20
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
TWENTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/ Chaitra, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 20.4.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)


COF No. 20
Price : Rs. 25.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
1. Demand No. 17—Discrepancies in the Demands for
Grants .............................................................................................. 2
2. Demand No. 17—Office expenses (SFIO) .............................. 3
3. Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) ............................. 4
4. Competition Commission of India (CCI) ............................... 15
5. Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) .................. 19
6. Vanishing Companies .................................................................. 24
7. Inspection of Companies ............................................................ 31
8. Filing of statutory returns by the companies....................... 36
A
PPENDIX
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 31 March,
7 and 12 April, 2005 ............................................................................ 40
Annexure.................................................................................................. 46
Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations ................................. 48

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2004-2005
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

(iv)
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of
the Ministry of Company Affairs.
2. The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Company Affairs
were laid on the Table of the House on 18 March, 2005. Under Rule
331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha,
the Standing Committee on Finance are required to consider the
Demands for Grants of the Ministries/Departments under their
jurisdiction and make Reports on the same to both the Houses of
Parliament.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Company Affairs at their sitting held on 31 March, 2005
in connection with examination of the Demands for Grants.
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 7 April, 2005 expressed
their views on the subjects/topics that could be covered in the Report.
The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting
held on 12 April, 2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Company Affairs for the co-operation extended by
them in furnishing written replies and for placing their considered
views and perceptions before the Committee.
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 April, 2005 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

REPORT
INTRODUCTORY
The Ministry of Company Affairs, earlier known as Department of
Company Affairs under the Ministry of Finance, was designated as a
separate Ministry vide Cabinet Secretariat Notification No. DOC.CD-
160/2004 dated 27.05.2004 to function under Minister of State with
Independent Charge. The Ministry is primarily concerned with the
administration of the Companies Act, 1956, other allied Acts and rules
& regulations framed thereunder mainly for regulating the functioning
of the corporate sector in accordance with law. The Ministry is also
responsible for administering the Competition Act, 2002 which will
eventually replace the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act,
1969 under which the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Commission (MRTPC) is functioning. Besides, it exercises supervision
over the three professional bodies, namely , Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI), Institute of Company Secretaries of India
(ICSI) and Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI)
which are constituted under three separate Acts of the Parliament for
proper and orderly growth of professions of Chartered Accountants,
Company Secretaries and Cost Accountants in the country. The Ministry
also has the responsibility of carrying out the functions of the Central
Government relating to the administration of the Partnership Act, 1932,
the Companies (Donations to National Funds) Act, 1951 and Societies
Registration Act, 1980.
2. The overall Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of
Company Affairs is as follows:
Voted
Demand No. 17 – Ministry of Company Affairs 116.27 crore
3. The Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Company
Affairs were laid in Parliament on 18.03.2005.
4. In the present Report, the Committee have examined following
issues:—
(i) Demand No. 17—Discrepancies in the Demands for Grants
(ii) Demand No. 17—Office expenses-SFIO

2
(iii) Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO)
(iv) Competition Commission of India (CCI)
(v) Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF)
(vi) Vanishing Companies
(vii) Inspection of Companies
(viii) Filing of statutory returns by the companies
Discrepancies in the Demands for Grants
Demand No. 17
Ministry of Company Affairs
Major Head: 3451
Detailed Head: 05.03.12
Foreign T ravel Expenses
 (Rs. in thousands)
Year   Budget Estimates   Revised Estimates  Actuals
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
2001-2002 - 8,00 - 8,00 - 4,73
2002-2003 - 8,00 - 28,00 - 22,30
2003-2004 - 8,00 - 24,00 - 22,02/
16,48
2004-2005 - 29,00 - 20,00 - -
2005-2006 - 29,00 - -
5. The actual expenditure under non-plan head during the
year 2003-04 was shown as Rs. 22,02,000 and it was reflected in the
Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05 presented to the House. But
this amount was shown as Rs. 16,48,000 when shown in Demands for
Grants for 2005-06. When questioned to state the reasons thereof, the
Ministry have in their written reply stated as below:—
“It is proposed to firm-up a system of reconciliation with the
Principal Accounts Office at regular intervals so that such type of
inconsistencies do not occur in future.”

3
6. The Committee note with serious concern that certain
discrepancies have crept in the figures supplied in Demands for
Grants for the years 2004-2005 and 2005-2006. The explanation given
by the Ministry that such inconsistencies would be avoided in future
through the system of reconciliation with the Principal Accounts
Office at regular intervals do not convince the Committee. This
reconciliation exercise should have been completed well in advance
of supplying figures in Parliamentary papers. They are of the view
that the Government should take utmost care while furnishing the
figures before Parliament. They expect that such discrepancies will
not occur in future.
Office Expenses – SFIO
Demand No. 17
Ministry of Company Affairs
Major Head : 3475
Minor Head: 800
Detailed Head: 57.00.13
 (Rs. in thousands)
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actuals
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan
2002-2003 0 0 0 0 0 0
2003-2004 0 2000 0 15300 0 12616
2004-2005 0 16000 0 16000 - -
2005-2006 0 11800 - - - -
7. The Ministry have in a written reply explained the connotation
of this Head as:—
“This Head pertains to the ‘Office Expenses’ in respect of the
establishment of Serious Frauds Investigation Office (SFIO). In terms
of Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, Office Expenses include
all contingent expenses for running an office”.

4
8. When asked why realistic estimates could not be made which
commensurate with the actual requirement, the Ministry have furnished
the following reply:—
“The estimate under this head is based on the regular/requisite
office contingencies. The expenditure out of the budget grant of
Rs. 125.00 lakh for the financial year 2003-2004 had been fully
utilized. Since proper accommodation for the regional office,
Mumbai could not be located, the projected expenditure for the
financial year 2004-2005 could not be utilized fully. As a result, the
savings in the budget grant for the year 2004-2005 was
surrendered”.
9. During the oral evidence, when asked whether the present
Budget is adequate for the quantum of serious frauds that are
occurring, the representative of the Ministry has submitted as under:—
“As I said, we are a small organisation. We have already set up
the basic infrastructure for the Head Office here. That expenditure
is not to be made again. We have to open a Mumbai Office for
which we have made adequate provision. Whatever provision we
have kept this year is adequate. In fact, in the current year, that
is 2004-05, we are surrendering some money. So, we are not short
of money”.
10. The Committee are concerned to note that budgetary
allocations were made by the Ministry with a casual approach due
to which it had allowed a large sum of Rs 1.6 crore allocated at BE
stage which was retained even at RE stage, to be surrendered. When
the accommodation was not available, the Ministry should have
changed the allocations at RE stage but it did not do so and allowed
the allocations to be surrendered. The Committee recommend the
Government to come out with realistic Budgetary estimates so that
there is minimum gap between BE, RE and Actuals.
SERIOUS FRAUD INVESTIGATION OFFICE (SFIO)
11. Government has set up the Serious Fraud Investigation Office
(SFIO) in the year 2003, as a multi-disciplinary investigation
organization entrusted to carry out investigation of serious corporate
frauds. This organization started functioning from 1st October, 2003.
The organization has been provided with necessary investigating and
support staff and other infrastructure and includes experts from the
fields of Finance, Company Law, Capital Market, Law, Information
Technology, Forensic auditing, Taxation and Investigation on its staff.
The headquarters of SFIO are located at New Delhi. The regional office
of SFIO at Mumbai has been made operational with effect from
25.10.2004.

5
12. In response to a specific query about the details of the cases referred to SFIO, the Ministry have in a written
reply stated as under:
“List of cases handed over to SFIO & their present position is as under:
Sl.No. Name of the Date of Date of Date of Date of issue Date of filling of Present status/
Company order of submission of order of of prosecution Remarks
investigation investigation acceptance authorization
Report of report filling of
prosecution
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. M/s Daewoo 14.10.2003 16.2.2004 29.11.2004 18.1.2005 21  Prosecutions Cases under IPC to be filed.
Motors India under Companies Authorisation Notification by the
Ltd. Act filed Ministry is being issued in
on 17.02.2005 consultation with the Department of
Legal Affairs.
2. M/s DSQ Software 23.10.2003 - - - - Investigation order was stayed by
Ltd the Chennai High Court on 20.11.04.
Stay is still in operation.  However,
an appeal against the stay order has
been filed on 2.3.05 before the bench
of Chennai High Court.

6
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
3. M/s Design Auto 16.12.2003 19.01.2005 - - - Investigation report in the case is
Systems Ltd. presently under examination of the
Ministry.
4. M/s Bonanza Biotech Ltd 16.12.2003 20.01.2005 - -                 -do -
5. M/s Ispat Industries Ltd 13.02.2004 - - - The order of investigation was
quashed by the Hon. Calcutta High
Court on 5.10.2004 on the ground that
the ROC had not followed all the
procedural requirements under Section
234 of the Act. However, freedom was
given to the Ministry to get the case
re-examined by the ROC, if felt
necessary . A fresh report has been
submitted by the ROC which is under
examination.
6. M/s Vatsa Corporation 23.03.2004 21.09.2004 24.1.2005 17.02.05 55 prosecution cases Cases under IPC to be filed.
Ltd. under Companies Act Authorisation Notification by the
have been filed against Ministry is being issued in
the Company and its consultation with the Department of
officers from 5th to Legal Affairs.
15th March, 2005

7
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
7. Ketan Parekh Group 20.10.2004
1. Triumph
International Finance
India Ltd.
2. N H Securities Ltd
3. KNP Securities Pvt.
Ltd
4. N V Parekh
Securities Pvt Ltd.
5. Panther Finsap and
Management Services
Ltd.
6. Panther Investrade
Ltd.
7. Panther Industrial
Products Ltd.
8. Saimangal
Investrade Ltd.
9. Classic Credit Ltd.
10. Classic Shares &
Stock Broking
Services Ltd.
11. Luminant
Investrade Pvt. Ltd.
The investigation in Ketan
Parekh Group of companies
was stayed by Company Law
Board on 9.11.04 and the stay
was vacated on 25.11.04.
However, on a petition filed by
this group, 
the Mumbai High
Court has ordered status-quo.
Investigation of these cases,
therefore, is stayed at present.
Final hearing has taken place
on 4.3.2005. Judgement is
reserved.

8
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
12. Goldfish
Computers Pvt. Ltd.
13. Triumph Securities
Pvt Ltd.
14. Nakshatra
Software Pvt. Ltd.
15. Chitrakoot
Computers Pvt.Ltd
16. Manmandir Estate
Development Pvt.
Ltd.
8. M/s Mardia Chemicals 14.02.2005 Investigation in progress.
Ltd.
9. 1. M/s Adam Comsof 28.02.2005 Investigation in progress.
Limited.
2. M/s Soundcraft
Industries
Limited.
3. M/s Kolar Biotech
Limited.

9
13. When asked specifically about the progress in DSQ Software
Ltd., the Ministry have furnished as under:—
“M/s DSQ Software Ltd. had obtained stay against the investigation
order dated 23rd October 2003 from Hon’ble High Court of Madras.
After receipt of intimation of stay, MCA filed its objections and
the company filed its rejoinder and the case was listed on
2nd July 2004. Thereafter, the case did not come up in the cause
list. The stay vacation petition was heard on 31st January 2005
and the Hon’ble High Court made the stay absolute. The Writ
Appeal has been filed before Hon’ble High Court of Madras within
the time on 2nd March, 2005. There is no delay in filing the appeal
in this case.
Cases relating to Ketan Parekh Group are pending before the
Hon’ble High Court of Mumbai. Final hearing has taken place on
4th March 2005. The Hon’ble High Court has reserved its
judgment”.
14. Supplementing the written reply furnished to the Committee,
the Secretary of the Ministry of Company Affairs have during oral
evidence stated as under:—
“With the setting up of the Serious Fraud Investigation Office, a
step was taken to significantly upgrade the capacity of the
Government to investigate complex matters associated with
corporate fraud. The SFIO has been constituted, staffed and is
already functioning. Since its constitution in 2003, a number of
cases (24) have already been referred to the SFIO. The reports
have also been received in many cases. These are being processed
for prosecution. Investigation is under process in other cases. Orders
of prosecution have also been issued in some cases where
investigation is complete. The SFIO comprises a team of officers
with multidisciplinary schemes and having background in law,
finance, securities transactions, chartered accountancy, company law,
etc. Through application of the expertise of such personnel it
becomes feasible to examine and properly analyse situations where
fraudulent behaviour may have taken place. However, SFIO is a
new organisation. New ground is continuously been broken while
handling issues thrown up in the operation of the SFIO. Some of
these issues are related to the application of the existing laws and
require detailed consultations with legal experts and Ministry of
Law. All these efforts are being done so as to strengthen the

10
framework for the operation of the SFIO. From time to time, the
actions of the Government and SFIO are also been challenged in
the courts. In some cases, courts also gave stay orders. These are
contested and in some cases the stay orders were vacated and the
investigation work carried on. The details are already submitted
as a part of the written submission. At the same time, investigation
activity is also carried out through appointment of private firms
as inspectors. Reports have been received in two such cases where
investigation was ordered.”
15. When asked why SFIO took up cases only after the JPC Report
came after the 2001 scam, the representative of the Ministry of
Company Affairs has during the oral evidence stated as under:—
“As a matter of fact, the creation of a multi-disciplinary agency,
which will be able to deal with complex cases of corporate fraud
was one of the recommendations of the JPC. The creation of the
SFIO was in pursuance of the concerns expressed by the JPC, and
the follow-up action that was taken on it”.
16. Outlining the major activities undertaken by SFIO, the
representative of the Ministry has inter-alia in his reply stated as under:—
“The action of the SFIO is intended to achieve two or three
objectives. Firstly, it is intended to unravel the complexity of the
corporate fraud. It is a fact that corporate functioning is a very
complex issue, and has a number of disciplines involved in it. It
is extremely difficult to fully understand or comprehend the nature
of fraud that has taken place. These things become evident only
after an expert goes into it in detail. Therefore, this is one of those
areas, where certain situations that might not appear to the mind
to be a case of fraud would be unravelled by an expert body, and
it would be established to be a case of fraud. In doing so, the
SFIO would be carrying out the role of a guiding force for all the
enforcement and investigating machinery in the Government. It is
not only there for the Company Affairs, but also for other agencies
like the Directorate of Enforcement, etc. In many cases, the Report
of the SFIO is being provided to these agencies, and they examine
it.
The second area where the SFIO contributes or is expected to
contribute is in establishing the practice both in the administrative,
and the legal fields. It is because once these cases are taken up,
the corporates often go to the courts. The protection of the court

11
is available to every citizen, and it cannot be denied. Now, many
of these issues have appeared for the first time, and these have
been brought to the notice of the courts. The courts have examined
the pros and cons of the same, and they have given some ruling.
Accordingly, the law and the practice are getting laid down in
these cases. This is a path breaking activity, which we hope will
continue for some time to come. New areas also surface because
when some fraud takes place, it is not only a case of violation of
the Companies Act, but there might be violation of other Acts also
taking place. It is relatively a simpler matter to prosecute or to
authorise the sanction of prosecution under the Companies Act
and this is being done with the investigation reports that are
available, but it requires a little more time. For example,
establishment of procedures to undertake proper prosecution under
other Acts; proper filing of the complaints; etc. are issues that are
getting resolved. Therefore, the SFIO in addition to unraveling the
corporate fraud is also laying down the practice for the same.
The third area where the SFIO contributes is in terms of the
deterrent effect. Actually, at the time of the constitution of the
SFIO, it was not intended that all kinds of cases of fraud would
be referred to the SFIO. The SFIO was intended to be a specialised
agency, where frauds of a large nature; involving a large number
of people; and a wider public interest, namely, an amount of Rs.
50 crore plus was involved. This was done in order to ensure that
the SFIO could go into the issue of frauds of such nature in detail.
It was thought that with relatively a fewer numbers of cases they
would be able to lay down the principles and guidelines, and also
have the deterrent effect in terms of the corporate sector as a
whole.
This brings me to the second part of the question, namely a
situation where a large number of companies are not filing returns,
and there is a possibility that there might be some element of
fraud taking place or not taking place. How is it possible for a
small organisation of the nature of the SFIO to deal with so many
situations like this? The correct perspective would be that it would
not be reasonable to expect the SFIO to deal with all of them.
The efforts of the SFIO will have to be supported by other
agencies”.
17. When asked why despite such significant role being played by
SFIO, the allocation for it is comparatively less, the representative of

12
Ministry of Company Affairs have during the oral evidence stated as
under:—
“Actually, this concern is an extremely important one. We really
expect that in the future the extent; the scope; the volume; and
the type of activities undertaken by the SFIO would definitely
increase. In the years ahead, it would also require expertise, newer
methods of investigation, newer techniques, etc., and for all these
requirements additional funds would be required. In the years to
come this requirement of funds will definitely increase.
In the present context, given the fact that it is a newer organisation,
it was felt that this was the appropriate requirement for the current
year to meet the establishment and other expenses of the SFIO”.
18. When asked about the adequacy of funds for SFIO to cover all
serious frauds, the representative have inter-alia during the oral evidence
stated as under:—
“…Over the last two years, the references which have been made
to the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) have been
increasing. Starting from an initial of just five or six references,
now they have gone up to over 24 references. I think, today, it
stands at 26, and the Director would be able to clarify it further.
Therefore, the work is increasing, but given the complexity, it
increases a little gradually. In the years to come, it is natural that
the complexity and the scope will increase. This is the first issue.
The second issue is that all cases of fraud are not intended to be
referred to the SFIO. This is a very valid concern, otherwise the
whole effectiveness of the organisation would be diluted. They
cannot go into minor and other cases of wrongdoing or something
like that. They have to go into substantive issues where a
wrongdoing has taken place so that a clear-cut signal is established
for the corporate sector”.
19. On a specific query whether any efforts have been made by
the Ministry to overcome the constraints stated above, the representative
of the Ministry stated as follows:—
“…Now, all these cases have been very-very complex, as my
colleague had said just now. It is very difficult to unravel the kind
of frauds which are committed by extremely highly professional
and competent people. Since this kind of investigation is taking
place for the first time, we are an executive body without any
statutory support, we have to work within the given framework

13
of a company law: everything is being determined as to how the
prosecution will be filed. Under the Companies Law, it is easy to
file because the Government can file prosecutions based on our
recommendations, but when it comes to filing prosecutions, where
the substantive criminal law has been violated, for example, the
Indian Penal Code, the procedure is being set as to who will file
the case…. We hope to file the prosecution under the Indian Penal
Code shortly because that issue has to be resolved between the
Ministry of Law and ourselves, and that system will be put in
place. Emanating from this is the challenge to the very order of
investigation issued by the Government. Almost everybody has
gone to the court and they succeeded in obtaining some kind of
interim stay, final stay, and so on. But in two or three cases, we
have won the case right up to the Supreme Court, and those
investigations have been completed. There was a mention about
DSQ. In the DSQ case, well, the stay was granted, but the
Government has gone on an appeal and the case was last heard
yesterday. Hopefully, by next weekend, we will have an order or
a final hearing. This is also the case with the 2001 scam involving
Ketan Parekh and others. There also, the final hearing has taken
place and the judgment is reserved. It is about three weeks since
the case was last heard. Now, as far as the budget is concerned,
our requirement was very small”.
20. When asked whether SFIO is empowered to take up suo moto
cases, the representative of the Ministry have said:—
“I missed out a point on the Cabinet decision, when I mentioned
that. They had said that in the first phase, our organisation will
work under the Companies Act, and in the second phase, there
will be proper legislative changes on the lines of UK Serious Fraud
Office. That second stage has not yet started because we are in
operation only for five months, and that is being looked into.
Whatever cases are referred to us, the Ministry looks into that.
There is a preliminary kind of inquiry under section 234 of the
Companies Act and that inquiry is submitted to the Ministry. If it
is found that it is a matter of serious fraud, then it is referred to
us; and if it is some other matter, it can be referred to any other
Inspector”.
He has further stated:—
“If I may clarify, the Companies Act provides for investigation
under two provisions. Under one provision, under 235, the Central

14
Government may order investigation into the affairs of a company
or under 237, investigation may be ordered on the basis of the
orders of the Company Law Board, which is a quasi-judicial forum.
They can also go into whatever is proceeding and ask for an
investigation. The Companies Act, 1956, and this may also be a
part answer to the concern which you have raised, provides a
specific procedure before an investigation may be ordered.
As I have mentioned, if it is by the judicial forum, then they are
supposed to have applied their mind and come to a conclusion
that investigation is required, and they order. Where it is a case of
Central Government, the procedure is prescribed in the Act itself.
That follows the procedure laid down in Section 234 which requires
the Registrar of Companies to enter into a preliminary exercise of
fact-finding, arrive at a prima facie  conclusion, make a report to the
Government. If the Government is then satisfied that this has an
implication of fraud in it, then it is correctly referred to the Serious
Fraud Office.
Actually, the legal provision is that the Government appoints an
investigator drawn from the Serious Fraud Office. The point is
Government can appoint an investigator to go into it. Prior to the
setting up of the Serious Fraud Office, this provision was also
there and the Government were making appointments of
investigators who were sometimes not fully conversant with all
the kinds of implications which are involved. Once the JPC went
into this issue and they felt this is a very complex area, they said,
‘You should have a proper multi-disciplinary organisation who can
then do the job of an inspector. Therefore, in complex cases, this
is where that 50 crore was prescribed, these cases are then referred
by appointing an inspector drawn from the SFIO. The Director of
SFIO is asked to make his recommendation as to which of the
persons, given the nature of the case, are the appropriate persons,
and they are made the inspectors. The point here is suo motu
powers versus the procedure. At the present stage, this is the legal
procedure which we are mandatorily required to follow.
Where there is any lacuna in following this procedure, the matter
is justiciable because it is laid down in the Act itself. In some
cases which were agitated before the High Court, this issue also
came up. In one case, the concerned court made the order that
full procedure had not been followed up and, therefore, this cannot
be taken up. You are at liberty to do it if you wish and that is

15
fair. So, therefore, this exercise in the current time is a bit long-
drawn and it requires full compliance with the provisions of the
Act. Whether this is an appropriate process, whether it is resulting
in serious fraud which may affect a large number of people to be
quickly dealt with or not, is an issue which will have to be dealt
with through the amendments of the Act itself. This is because, till
the time this provision is there, we have to follow it.
The other issue that came is about having a statutory basis for the
serious frauds itself. As has been clarified, there the thinking is
that let there be some experience. That is because a number of
relevant legal issues probably both the SFIO and the Ministry have
not fully gone into. New legal issues come up all the time.
Therefore, at the appropriate time, once some experience about
some investigations, the follow up of those investigations, orders
of the courts on the prosecutions filed under those investigations,
are available, the question of providing statutory basis to the SFIO
so that it can in that case in a manner similar to some other
countries, be able to take up investigation in various ways including
suo moto  will come up”.
21. The Committee note that SFIO which was intended to be a
specialized agency, investigating cases of frauds involving large sum
of money in excess of Rs. 50 crore and the interests of large section
of the people is currently looking into 26 cases. They have been
informed that within a period of two years, since SFIO came into
being this number has increased from initial five or six references
to 26 at present. They are given to understand that SFIO has to
work within the ambit of the Companies Act, the procedures are
long drawn and it has no powers similar to the ones like institutions
enjoyed in other countries. The Committee were however, informed
that since this organization is very new, the Government will after
gaining some experience further deliberate on improving the efficacy
of this institution including conferring it with statutory status. Given
the important nature of the functions which the SFIO is supposed
to discharge, the Committee desire that suitable measures be taken
to further strengthen it.
COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA
22. The Competition Act, 2002 was notified on 14th January, 2003
to provide, keeping in view the economic development of the country,
for the establishment of a Commission to prevent practices having
adverse effect on competition, to promote and sustain competition in

16
markets, to protect the interests of consumers, and to ensure freedom
of trade carried on by other participants in markets in India, and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
23. The Competition Commission of India was established on
14th October, 2003 under the Competition Act, 2002. There was legal
challenges on certain aspects of the Competition Act. The Supreme
Court of India has pronounced its judgement on 20.01.2005. Certain
amendments to the Competition Act are at present under examination.
24. The Competition Act, 2002 provides for repeal of the Monolopies
and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act, 1969 on the date to be
appointed by the Central Government and on repeal of the MRTP
Act, 1969 the MRTP Commission shall stand dissolved.
25. As regards the present status of the Competition Commission
of India, the Ministry of Company Affairs have in their written reply
stated as follows:—
“The Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established vide
notification dated the 14th October, 2003. Shri Dipak Chatterjee
and Shri Vinod K. Dhall were approved for appointment as
Chairperson and Member respectively from the dates they assumed
office. Shri Dhall assumed office on 17th October, 2003. Shri Dipak
Chatterjee has not joined so far as Chairperson, CCI. While the
action was in hand for making the CCI fully functional, certain
Writ Petitions were filed in the Madras High Court and in the
Supreme Court. Writ Petitions filed before the Madras High Court
have also been transferred to the Supreme Court. Before
Shri Chatterjee could assume office, the Supreme Court in its order
dated 31st October, 2003, stayed the judicial functioning of the
Commission.
While disposing of the Writ Petition, the Supreme Court, in its
Judgement dated 20.01.2005 on the Writ Petition filed by Shri Brahm
Dutt challenging certain provisions of the Competition Act, 2002,
has left open all questions regarding the validity of the enactment
to be decided once amendments necessary to ensure consistency
with constitutional provisions are made or attempted. An exercise
has been initiated to review the enactment in light of the Supreme
Court Judgement”.

17
26. Supplementing the written reply, the Secretary of the Ministry
of Company Affairs has during the oral evidence stated as follows:—
“The other thing was about the Competition Commission of India.
As you know, in the country, we have so many regulators, but the
need for a main economic regulator at the head of the entire
spectrum of the economy was very much felt and this legislation
had its genesis in this need. However, the exercise was being taken
for the first time and in consultation with the Law Ministry. Despite
that, there was a legal challenge and for the last one and a half
years, we have not been able to activate it though we have set it
up. It is only carrying on advocacy functions. They hold a lot of
seminars and try to do whatever they could do. It is only a small
office of six people and is not really on the ground, but the need
is paramount in the country and we need to put it through very
soon.
Now, after this judgement was received from the Supreme Court,
the Ministry geared itself to do a very delicate act of reconciling
the problems which had been raised and the issues which had
been raised by the Supreme Court, essentially of separation of
powers, how we are going to ensure that the doctrine of separation
of powers can be carried through in this legislation. Sir, as you
know, all regulators have to regulate and also carry out adjudicatory
functions. It is something which we have known in this country.
Even MRTPC has both these functions to perform. That is what
has been envisaged in this Act. Nevertheless, with all respect to
our Judiciary, they raised this question. They said that this
legislation defaults in this aspect and the functioning of the
Adjudicatory Wing and the Regulatory Wing should be separated
very clearly. They have recommended it and they have left it to
the Executive”.
27. When asked specifically about whether Supreme Court wanted
that no bureaucrat should head CCI, the Secretary, Ministry of
Company Affairs has further stated as under:—
“Yes, then our Cabinet had to take a view. They laid down certain
provisions whereby essential qualifications for the post would be
very general. They also stated that it should not be a judge. It
was a Cabinet resolution. They did not want a judge. They came
to a kind of a head-on the whole issue with the Judiciary saying
that it should be headed by a judicial person and the Executive
saying that it should be headed by a generalist. That is the issue.

18
But from the point of view of the Government, it was felt that it
should be a professional person, without regard to whatever will
be his calling. The Cabinet considered this and we filed an affidavit
in the court accordingly, as the Cabinet had desired”.
28. On their future course of action, the Secretary has inter-alia in
her replies stated as below:—
“Sir, we would like to share with you that after the judgement,
we had to undertake a lot of exercise to see that we kept in mind
the sentiments of the Supreme Court as well as try to have a
workable body called the future CCI. In this, we are now preparing
the amendments. We propose that we will have an appellate body
which will consider cases which will come to it as appeal from
the CCI, but they may also have some original jurisdiction in which,
for instance, cases which are punishable with imprisonment and
others and also cases where compensation is to be given, may also
come to it. This might take out the edge of the problem that is
being seen by the Supreme Court. This exercise, a delicate one,
have been completed and we hope to bring it to the Cabinet within
a week or ten days. Then, we hope that we will introduce this
legislation in the Monsoon Session since there is a need for it.”
29. In this context, it is worthwhile to note the observations of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Brahm Dutt versus Union of India :
“We may observe that if an expert body is to be created as
submitted on behalf of the Union of India consistent with what is
said to be the international practice, it might be appropriate for
the respondents to consider the creation of two separate bodies,
one with expertise that is advisory and regulatory and other
adjudicatory. This followed up by an appellate body as
contemplated by the proposed amendment, can go long way in
meeting the challenge sought to be raised in this Writ Petition
based on the doctrine of separation of powers recognized by the
Constitution.”
30. The Committee take note that the Competition Act, 2002
which was to replace the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1959 could not be made operational because of legal challenges
in the Supreme Court of India. They have been informed that the
Apex Court has given its judgement on 20.01.2005 with some
observations in regard to issue of separation of powers. The
representatives of the Ministry have stated that the amended Bill on

19
the lines of suggestions made by Supreme Court, would be tabled
in the Monsoon Session, 2005. The Committee are of the view that
this progressive legislation has already been delayed on account of
legal tangles which could have been avoided, had the Ministry taken
this aspect into account before its passing by both the Houses of
Parliament. There should not be further delay in bringing conformity
amendments. They expect that the Government would come forward
with necessary legislation in the Monsoon Session, 2005 and get it
enacted within the same session.
INVESTOR EDUCATION AND PROTECTION FUND (IEPF)
31. With a view to protect the interests of the investors, the Investor
Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) has been established in Ministry
of Company Affairs with effect from 1.10.2001. The amounts which
remained unpaid for a period of seven years from the date they have
become due are credited to the Fund. The Fund is utilized for
promotion of investor’s awareness, education and protection of the
interests of the investors.
32. The Ministry have in their Annual Report furnished as
under:—
“As per the information received from the Registrars of Companies
located all over India, an amount of Rs. 352,24,81,085/- has been
credited by the companies to the Fund upto 31.12.2004. The amount
deposited by the companies under this Head goes to the
Consolidated Fund of India. A budgetary allocation is made by
the Parliament each year to run the IEPF activities.”
33. When asked about the source of amount credited to the fund,
the Ministry have in a written reply furnished:—
“As per Section 205-C of the Companies Act, such of the amounts
as mentioned under clauses (a) to (d) below as have remained
unclaimed and unpaid for a period of 7 years from the date they
became due for payment and those mentioned at clauses (e) to (g)
below constitute the sources of amount credited to the IEPF :
(a) amounts in the unpaid dividend accounts of companies;
(b) the application moneys received by companies for allotment
of any sureties and dues for refund;
(c) matured deposits with companies;

20
(d) matured debentures with companies;
(e) the interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses
(a) to (d)
(f) grants and donations given to the Fund by the Central
Government, State Governments, companies or any other
institutions for the purposes of the Fund; and
(g) the interest or other income received out of the investments
made from the Fund.”
34. In response to a specific query about the activities and
programmes undertaken as per the Investor Education and Protection
Fund in all the five areas listed under the IEPF Rules, 2001, the Ministry
have furnished the following written reply:—
“Activities and programmes undertaken in the areas listed under
IEPF Rules, 2001 are as under:
Sr. No. Name of the Activity under IEPF Rules Activities undertaken
12 3
1. Education Programmes through Media i) 15 panel discussions were organized over
five regional Kendras of Doordarshan.
ii) three educational spots were also
periodically broadcast over Doordarshan
Kendras.
2. Organizing Seminars and Symposia Financial assistance under IEPF has been
provided to eight NGOs/VOs for conducting
seminars/programmes (approx.35 seminars).
3. Proposals for registration of voluntary Five organizations, working in this field, have
 associations or Institutions or other been registered.
organizations engaged in Investor
Education and Protection activities.
4. Proposals for projects for Investors’ (a) Indian Institute of Capital Markets
Education and Protection including (IICM) - Study on unclaimed dividends
research activities and proposals for etc.
financing such projects. (b) Society for Capital Market Research and
Development – Research on Household
Investors.

21
12 3
(c) IEPF project by the Prime Investors’
Protection Association and League
(PIPAL) for the website
“watchoutinvestors.com”.
5. Coordinating with institutions Financial assistance has been provided to
engaged in Investor Education, Indian Institute of Capital Market (IICM) for
awareness and protection activities; conducting (a) Interactive workshop with
NGOs/VOs; and (b) Training of Trainers
Programme.
35. Asked whether the Ministry have noticed any discrepancy in
the original accounts, original bills and the utilization certificates etc.
submitted by the NGOs/Associations to the IEPF Committee/Ministry,
the Ministry in their written reply furnished to the Committee have
stated as below:—
“This Ministry has appointed the Indian Institute of Capital Markets
(IICM) as the agency to carry out pre-scrutiny and post-scrutiny
of all proposals received for financial assistance under the IEPF.
Certain discrepancies are observed in case of some organizations
at the time of post-sanction scrutiny by the IICM. However, such
discrepancies are attended to meticulously and the amounts due
for refund from the organizations have already been effected.”
36. In response to a query on the number of NGOs funded by
IEPF which are operating in the rural areas, the Ministry have in a
written reply stated as follows:—
“Rural investors are required to be protected. In this connection,
the Committee on IEPF has decided that efforts may be made to
identify the investor organizations/ associations active in the rural
and semi urban areas to encourage them to spread the outreach of
Investor Education and Protection Fund programmes. The Indian
Institute of Capital Markets have also been requested to do the
needful in this regard. Some of the NGOs/ VOs which have been
registered with the IEPF and financed and which have been active
in the rural/ semi-urban areas are as under:
(a) Consumer Unity and Trust Society, Jaipur;
(b) Tamil Nadu Investors Association, Chennai;
(c) Kolhapur Investors Association, Kolhapur.”

22
37. When asked about the activities which are taken up by IEPF
with reference to the fund credited to it, the representative of the
Ministry of Company Affairs have during the oral evidence stated as
follows:—
“As far as Investor Education and Protection Fund programme is
concerned, there is absolutely no doubt about what Hon. Members
have said that the activities which are taken up with reference to
the size of the fund are inadequate. The amount which has been
collected comes from four streams – as per Section 205(c) – share
application money, debentures, unpaid dividends and unclaimed
deposits and the interest accrued on all these four, which have
remained unpaid for a period of more than seven years gets
credited to the fund.
I do not think that this rate of accretion to the fund will continue
because the bulk of it has come and a statement is asked for, from
each of the companies in their filings that compliance has been
done as far as the requirement of 205(C) is concerned. But it will
certainly keep flowing. One of the research studies that was
sponsored under this was also to assess as to what is the size of
the fund which could probably be available with these companies.
The findings of the study have to be taken with a pinch of salt.
The report shows that the total corpus under these four heads is
about Rs. 434.61 Crore. But the sample size is on the basis of a
survey of 100 companies which I find is rather small and it could
probably only indicative.
Sir, coming to the core issue, as far utilization of this fund is
concerned, we have come to this view that we need to expand
our activity and take up the financial literacy programme in a real
big way. We propose to take on board a professional agency to
advise us on this apart from financing the NGOs, voluntary
organizations, conducting workshops, seminars, panel discussion,
investors’ clinics and some of the things which are being taken up
under the financial literacy programmes though the TV . We could
organize or sponsor some kind of a Quiz programme on NDTV or
CNBC on a weekly basis on financial literacy. We could take on
investors’ clinic and we could go in for picking up some schools
and colleges as pilots to start financial literacy classes. These kind
of activities are proposed to be broad based. We are preparing a
proposal for the Finance Ministry saying that funds could be
considered to be kept as an interest bearing deposit and if we do
not touch the corpus, then the interest should flow back to us in
the form of every year’s Budget for taking up these activities.”

23
38. When asked whether an unbiased scrutiny is expected of IICM
as it itself is a recipient of funds from IEPF, the Ministry have in their
post evidence written reply stated as follows:—
“The Indian Institute of Capital Market (IICM) had initially
submitted a proposal for its registration under IEPF, which was
rejected by the Sub-Committee on IEPF. As such, IICM has not
been provided any financial assistance under IEPF for any proposal
submitted by them.
However, the Committee on IEPF, which consists of representatives
of various Ministries and eminent professionals, approved a grant
of Rs. 5.00 lakh to IICM for conducting a study on the unclaimed
and unpaid dividend/amounts lying with the various companies
on behalf of Ministry of Company Affairs. Under the Capacity
building programme, IICM was requested to take up “Training for
Trainers Programme” as a measure of capacity building for various
NGOs/VOs and the expenditure incurred by the IICM on
organizing these programmes has been re-imbursed to them under
the IEPF.
IICM is a reputed institution promoted by the UTI in the field of
Capital Markets. As such, there are no reasons to doubt the scrutiny
done by the IICM especially when a detailed scrutiny report is
furnished in each case.”
39. The Committee take note of the fact that Investor Education
and Protection Fund (IEPF) has to its credit a whopping sum of
about Rs. 352 crore upto 31.12.2004 and about Rs. 100 crores is added
every year to the fund. This huge amount comes mainly from four
sources, namely, share application money, debentures, unpaid
dividends and unclaimed deposits. They are given to understand
that this amount is credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and
a budgetary allocation is made by the Parliament every year to run
the activities under IEPF. In this way the Ministry contributes more
funds to the Consolidated Fund of India than getting from it. They
are dismayed to note that such huge amount of money deposited by
the companies is not being utilized for the object under which it
has been constituted. They have been informed by the Secretary,
Ministry of Company Affairs that the Ministry is making a proposal
saying that funds could be considered to be kept as an interest
bearing deposit which should flow back to them in the form of
each years’ budget for taking up these activities. The Committee are

24
in total agreement with this proposal and want that Government
should clear this proposal as and when received.
40. As far as utilization of the fund is concerned, a lot more
needs to be done. As per Ministry’s own admission before the
Committee, the activities under IEPF need to be expanded by taking
up the Financial Literacy Programme in a big way. They have been
informed that a professional agency is being proposed to be taken
on the board of IEPF to advise them apart from financing the NGOs
and Voluntary organizations, conducting workshops, seminars, panel
discussions and investors’ clinics etc. The Committee recommend to
the Government that no effort should be spared to take up this task
in a big way and the proposal to engage professional agency may
be expedited so as to bring about professional approach to this
ambitious programme.
41. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the activities
under IEPF have little penetration in rural areas. They are of the
view that the rural investor is gullible and hence needs more
protection but going by the registration of NGO’s and Voluntary
Organisations for this purpose, they find that only three agencies
have been registered so far with IEPF. The Committee find that
unless more and more NGO’s and Volunatary Organisations are
engaged and encouraged by the Government to take up this job, the
entire exercise under IEPF will be rendered futile. They, therefore,
recommend that Government should encourage more NGO’s and
Voluntary Organisations to take up the task of educating the rural
investors expeditiously.
VANISHING COMPANIES
42. The capital market had witnessed a boom period during the
years 1993-94 and 1994-95 when many new companies tapped the
capital market and collected funds from the public issue of shares/
debentures. Some of these companies defaulted in their commitments
made to the public while mobilizing funds. The Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI) had originally identified 229 listed companies as
“vanished”.
43. In response to a query about the follow up action taken by the
Government against promoters and directors of these “vanishing
companies” in the year 2004-05 along with the latest position regarding
region-wise cumulative action taken against vanishing companies, the
Ministry have in a written reply stated as follows:

25
“The Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) on Vanishing
Companies has been monitoring the action taken against the vanishing
companies and their Directors. Of the 229 companies identified as
vanished, CMC, in its meetings, held on 25.2.2003, 15.1.2004 and
23.11.2004 deleted names of 44, 63 and 7 companies respectively from
the list of vanishing companies, as these companies were found to be
regular in filing statutory returns, etc. Thus, at present, 115 companies
stand identified as vanishing companies.
The concerned Registrars of Companies have taken action against
vanishing companies for violation of the provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956 and have also tried to enlist assistance of police authorities
and general public to ascertain the whereabouts of such companies.
Prosecutions have been filed against vanishing companies and their
Promoters/Directors for non-filing of Balance Sheet/ Annual Returns
as well as under Sections 62/63, 68 and 628 of the Companies Act for
misstatement in prospectus/fraudulently inducing persons to invest
money/false statement made in the offer documents etc.
A Model FIR was finalized in consultation with SEBI during the
month of May, 2003 for filing complaints with the police authorities
against the vanishing companies and their Promoters/ Directors for
offences punishable under Sections 420, 406, 403, 415, 418 & 424 of the
Indian Penal Code.”
The Ministry have further stated as :—
“The latest position regarding Region-wise cumulative action taken
against vanishing companies, their Directors/Promoters, is given
below:
Particulars Northern Western Eastern Southern Total
Region Region Region Region
Number of vanishing companies 17 49 14 35 115
Number of companies against
which prosecutions filed under
Sections 62/63, 68 & 628 of the
Companies Act, 1956 17 45 11 31 104
Number of companies against
which prosecutions filed for non-
filing of statutory returns 16 45 11 20 92
Number of companies where
FIRs filed 13 41 14 24 92
Number of companies where
FIRs have been registered  8 34 13 19 74

26
44. When asked whether increasing of the registration money is a
step in the right direction to check fly-by-night or frivolous companies
which vanish overnight leaving the investors in lurch, the Ministry
have in a written reply stated as follows:—
“Schedule X of the Companies Act provide for fees to be paid to
Registrar of Companies at the time of incorporation as registration
fee. After incorporation, various returns are required to be filed
under the Companies Act, 1956, with filing fee. Schedule X was
amended to increase the registration fee from time to time. The
last such amendment was made vide notification No. S.O. 419(E)
dated 27.04.2000 effective from 1st May, 2000. The increase was
four times more than the previous rate. Further, in order to check
the fly by night or frivolous companies from registration, sub-
sections (3) & (4) of Section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 were
inserted in the Act through Companies (Amendment) Act, 2000
which came into effect from 13.12.2000, according to which, every
private and public company shall have to bring in liquid minimum
paid up capital of one lakh rupees and five lakh rupees respectively
at the time of incorporation itself. The above amendment was
brought on the basis of past experience that companies with small
capital base were registered and they remained dormant without
any business activity but raise funds by public issue or deposits,
and then become untraceable causing considerable damage to the
investor community. In the light of above, further increase in the
registration fee is not likely to serve the purpose as there is a
limit to which it can be increased.”
45. When asked during the oral evidence about endeavours to
locate “vanishing companies” and the action taken by the Ministry to
provide the legitimate dues to the investors who have put their money
in those companies, the representatives of the Ministry of Company
Affairs have stated as under:—
“The important issue raised is that those who resurfaced, what is
being done on them. The Ministry is conducting the inspection of
all the companies listed as vanishing and which have now
resurfaced to make up for their initial affairs are as they have
reported. They may come back and they may file some documents
and there might be some discrepancy legally under Section 209A
there is a power of inspection. So, all these companies which vanish
have come back again are subject to that. This is the follow up
action taken on those companies. The companies which have

27
vanished for which there is no trace available, Sir, the important
point and this is what has come out in the experience in dealing
with vanishing companies whereas you have legal provisions or
some field organizations comprising of Registrar of Companies,
the enforcement powers the Registrar of Companies have are
powers of inspection and investigation which are prescribed under
the law. But once that is done, the proper thing should either be
CLB or to the courts in comparison with other enforcement agencies
like Directorate of Income Tax or other agencies of the Government,
enforcement powers of the field machinery of the Company Affairs
is relatively low. Therefore, for example for summary disposal and
imposition of minor penalties are not powers. Every case must go
to the court. Judicial procedure has its own resources, which must
be met at the end of it, and if it is found to be well merited then
there is punishment or sometimes no punishment and that is
something which we have to accept.
The investors’ funds which go into these vanishing companies and
when vanishing companies do not turn up—Sir, this is a very
complex problem for us… and the available framework under the
Companies Act is—there is a certain section or provisions which
allow for judicial process under which the disgorgement of assets
of company may take place. As a matter of fact, these judicial
procedures are applied under the Companies Act to companies
which are in liquidation and winding up. Under special enabling
clause it can be applied in such companies. These are being applied.
Of course, these are judicial procedures, they will go through
scrutiny and presentation before the courts and the orders of the
courts. But of late under the decisions taken by the Coordination
and Monitoring Committee which is jointly between SEBI and DCA
action has been taken up to start disgorgement procedures in the
case of some companies which have vanished and for which, there
are some assets which are available and where nobody has turned
up. In the sense, those companies which have started re-filing, still
they are vanished. In a limited number of proceedings those
disgorgement proceedings have been started. According to me,
disgorgement proceedings will be taken up as we go now. In other
cases, we have to depend on the enforcement machinery which is
available with other agencies. For that reason, FIRs are being filed
so that the police machinery and various State Governments can
be utilized to track down the persons or the individuals who are
not available. So, that is the action going on through the filing of
the FIRs but again it cannot be gainsaid that under the Companies

28
Act probably there is an area where some degree of enforcement
powers given to the field machinery may not perhaps fully address
this issue. But may perhaps to reduce the problem because powers
to seize, powers to search, etc. would at least fix the physical
persons of these companies little more clearly. These issues also
are being looked up in the overall context of the revision of the
case.”
46. When asked about the criteria adopted to classify a company
as “vanishing” and list others as simply “delaying in filing returns”,
the representative of Ministry of Company Affairs have, during the
oral evidence stated as below:—
“If I may just clarify that point, in order to define what a vanishing
company is, this issue was gone into jointly and a common criteria
was adopted. It says that companies have not complied with the
listing requirement or filing requirements of the stock exchange or
the ROC. So, filing requirements were taken care of, for a period
of two years and wherever a gap of two years took place, that
company was categorized as a vanishing company and those
companies are not public listed companies. That is the
categorization of vanishing companies. Their number was a few
thousands out of 6,50,000. The number is much small. Secondly,
no correspondence has been received by the exchange from the
company for a long time. This is the second point of issuing notices
and all that”.
47. When asked whether any mechanism has been made or is
proposed to be evolved by the Ministry to trace vanishing companies,
the Ministry have in their post evidence reply stated as follows:
“A joint mechanism has been evolved by constituting a
Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) between the
Ministry of Company Affairs and the Securities and Exchange Board
of India (SEBI) for taking stringent action against unscrupulous
promoters/ companies who raised monies from investors and
misused them.
The Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) has adopted
the following criteria for identifying vanishing companies:
(i) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchange/ROC
respectively for a period of 2 years;

29
(ii) No corr espondence has been received by the Stock Exchange
from the company for a long time;
(iii) No of fice of the company is located at the mentioned
registered office address at the time of Stock Exchange
inspection.
It was clarified by the CMC on 25.02.2003 that in the criteria laid
down for identifying the vanishing companies, all the conditions
laid down have to be met for treating a company as vanishing
and companies satisfying one or more but not all conditions may
not be considered as vanishing.
Four Task forces headed by Regional Directors under the Ministry
of Company Affairs have been constituted to make concerted efforts
for tracing the vanishing companies and their promoters/ Directors
and also for taking necessary action as per law. Prosecutions have
been filed under Sections 62/63, 68 and 628 of the Companies Act,
1956 against Directors of vanishing companies. Besides, First
Information Reports have been filed under Sections 403, 406, 415,
418 and 420 of the Indian Penal Code against the promoters/
Directors of vanishing companies. Petitions have also been filed
with the Company Law Board under Sections 397/398/402/408
read with Section 406 of the Companies Act. The CMC monitors
and reviews the progress on a regular basis.”
48. Asked to furnish the reasons for difference in the total number
of vanishing companies, the number of vanishing companies, the
number of FIRs that have been filed and the number of FIRs that
have been registered, the Ministry have in their post evidence written
reply stated as under:—
“FIRs have been filed against 92 out of the 115 vanishing
companies. This difference is on account of the fact that no FIRs
has been filed in cases where the companies have either gone into
liquidation or are facing winding up/closure proceedings.
Registration of FIRs vests with the State Police authorities. While
the State Police agency is expected to register an FIR on the basis
of information furnished by any person including the ROC, for
successful investigation and prosecution of criminal case, association
of the person as a complainant, to whom a wrongful loss has
been caused, becomes important. In many of these cases, it has
been found that there have been no individual/ group complainants

30
who have been directly affected by investment in these companies.
As such, some reluctance has been observed on the part of police
authorities to register all the FIRs. However, this gap is being
monitored on a regular basis through a mechanism of the
Monitoring Committee set up for the purpose. Chief Secretaries of
some of the States are members of this Monitoring Committee.”
49. In response to a specific query about the amount of money of
Investors that have been defrauded by the vanishing companies, the
Ministry have in their post evidence reply furnished the figure as
Rs. 803.56 crores.
50. Asked to furnish the date when the Ministry was apprised of
the “vanishing” status of such companies, the Ministry have in their
post evidence written reply stated as follows:
“With the establishment of the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI) in 1992, SEBI has assumed the role of regulator of
securities markets etc. with a view to protect the interests of the
investors. The functions of SEBI include regulating the business of
stock exchanges and working of merchant bankers and under-
writers. Besides, Guidelines have been issued by SEBI for disclosure
for investor protection in the primary market. In pursuance of
these responsibilities, following the 1992 stock market scam,
companies which had been failing to file returns and in whose
cases the show-cause notices issued were being returned
undelivered, were treated as vanishing. SEBI had identified and
furnished to this Ministry lists containing the names of Vanishing
Companies at different points of time starting from 20th November,
1998, 27th November, 1998, 5th April, 1999 and 23rd October, 2000.”
51. The Committee are deeply anguished to note that not much
is being done to address investors’ grievances and save gullible
investors from falling into the trap of “vanishing companies”.
Instances of investors continuing to be duped by capital market
swindlers are heard of as a matter of routine. The Committee observe
that the exercise of identifying “vanishing companies” was
undertaken by SEBI in the year 1998, 1999 and 2000. Apart from this
endeavour of SEBI, the Committee note that the Ministry of Company
Affairs have not undertaken any serious exercise to maintain a
continuously updated database of “vanishing companies”. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should take
suitable measures to identify the “vanishing companies”, debar the
promoters/directors of such companies permanently, so as to eliminate
any chances of them surfacing again and also ensure that the guilty
are punished under the due process of law. While the Committee

31
note that the Government have launched prosecutions against
“vanishing companies” under the Companies Act as well as Indian
Penal Code, they feel that a lot more needs to be done. The
Committee feel that unless the regulators get serious about their
investigations and find ways to ensure that the investors get back
their money, the concept of investor protection will remain
meaningless.
52. The Committee also recommend that Government should take
concrete measures to establish the veracity of promoters and directors
of companies, inclusive of their capacity to raise funds at the time
of their registration. They also feel that apart from ensuring penal
action, details of promoters/directors of vanishing companies need
to be widely publicized through newspapers and other media, which
could contribute to protecting investors’ interest.
INSPECTION OF COMPANIES
53. Section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956, empowers the
Registrar of Companies and the officers of the Central Government
who have been authorized in this regard under the Act to undertake
inspection of the books of accounts and other records of companies.
54. As on date, 6.5 lakh companies have been registered with all
Registrar Offices of the Ministry of Company Affairs across the country.
Out of these 6.5 lakh companies, the number of Inspection conducted
by the Ministry during last four financial years are as under:—
Year No. of Inspections
2001-2002 244
2002-2003 150
2003-2004 109
1.4.2004 – 28.02.2005 197
55. Asked about the major steps taken by the Ministry to improve
the efficiency of inspection mechanism in the Inspection Wing, the
Ministry in their written reply have stated as follows:—
“Following are the three major steps that Ministry has taken for
this purpose in recent years:—
(a) Ministry has taken up cadre review which will result in the
increase of number of officers available for inspections and
encourage the officers’ morale;

32
(b) Ministry of Company Affairs has constituted a Committee,
chaired by Shri Shardul Shroff to look into the ways and
means and advise the Ministry as to how to engage private
professionals also for carrying out inspections under the
Companies Act, 1956. The report will be received shortly.
(c) The Ministry, from time to time, sending its officers for
training to the professional institutes, like Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India, Institute of Companies
Secretaries of India and Haryana Institute of Public
Administration with a view to improving their techniques
of inspections. It is believed that on completion of the said
trainings, these officers will become more efficient and their
inspections will be more effective.”
56. Asked to furnish the steps taken to strengthen the organizational
setup of the Inspection Wing, the Ministry have in their written reply
stated as :—
“To strengthen the Inspection Wing, a cadre review of Indian
Company Law Service (ICLS) has been taken up. An internal
committee constituted for the purpose has submitted its report.
The recommendations of the cadre review committee are under
examination”.
57. When asked about the steps to speed up the scrutiny,
investigation and inspection of the companies, the Ministry have stated
in a written reply as:—
“To speed up the scrutiny , investigations and inspections of
companies, Ministry has issued fresh guidelines for taking up the
technical scrutiny by ROCs. Further, a specialist organization,
known as Serious Frauds Investigation Office (SFIO) has been
created for quality investigations. To look into the problems of
inspections, a Committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri Shardul Shroff, whose report is due any
time”
58. Asked to furnish the reasons for non-willingness of any CA
firm to take up inspection work and the remedial measures taken by
the Ministry in this regard, the Ministry have furnished in their written
reply as:—
“When attempts were made to enlist the CA firms to conducting
investigations, it was found that many CA firms were unwilling

33
to take up the job mainly because they were requested to furnish
certification that they have no dealings with the company (comfort
letter), which they are going to investigate or with the group the
company is associated with. As per experience CA firms are found
to be unwilling to categorically furnish such statements and instead
preferred to withdraw, thus leading to difficulties in obtaining
services of CA firms for investigation.
As for routine inspections, since such activity is conducted on a
much wider scale as compared to investigations, difficulties are
anticipated in obtaining sufficient numbers of independent
Chartered Accountant firms for the purpose. As at present under
section 209A, routine inspections are entrusted to officials of the
Central Government and SEBI only”.
59. When asked whether Shardul Shroff Committee have submitted
its report, the Ministry have stated as follows:—
“The final report of Shardul Shroff Committee is expected shortly.
The Committee was set up on 22.04.2002. It has since completed
its consultations with various experts. The issues identified by the
Shardul Shroff Committee were also presented before the Expert
Committee headed by Dr. JJ Irani set up to advise the Government
on the revision of the Companies Act. The report is being finalized
and is expected shortly”.
60. In response to a query on the percentage of total number of
companies that could be inspected by Ministry of Company Affairs,
even if Regional Directors as well as ROCs are engaged, the Ministry
have stated as under:—
“It has been found through practice over a period of years that
one inspecting officer can submit around 12 inspection reports in
a year and with 24 officers working in Inspection Wing, it should
be possible to carry out approximately 240 to 250 inspections in a
year after leaving one officer in each region to be in-charge of
follow up action. The Registrars of Companies are also advised to
take up inspections independently, at least one company a
month. With this, another 240/250 inspections can be carried out.
During the current year, MCA may inspect 0.2% of working
companies”.
61. When asked whether any extra efforts are being made by the
Ministry to strengthen their inspection wing so that the number of

34
inspection being conducted could increase, the Ministry have in their
written reply furnished as below:-
“Inspections are mostly individual based, therefore, to improve the
number of inspections to be conducted, it requires more strength
and also to provide computerized system support for easy retrieval
of information and analysis. The officers of the Inspection Wing
are being trained in the use of computers”.
62. Elsewhere in their reply, the Ministry have while explaining
the MCA-21 e-Governance project furnished in their written reply as:-
“The Government of India has approved the Ministry’s ‘MCA21’
e-Governance Project on 02.02.2005 with cost estimates of Rs.
341.214 crore plus a permissible addition of Rs. 4.68 crore towards
change of scope in the software. The Project was launched on
09.02.2005 and the requisite contract agreements have been signed
on 01.03.2005. Effective from the date of signing the contract, the
Project has an implementation period of 60 weeks and an operation
period of 6 years”.
63. Asked to furnish the status of cadre review exercise alongwith
suggestions made for strengthening of inspection wings, the Ministry
have submitted in their written reply as below:—
An internal Committee was constituted in January, 2003 under the
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Admn.) with the approval of
Secretary , MCA, for making recommendations/ suggestions for
cadre review of the Indian Company Law Service (ICLS). The
Committee, after several meetings held to discuss the draft
proposals, has submitted its report in December, 2004. The report
of the Committee is under examination. It has been recommended
in the report that the number of posts in the Inspection Wing be
increased from 49 to 112 in order to strengthen the Inspection
Wings at Headquarters and the Offices of four Regional Directors
at Kolkata, Kanpur, Mumbai and Chennai. However, the
recommendations contained in the report are under examination
in the Ministry”.
64. During the oral evidence, the Secretary of the Ministry of
Company Affairs have stated as follows:—
“Already the level of inspections undertaken in the year 2004-05
has shown an increase over the previous year and has had the

35
declining trend. Against 109 inspections carried out in 2003-04,
nearly 180 inspections have been carried out during the year 2004-
05 and it is expected to reach the figure of 200 this year.
Efforts are also being made to strengthen the inspection wing of
the Ministry to take up this activity on a sustainable basis. As
many as 22 posts in Group ‘A’ have been recommended recently
to the UPSC for filling up by direct recruitment. As regards Group
‘B’ posts and Group ‘C’ posts, 11 and 22 posts respectively have
been approved for filling up through the competent agencies”.
 65. In response to the concern about the staff strength, the
Secretary has during the oral evidence stated as under:—
“Another concern was about the staff needed. Over the years, the
staff strength or vacancies have not been filled. This time, we
have made attempts to fill 22 vacancies in Class ‘A’ posts. The
request has been posted with the authorities and we hope that we
would get their approval so that we could approach the UPSC to
fill them up. Similarly, in Classes ‘B’ and ‘C’, we have had the
meetings and they have been approved. We are approaching the
authorities for filling up those posts also.
In the MCA, there would be a large number of officers or young
staff, who would be eased out of the normal day to day activities.
We hope to divert them and we have a proper work plan for
them so that they could be put on inspection for inquiries and
inspections. This way, we would be able to gear up the Department
to meet the requirements of the growing number of companies
getting registered in the country”.
66. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry towards
computerization under the MCA-21 e-Governance Project, the
Committee note with concern the explanation of the Government
regarding the number of inspections. The Committee observe that
the number of inspections done have gone up from 109 in 2003-04
to 197 till February, 2005. However, when compared to the number
of companies operating as on date i.e. 6,52,000, it is just a miniscule
number. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry
envisages to conduct inspection of only 0.2% of the companies during
the current year. In this regard, the Committee are reminded of their
recommendation of the previous year wherein they have expressed
serious concern that the number of inspections were coming down
year after year and have deplored the casual approach of the

36
Government towards inspections. It seems that the Government have
become content with only marginal increase in the number of
inspections to be conducted this year. The Committee find that their
concerns regarding lesser inspections over the years have not been
adequately addressed to by the Government and the Ministry are
not taking any strong measures to rectify this problem. The
Committee note that this is despite the fact that inspection of
companies are the primary responsibility of the Ministry’s field
organization and it is the most significant job entrusted to the
Ministry.
67. The Committee are given to understand that the lesser number
of inspections being carried out is a result of inadequate staff
strength with the Government and after implementation of MCA-21
e-Governance Project, some surplus staff would be available who
would be transferred to the inspection wings. The Committee also
note that the cadre review Committee of the Indian Company Law
Service has submitted its report and its recommendations are under
examination. They have also been informed that the Shardul Shroff
Committee on outsourcing the routine inspections under section 209A
is going to submit the report shortly. The Committee recommend
that the recommendations made by this Committee should be
examined expeditiously and suitable steps should be taken to
augment the staff strength of the Ministry apart from training those
staff who are rendered surplus after the implementation of MCA-21
e-Governance project.
FILING OF STATUTORY RETURNS BY THE COMPANIES
68. Section 159 and 160 of the Companies Act 1956 makes it
mandatory for the companies to file annual returns. Section 162,
prescribes that if a company fails to comply with any of the provisions
contained in section 159, 160 or 161, the company and every officer of
the company who is in default, shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which the
default continues.
69. Asked to furnish the number of companies registered, the
number of companies which failed to file their annual returns and  the
number of cases in which penalties were imposed for delays/defiance

37
in failing to file the returns, the Ministry in their written reply have
stated as follows:—
The number of companies registered:
Year No. of Companies
2001-2002 21,166
2002-2003 24,170
2003-2004 30,218
The number of companies who failed to file their returns;
(Annual returns and Balance sheets)
Year No. of Companies
2001-2002 2,62,219
2002-2003 1,64,671
2003-2004 3,30,774
70. As regards, the number of cases in which penalties were
imposed for delays/defiance in failing to file the returns, the Ministry
have stated that the information was not maintained centrally in the
Ministry as the penalties could be imposed either by the courts or by
the Company Law Board. Those imposed by courts were collected in
State treasury and those imposed by Company Law Board were
collected by CLB and thus the information was centrally not available.
71. When asked, whether the Ministry is thinking in terms of either
increasing the field officers strength very steeply on the punishment/
penalty very steeply to make those 50% of the Companies which are
not filing their statutory returns comply with the statutory requirement,
the Secretary of the Ministry has, during the oral evidence stated as
follows:
“…It has been said here that some time after registration many
companies are not filing their returns. It is correct that 50 per cent
is a very high percentage. All this is because the punishment is
very minimal. So, that concern is going to be met by Dr. Irani. He
is addressing that concern himself. In fact, Shri Shroff is also one
of the Members of that Committee. He has been associated with
it.”

38
72. When asked specifically whether the punishment/penalty part
can be delinked with the issue of revision of the Companies Act, 1956
and be taken separately on priority, the Secretary of the Ministry of
Company Affairs has stated as under:
“Sir, we can take it up with the Law Ministry. Earlier efforts show
that this has to come in the main Act. We are very much concerned.
We do not want this again to be hung up on this.”
73. The representative of the Ministry of Company Affairs added:
“In filing of returns what has been observed is that there is some
kind of a cyclic pattern taking place in a number of companies
which are found not to have filed returns. They increase, then
they come down, and then they increase again. A part of the
answer to that is that traditionally over the last so many years
under the Companies Act, over two to three years, there is an
intensive exercise which is taken up by the Department, then the
Department now the Ministry, to have the filing expedited. That is
because what happens is that a company is required to file but it
can file later with payment of late fee under the Act. In some
cases there are group companies, in some cases there are related
companies and they all file together. Sometimes companies do not
file in the prescribed period but pay with late fee. Therefore, there
is a cyclic variation which takes place, but the concern remains.
In the existing framework that we have, filing of returns is an
important function because filing of return brings certain
information about the company into the public domain where a
member of the public may see and then take his decision as to
what the company is. On the filing, the current provisions provide
for a filing fee. In case it is not complied with, there is filing with
payment of a late fee. Then if, as a result of this thing, there is an
inspection and the company is not found to have filed its
documents in time, there are certain fines and penalties which
follow. Now, the view and the concern which has been expressed
around the table is that perhaps it may be correct to say that
these provisions do not provide an adequate deterrent for a
company to avoid non-filing. For example, absence of an incentive
for him to file in time, also absence of adequate deterrent in terms
of punishment and whatever consequences to avoid non-filing.
This is an important matter which is also being looked at in the
revision. The important issue is that this will also require a revision.

39
These levels which provided were there in 1956. There was one
revision in the year 2000. Fees and all these things and some fines
were raised also. But still, in many cases they are not found to be
adequate. We hope that with this exercise a new regime for filing
should be available. What is being looked at for example is that
under the computerised system there will be one identification
number. This identification number may be useful in many ways
in the manner which is similar to the Income Tax Department
where possession of a PAN number facilitates and is a positive
incentive today for other actions. It is hoped that having a
computerised company registration number and its valid
maintenance will be a positive incentive for a company to file. A
provision can be thought of that if you do not file regularly then
this number may get frozen and become non-operational. This is
the positive side.
At the same time, the deterrent aspect will also have to be reviewed
so that the consequences of non-filing are made more stringent
than they are at present. I think, this is a concern which is also
very much, to our understanding, before the Irani Committee and
they are expected to come out with some recommendation on this
issue.”
74. The Committee lament that 50% of the companies are not
filing statutory returns and no concrete action is being taken against
such companies by the Ministry. The Committee are of the opinion
that this situation is no longer acceptable and needs to be changed.
The Committee recommend evolving an effective means of
identifying non-operating companies and also publish details of such
companies through the print/electronic media. The Committee note
with concern that the present provisions do not act as a sufficient
deterrent on the companies that delay or do not file the statutory
annual returns. The Committee note that the Government has gone
for a computerization exercise that would provide distinctive
identification number to facilitate filing of annual returns. They,
therefore, suggest that inconsistencies in filing of annual returns
should be met with stringent penalties.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 April, 2005 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 31 March, 2005 from 1030 hours
to 1315 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
9. Shri Rupchand Pal
10. Shri K.S. Rao
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
14. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P . K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
40

41
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Secretary
2. Shri M. Deena Dayalan, Financial Advisor
3. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Y.S. Malik, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Vyas Ji, Secretary, CCI
6. Smt. Usha Nigam, Secretary , MRTP
7. Smt. Jayalakshmi Srinivasan, Secretary, CLB
8. Shri Ajay Nath, DGI&R
9. Shri O.P . Arya, Director General (SFIO)
10. Shri Paul Joseph, Economic Adviser
11. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Adviser, Cost
12. Shri V .S. Rao, D II
13. Shri R. Vasudevan, D II
14. Smt. Vibha Pandey, CCA
15. Shri K.K. Sabbarwal, Dir. (Fin)
16. Shri P . K. Kumar, Dir.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Company Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of representatives of the
Ministry of Company Affairs on Demands for Grants (2005-06) and
other related matters.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of Ministry
of Company Affairs to furnish notes on certain points raised by the
Members to which replies were not readily available with them during
the discussion.
5. The evidence was concluded
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
(The Committee then adjourned to meet again on
01 April, 2005 at 1030 hours)

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 07th April, 2005 from 1100 to
1230 hours
 PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri Lakshman Seth
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
14. Shri Yashwant Sinha
15. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
42

43
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. The Chairman then requested the Members to give their
suggestions on the issues proposed to be taken up for inclusion in the
draft reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of
the Ministries/Departments under their purview.
4.Thereafter, Members expressed their views on the subjects/topics
that could be covered in the Reports of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministries/Departments, which were to
be taken up for consideration and adoption at the sittings to be held
on 11 and 12 April, 2005.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 12 April, 2005 from 1100 to 1310
hours.
 PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri R.P . Goenka
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting.
44

45
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft reports:
(i) ** ** ** **
(ii) ** ** ** **
(iii) Draft report on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the
Ministry of Company Affairs.
(iv) ** ** ** **
4. The Committee adopted the report with the modifications/
amendments shown in Annexure.
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of modifications as also to make verbal and other
consequential changes arising out of the factual verification and present
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned

ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS  MADE  BY  STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  IN  THEIR  DRAFT  REPORT
ON  THE  DEMANDS  FOR  GRANTS  (2005-06) OF THE
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS AT THEIR SITTING
HELD ON 12 APRIL, 2005]
Page Para Line Modifications
No. No. No.
12 3 4
37 51 10 For:
The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Government should take
suitable measures to continuously
identify the “vanishing companies”, and
debar the promoters/directors of such
companies permanently, so as to
eliminate any chances of them surfacing
again.
Substitute:
The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Government should take
suitable measures to identify the
“vanishing companies”, debar the
promoters/directors of such companies
permanently, so as to eliminate any
chances of them surfacing again and
also ensure that the guilty are punished
under the due process of law.
37 51 2 from below For:
investors are compensated for the losses
suffered,
Substitute:
investors get back their money
46

47
12 3 4
37 52 2 For:
promoters and directors of companies
at the time of their registration
Substitute:
details of promotors and directors of
companies, inclusive of their capacity
to raise funds at the time of their
registration
3 After:
They also feel that
Insert:
apart from ensuring penal action,
48 74 4 After:
Needs to be changed
Insert:
The Committee recommend evolving an
effective means of identifying non-
operating companies and also publish
details of such companies through
print/electronic media.

STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THE TWENTIETH
REPORT (2005-06)
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Conclusions/
No. No. Concerned Recommendations
12 3 4
1. 6 Ministry of The Committee note with
Company Affairs serious concern that certain
discrepancies have crept in the
figures supplied in Demands
for Grants for the years 2004-
2005 and 2005-2006. The
explanation given by the
Ministry that such
inconsistencies would be
avoided in future through the
system of reconciliation with
the Principal Accounts Office at
regular intervals do not
convince the Committee. This
reconciliation exercise should
have been completed well in
advance of supplying figures in
Parliamentary papers. They are
of the view that the
Government should take utmost
care while furnishing the
figures before Parliament. They
expect that such discrepancies
will not occur in future.
2. 10 Ministry of The Committee are concerned
Company Affairs to note that budgetary
allocations were made by the
Ministry with a casual approach
due to which it had allowed a
large sum of Rs 1.6 crore
allocated at BE stage which was
retained even at RE stage, to be
surrendered. When the
accommodation was not
48

49
12 3 4
available, the Ministry should
have changed the allocations at
RE stage but it did not do so
and allowed the allocations to
be surrendered. The Committee
recommend the Government to
come out with realistic
Budgetary estimates so that
there is minimum gap between
BE, RE and Actuals.
3. 21 Ministry of The Committee note that SFIO
Company Affairs which was intended to be a
specialized agency, investigating
cases of frauds involving large
sum of money in excess of
Rs. 50 crore and the interests
of large section of the people is
currently looking into 26 cases.
They have been informed that
within a period of two years,
since SFIO came into being this
number has increased from
initial five or six references to
26 at present. They are given
to understand that SFIO has to
work within the ambit of the
Companies Act, the procedures
are long drawn and it has no
powers similar to the ones like
institutions enjoyed in other
countries. The Committee were
however, informed that since
this organization is very new,
the Government will after
gaining some experience further
deliberate on improving the
efficacy of this institution
including conferring it with
statutory status. Given the
important nature of the
functions which the SFIO is
supposed to discharge, the
Committee desire that suitable
measures be taken to further
strengthen it.

50
12 3 4
4. 30 Ministry of The Committee take note that
Company Affairs the Competition Act, 2002
which was to replace the
Monopolies and Restrictive
Trade Practices Act, 1959 could
not be made operational
because of legal challenges in
the Supreme Court of India.
They have been informed that
the Apex Court has given its
judgement on 20.01.2005 with
some observations in regard to
issue of separation of powers.
The representatives of the
Ministry have stated that the
amended Bill on the lines of
suggestions made by Supreme
Court, would be tabled in the
Monsoon Session, 2005. The
Committee are of the view that
this progressive legislation has
already been delayed on
account of legal tangles which
could have been avoided, had
the Ministry taken this aspect
into account before its passing
by both the Houses of
Parliament. There should not be
further delay in bringing
conformity amendments. They
expect that the Government
would come forward with
necessary legislation in the
Monsoon Session, 2005 and get
it enacted within the same
session.
5. 39, 40 Ministry of The Committee take note of the
& 41 Company Affairs fact that Investor Education and
Protection Fund (IEPF) has to
its credit a whopping sum of
about Rs. 352 crore upto
31.12.2004 and about Rs. 100
crores is added every year to
the fund. This huge amount

51
12 3 4
comes mainly from four
sources, namely, share
application money, debentures,
unpaid dividends and
unclaimed deposits. They are
given to understand that this
amount is credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India and
a budgetary allocation is made
by the Parliament every year to
run the activities under IEPF. In
this way the Ministry
contributes more funds to the
Consolidated Fund of India
than getting from it. They are
dismayed to note that such
huge amount of money
deposited by the companies is
not being utilized for the object
under which it has been
constituted. They have been
informed by the Secretary,
Ministry of Company Affairs
that the Ministry is making a
proposal saying that funds
could be considered to be kept
as an interest bearing deposit
which should flow back to
them in the form of each years’
budget for taking up these
activities. The Committee are in
total agreement with this
proposal and want that
Government should clear this
proposal as and when received.
As far as utilization of the fund
is concerned, a lot more needs
to be done. As per Ministry’s
own admission before the
Committee, the activities under
IEPF need to be expanded by
taking up the Financial Literacy
Programme in a big way . They
have been informed that a

52
12 3 4
professional agency is being
proposed to be taken on the
board of IEPF to advise them
apart from financing the NGOs
and Voluntary organizations,
conducting workshops,
seminars, panel discussions and
investors’ clinics etc. The
Committee recommend to the
Government that no effort
should be spared to take up
this task in a big way and the
proposal to engage professional
agency may be expedited so as
to bring about professional
approach to this ambitious
programme.
The Committee are deeply
concerned to note that the
activities under IEPF have little
penetration in rural areas. They
are of the view that the rural
investor is gullible and hence
needs more protection but
going by the registration of
NGO’s and Voluntary
Organisations for this purpose,
they find that only three
agencies have been registered
so far with IEPF. The
Committee find that unless
more and more NGO’s and
Volunatary Organisations are
engaged and encouraged by the
Government to take up this job,
the entire exercise under IEPF
will be rendered futile. They,
therefore, recommend that
Government should encourage
more NGO’s and Voluntary
Organisations to take up the
task of educating the rural
investors expeditiously.
6. 51, 52 Ministry of The Committee are deeply
Company Affairs anguished to note that not
much is being done to address

53
12 3 4
investors’ grievances and save
gullible investors from falling
into the trap of “vanishing
companies”. Instances of
investors continuing to be
duped by capital market
swindlers are heard of as a
matter of routine. The
Committee observe that the
exercise of identifying
“vanishing companies” was
undertaken by SEBI in the year
1998, 1999 and 2000. Apart from
this endeavour of SEBI, the
Committee note that the
Ministry of Company Affairs
have not undertaken any
serious exercise to maintain a
continuously updated database
of “vanishing companies”.
The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the
Government should take
suitable measures to identify
the “vanishing companies”,
debar the promoters/directors
of such companies permanently,
so as to eliminate any chances
of them surfacing again and
also ensure that the guilty are
punished under the due process
of law. While the Committee
note that the Government have
launched prosecutions against
“vanishing companies” under
the Companies Act as well as
Indian Penal Code, they feel
that a lot more needs to be
done. The Committee feel that
unless the regulators get serious
about their investigations and
find ways to ensure that the
investors get back their money,
the concept of investor
protection will remain
meaningless.

54
12 3 4
The Committee also
recommend that Government
should take concrete measures
to establish the veracity of
promoters and directors of
companies, inclusive of their
capacity to raise funds at the
time of their registration. They
also feel that apart from
ensuring penal action, details
of promoters/directors of
vanishing companies need to be
widely publicized through
newspapers and other media,
which could contribute to
protecting investors’ interest.
7. 66, 67 Ministry of While appreciating the steps
Company Affairs taken by the Ministry towards
computerization under the
MCA-21 e-governance Project,
the Committee note with
concern the explanation of the
Government regarding the
number of inspections. The
Committee observe that the
number of inspections done
have gone up from 109 in
2003-04 to 197 till February,
2005. However, when compared
to the number of companies
operating as on date i.e.
6,52,000, it is just a miniscule
number. The Committee are
dismayed to note that the
Ministry envisages to conduct
inspection of only 0.2% of the
companies during the current
year. In this regard, the
Committee are reminded of
their recommendation of the
previous year wherein they
have expressed serious concern
that the number of inspections
were coming down year after

55
12 3 4
year and have deplored the
casual approach of the
Government towards inspections.
It seems that the Government
have become content with only
marginal increase in the
number of inspections to be
conducted this year. The
Committee find that their
concerns regarding lesser
inspections over the years have
not been adequately addressed
to by the Government and the
Ministry are not taking any
strong measures to rectify this
problem. The Committee note
that this is despite the fact that
inspection of companies are the
primary responsibility of the
Ministry’s field organization
and it is the most significant job
entrusted to the Ministry.
The Committee are given to
understand that the lesser
number of inspections being
carried out is a result of
inadequate staff strength with
the Government and after
implementation of MCA-21
e-governance Project, some
surplus staff would be available
who would be transferred to
the inspection wings. The
Committee also note that the
cadre review Committee of the
Indian Company Law Service
has submitted its report and
its recommendations are under
examination. They have
also been informed that the
Shardul Shroff Committee on
outsourcing the routine
inspections under section 209A
is going to submit the report

56
12 3 4
shortly. The Committee
recommend that the
recommendations made by this
Committee should be examined
expeditiously and suitable steps
should be taken to augment the
staff strength of the Ministry
apart from training those staff
who are rendered surplus after
the implementation of MCA-21
e-governance project.
8. 74 Ministry of The Committee lament that 50%
Company Affairs of the companies are not filing
statutory returns and no
concrete action is being taken
against such companies by the
Ministry. The Committee are of
the opinion that this situation
is no longer acceptable and
needs to be changed. The
Committee recommend
evolving an effective means of
identifying non-operating
companies and also publish
details of such companies
through the print/electronic
media. The Committee note
with concern that the present
provisions do not act as a
sufficient deterrent on the
companies that delay or do not
file the statutory annual returns.
The Committee note that the
Government has gone for a
computerization exercise that
would provide distinctive
identification number to
facilitate filing of annual
returns. They, therefore, suggest
that inconsistencies in filing of
annual returns should be met
with stringent penalties.