 
 
 
9 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FINANCE 
(2004) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Company Affairs] 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
       (2004) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2004-2005) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Company Affairs] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   22  December, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   22  December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
                   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
CHAPTER I       Report 
                                                                                                 
 
CHAPTER II      Recommendations/observations which have been   
                            accepted by the Government 
               
                                  
CHAPTER III     Recommendations/observations which the Committee   
                            do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
                            replies  
 
CHAPTER IV    Recommendations/observations in respect of which   
                            replies of the Government have not been accepted  
                            by the Committee  
 
CHAPTER V    Recommendations/observations in respect of which   
                           final replies of the Government are still awaited 
           
 
  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 20 December, 2004  
 
 
APPENDIX 
 Analysis of the action taken by government on the recommendations   
contained in the Fifth report of the Standing Committee on Finance  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005)  
of the Ministry of Company Affairs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Sh. P.D.T. Achary  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Sh. R.C. Kakkar  - Under Secretary  
 
(iii) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, Chairman of the Standing Committ ee on Finance (2004-05) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this Ninth 
Report on action taken by Government on t he recommendations contained in the fifth 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok S abha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) 
of the Ministry of Company Affairs.    
 
2. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 
2004.  The Government furnishe d the written replie s indicating action taken on all the 
recommendations on 11 November, 2004.  The draft action taken report was 
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 20 December, 2004. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
  
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI, 
20  December, 2004                                            Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana, 1926(Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

CHAPTER 1 
 
REPORT 
 
 1. This Report of the Standing Committ ee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations contained in their fifth Report (Fourteenth  Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grant s (2004-2005) of the Minist ry of Company Affairs 
which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2004. 
     
2. The Report contained seven recommendations.  Action taken notes have 
been received from the Government in respect of all the recommendations 
contained in the Report.  These have been analysed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos 1, 6, 7  
 
(Total 3)                               (Chapter II)  
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendations Nos. 3,4 
 
(Total 2)                               (Chapter III)  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in re spect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
Recommendations  Nos.  2, 5 
 
(Total  2)        (Chapter IV) 
                              
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited: 
 
Nil         (Chapter V) 
 
3.       The Committee des ire that reply in respect of  the recommendation contained 
in Chapter I of the Report may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4.       The Committee will now deal with action taken by the  Government on some 
of  their recommendations: 

A. COMPANY LAW BOARD 
Recommendation ( Para No. 15) 
 
5.          Focussing on the functioning the Company Law Board the Committee noted 
with serious concern that affairs of the Company Law Board (CLB) were being managed 
the only 3 members as against the sancti oned strength of 9 mem bers. They were 
dismayed at the apathetic a ttitude of the Government with regard to Company Law 
Board otherwise such a body would not have been allowed to function with one third of 
the sanctioned strength. That affected the disposal of petitions substantively. They 
deplored the sorry state of affairs. They were given to understand that functions of 
Company Law Board would be transferred to  the newly created National Company Law 
Tribunal (NCLT) which was no t functional  due to stay  granted by High Court. The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that till the stay was vacated and NCLT made 
fully operational, the Government should take steps to fill the vacant posts in the 
Company Law Board . 
 
 
6.  The Government in their acti on taken reply have stated as follows:- 
 
“The process of appointment of Chai rman/ Members of the Company Law 
Board was taken up in 2001 but was s ubsequently kept in abeyance since 
the Company Law Board was to be wound up and replaced by the  
National Company Law Tribunal,  c onsequent to the enactment of the 
Companies ( Second Amendmen t) Bill  - then under  consideration. The 
Companies ( Second Amendment) Act was enacted in 2002.  
 
Continuation of the Company Law Board is considered necessary until the 
constitution and functioning of the proposed National Company Law 
Tribunal (NCLT) as a tr ansitional arrangement. At present, constitution of 
NCLT is delayed on account of a legal challenge to some provisions of the 
Companies (Second Amendment) Act 2002. The matter is under the 
consideration of the Supreme Court. 
 
 In view of the likely delay in co nstitution of NCLT, steps have again been 
initiated by this Ministry to select suitable persons for the post of Chairman 
and two members of the Company Law Board (CLB). In the interim, 
arrangements are being made for proper functioning of the CLB.” 

7.  The Committee after taking note of the apathetic attitude of the 
Government with regard to the functioni ng of Company Law Board (CLB), which 
was being managed by only three members against the sanctioned strength of 
nine members, had specifically recommende d that till the stay was vacated and 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) made functional Government should fill 
up the vacancies for the smooth functioning of CLB.  The Committee are deeply 
perturbed to find that instead of filling up all the vacancies in the Company Law 
Board, the Ministry have initiated steps for filling up the vacancies of the 
Chairman and two members only inspite of the specific recommendation of the 
Committee.   They deprecate this casual approach of the government in not 
taking the recommendation of the Committ ee seriously. The Committee fail to 
understand as to how the claim of the  Ministry  for smooth functioning of the 
Company Law Board could be substantiated in the absence of full complement of 
the  Company Law Board.  The Commi ttee cannot but reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to fill up all vacancies in  CLB without further delay.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken by the Government in this 
regard within two months after the presentation of the Report. 
 

B. INSPECTIONS 
Recommendation ( Para No. 38) 
 
8. The Committee had expressed their  seriou s concern over the downward trends 
of inspections of the companies carried ou t by the Government.  The Committee also 
found that even 1% of the companies i.e. 6,52,000 as on date were not inspected during 
2003, 2004.  They had observe d that  the number of inspections were coming down 
year after year. They had observed that that such a casual approach of the Government 
towards inspections had made the mockery of the system. They were however informed 
about the inadequacy of staff in the Inspection Wing whic h could be augmented once 
the cadre review exercise was completed.  The Committee were also informed that an 
Expert Committee (Shardul Sharoff Committee) on outsourcing the routine inspection 
was to submit its report.  The Committee had desired that both these reports would be 
expedited and implemented at the earliest.   
 
9. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The Ministry takes the function of inspection as provided under the 
Companies Act with due seriousness and  notes the observations of the 
Hon'ble Committee for guidance. It is submitted that the number of 
inspections in the year 2003-2004 has been recorded as less compared to 
the previous years mainly because during this period, the Inspecting 
Officers were deputed in to submit  supplementary inspection reports on 
all the inspections done in connecti on with the Stock Market Scam, 2001, 
numbering ninety-six. The supplement ary reports were, however,  not 
classified as inspections and therefor e not taken into account as such for 
statistical purposes only.  The inspec tion function of the Ministry is being 
geared up by  draw ing up a framework for regular  inspections by all the 
available inspecting staff, timely completion of inspections already taken 
up and proper follow up for prosecution of violations/contraventions of the 
law.   The Cadre Review Committee has been constituted in the Ministry 
and is preparing proposals for cadre re view of ICLS.  The observations of 
Hon’ble Committee are being kept in view.  The `Shardul Shroff 
Committee’ is expected to submit it s report shortly on `Outsourcing the 
Routine Inspections under Section 209A of the Act’. 

10. The Committee are not convinced with  the reply of the Government with 
regard to continuing less number of inspect ions wherein it has been stated that 
inspecting officers were busy in prepar ation of 96 supplementary Inspection 
Reports relating to recommendation of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on 
Stock Market Scam.  Even if these 96 reports are taken into consideration and 
treated as inspections under the Compani es Act, the number of inspections done 
during the period would be much less than 1% of the total number of companies.  
The Committee are constrained to find th at the Committee for Cadre Review and 
Shardul Shroff Committee could not fina lise their proposals for augmenting the 
staff and outsourcing the routine inspecti ons respectively which resulted in the 
delay of the revamping of inspection wing and outsourcing of Routine Inspection 
Mechanism even after a lapse of four months since the report of the Committee 
was presented. 
11. The Committee are of the opinion that  unless the cadre revi ew of the staff 
is done and routine inspections are ou tsourced, there will be no significant 
improvement in the matter of inspections.  The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to take positive steps in this direction so that the exercise for Cadre 
Review is expedited and the recommendations made by Shardul Shroff 
Committee are finalised at the earliest so that  the Inspection Wing of the Ministry 
could be strengthened and mechanism for outsourcing of Routine Inspection 
could be set up without further delay.   
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 1, Para nos. 9&10)  
 
 
 The Committee take note of the fact t hat till now the Companies Act was being 
amended in a piecemeal manner and to meet the requirements at a given point of time. 
Since the commencement of the Act in 1 956, it has been amended 24 times. They 
recall their earlier recommendation made in  their Report on Demands for Grants 
pertaining to Department of Company Affa irs in 2003-04 wherein the Government was 
asked to make comprehensive overhaul of the existing Act. 
The Committee do appreciate the endevaour of  the Government to take up the 
exercise for developing the concept paper for comprehensive overhaul of the 
Companies Act, 1956. They are given to u nderstand that the said  concept paper has 
been circulated to all the interested parties  e.g. corporates, regulatory bodies, 
stakeholders and autonomous professional institutions. Thy want that adequate publicity 
may also be made through print and electronic media so that public at large may also 
involve themselves in the exercise and make suggestions. The Committee expect that 
the exercise would be completed in a fixed time and Government will come forward with 
a new look Companies Bill which meets the requirements of all c oncerned without any 
delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations/observations of th e Standing Committee of Finance as 
contained in its Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) have been noted for 
compliance. 
 The Ministry has already taken up a co mprehensive review of the Companies Act 
1956 with a view to enabling revised legislation to replace the same. 
 A concept paper on Company Law was placed on the Ministry website on August 
4, 2004, for a period of three months, to provide information on the initial proposals for 
revision of the Companies Act 1956 in legislative format for a wide based consultative 
process with various stakeholders.  
A large number of responses have be en received. Detailed consultations are 
being held with various industry associat ions, professional bodies etc. on the 
suggestions made by them to evolve a broad consensus on various issues. 

Simultaneously Concept Rules and Schedules associated with the Concept Paper are 
also being developed. These are also proposed to be placed on the website of the 
Ministry.  
On the basis of consensus achieved thr ough this process, a revised Companies 
Bill would be drafted. It is expected that the preparation of a ne w, revised Companies 
Bill would be possible by the first quarter of Financial Year 2005-06.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para no. 43) 
 
 The Committee do not approve the casual manner in which the Government is 
apparently content with furnishing its replies in regard to higher expenses in foreign 
travel expenses. The Committee are not inclined to accept the explanation advanced by 
the Government. None of the reasons adduc ed by the Ministry which necessitated 
unforeseen expenditure are such  which could not have been foreseen in advance. The 
Government has furnished a trivial pretext t hat the higher actuals during 2002-03 were 
due to deputation of officers at various levels for the international meetings, workshops, 
symposiums etc. The Committee are deepl y concerned to note that the actual 
expenditure under this head is higher than the budgetary estimates. They note that the 
austerity and economy instructions have been recommended from time to time but 
continuously ignored which has resulted in variations between BE and Actuals. The 
entire budgetary exercise thus  goes haywire. In view of the foregoing, the Committee 
are of the view that no seri ous efforts are being made by the Government either in 
anticipating and projecting realistic demand or  in making a judicious and economical 
use of funds allocated under the foreign travel expenses. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that import ant developments are taking pl ace at the international 
level in areas such as Corporate Governanc e, Insolvency Law, Inve stigation of Serious 
Frauds, Accounting Standards, Competition Policy & Law and Computerisation of 
Company Registries.  Various meetings, workshops, symposiums, etc are held in 
regard to matters such as these.  India needs to keep itself abreast of the developments 
in the world.  The Competition Act has already been enacted and the Competition 
Commission of India has also been set up. Si nce several of these areas are new, the 
Ministry was required to interact with some leading agencies, which are working in the 
area of Competition such as :- 

 
(i) OECD (Organisation for Economic  Cooperation and Development). 
 
(ii) UNCTAD (United Nations C onference on Trade and Development). 
 
(iii) ICN (International Competition Network). 
 
(iv) WTO (World Trade Organisation). 
 
2. The Government of India also atta ches great importance to the Corporate 
Governance, India has become a member of  the Steering Committee of the GCGF a 
World Bank organization by paying an annual contribution of US $ 2,50,000 from March, 
2003.  The meetings of the Steering Commi ttee of the GCGF are held at regular 
intervals.  The representation of the Minist ry of Company Affairs for participation in 
these meetings is also very important.  Mor eover, the representative of the Ministry of 
Company Affairs is also a part of the del egation of Department of Commerce, which 
participates in the meetings of GATT Negotiation.   In addition to abov e, India is also a 
member of the UNCITRAL (United Nati ons Commission on International Trade Law) 
and the representatives of t he Ministry of Company Affairs are regularly attending 
meetings of its working Group-V relating to Insolvency Law every year. 
3. The increase in the Foreign Travel  Expenses of the Ministry over the 
years 2001-02 and 2002-03 have been mainly due to the partici pation of India in the 
meetings of above Internat ional Organizations relating to Competition Commission, 
Corporate Governance, Insolven cy Law etc. Keeping in view  the, observations of the 
Hon’ble Committee, BE for t he year 2004-2005 has been care fully reviewed. The initial 
BE of Rs. 29 lakhs has now been proposed at Rs. 20 lakhs at RE stage.  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para no. 47) 
 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the explanation of the Government 
accounting for the under utilization of t he expected amount of expenditure. The 
Government has not provided a convincing explanation for under utilization of the 
amount. The Committee are concerned that t he Government is not making realistic 
anticipation in respect of its demands. T hey strongly disapprove the explanation 
advanced by the Ministry and opine that while  preparing budget estimates, actual 
requirement should be kept in view. The Committee feel that realistic demands would 
make the funds available for other significant areas.  
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The observations/recommendations of  the Standing Committee on Finance as 
contained in its Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) have been noted for 
compliance. While preparing Bud get estimates in future, utmo st care would be taken to 
keep actual requirements in view. 
 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 , Para no. 24) 
 
  
 The Committee note that Serious Fraud Inve stigation Office (S FIO) was set up 
recently in October, 2003. So far till date only six cases have been referred to the SFIO 
and it has been able to complete its investigation only in one case, while another case is 
still under investigation and in the case of a nother four cases stay has been granted by 
the Hon’ble High Court. The Committee have been apprised that  in the Enquiry Report 
submitted by SFIO some suggestions have been made on improving the system, law 
and procedure etc. and these recommendations are being lo oked into by the Expert 
Committee and the action on the recommendati ons will be taken after the report is 
made available by this Committee. The Commi ttee desire that Government should take 
necessary action with regard to getting the stay orders vacated and also take 
expeditious action on the report submitted by the Expert Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Hon’ble Committee’s observations  have been noted for guidance.   
  
In respect of the four cases stayed by  the Hon’ble High Courts which were 
referred to SFIO for investigation, the Mi nistry of Company Affairs is vigorously 
contesting all these cases. In three cases, where the interim stay was contested, the 
final verdict has come.  In two cases, the stay has been vacat ed and investigation has 
been allowed to continue.  In one case, t he case has been referred back to ROC for 
further examination.  At present, only one case is pendi ng before the Court where an 
early hearing application has been made and the judgement is expected shortly.  
 Additional cases are now being referred to SFIO for in vestigation. On the first 
enquiry report submitted by the SFIO, the recommendations of SFIO were examined 
by a Committee of Experts constituted by t he Ministry to advise on further legal action 
to be taken by the Government. Further action in the matter is being taken by the 
Government on the basis of the SFIO Report and in light of the recommendations of 
the Expert Committee. 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para no. 29&30) 
 
 The Committee are surprised to note that ‘nil’ budgetary allocation has been 
sought in favour of the Competition Commission of India , whereas operation of both 
these organizations has been stayed by the C ourts, the Government has sought Rs. 
28300 thousands for National Company Law Tribunal. 
They are not convinced by the Government ’s reply in regard to allocations for 
Competition Commission of India.  They are of the opinion that  ‘nil’ allocation gives an 
impression as if the governm ent does not intend to make th e organization functional in 
the near future. They, therefore,  want that in order to wa rd off such an impression the 
Government should make at least notional provision in such cases. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
‘Nil’ budgetary allocation has been show n against Competition Commission of 
India (CCI) since funds to CCI were propos ed to be provided through Grants-in Aid for 
which there is a separate Budget Head.  
A total fund of a sum of Rs. 50800 thous ands,  proposed to be spent by the CCI 
during the current financial year have been shown under the Head ‘G rants-in-Aid’   
(Major Head 3451) .   
The CCI was created during the financia l year 2003-2004 and at that time 
provision was made under different heads, na mely, Salary, Domestic Travel Expenses, 
Office Expenses, Rent and Prof essional Services.  However,  during the financial year 
2004-2005, the total budget of CCI was shown under the Head ‘Grants-in-Aid’ in 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance as CCI is to function as an autonomous body 
under the Government of India and not like a Department of Government of India.  As 
such during the financial year 2004-2005,  the total budget of  CCI i.e. Rs.50800 
thousands have been shown under the head ‘Grants-in-Aid’ ( Major Head 3451). 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2,  Para no. 15) 
 
 The Committee note with serious concern t hat affairs of the Company Law Board 
(CLB) are being managed by th e only 3 members as against th e sanctioned strength of 
9 members. They are dismay ed at the apathetic attitude of  the Government with regard 
to Company Law Board otherwise such a body would not have been allowed to function 
with one third of the sanction ed strength. This affects t he disposal of petitions 
substantively. They deplore the sorry state of  affairs. They are given to understand that 
functions of Company Law Board will be transferred to the newly created National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) which is not functional at present due to stay granted by 
High Court. Till the stay is vacated and NCLT  made fully operational, the Government 
should take steps to fill the vacant posts in the Company Law Board . 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The process of appointment of Chairman/ Members of the Company Law Board 
was taken up in 2001 but wa s subsequently kept in abey ance since the Company Law 
Board was to be wound up and replaced by the  National Company Law Tribunal,  
consequent to the enactment of the Companies ( Second Amendment) Bill  - then under 
consideration. The Companies ( Second Amendment) Act was enacted in 2002.  
Continuation of the Company Law Board is considered necessary until the 
constitution and functioning of the proposed National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) as 
a transitional arrangement. At present, consti tution of NCLT is delayed on account of a 
legal challenge to some prov isions of the Companies (Second Amendment) Act 2002. 
The matter is under the consideration of the Supreme Court. 
 In view of the likely delay in constitution of NCLT, steps have again been 
initiated by this Ministry to select su itable persons for the post of Chairman and two 
members of the Company Law Board (CLB).  In the interim, arrangements are being 
made for proper functioning of the CLB. 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 5,  Para no. 38) 
 
 The Committee note with serious concer n that the number of  inspections are 
coming down year after year. The Government has accounted for less inspections 
during 2003-04 which is miniscule when com pared to the number of Companies as on 
date. At present, there are 6,52,000 companie s operating in the country. As such not 
even 1% of the companies are being inspected. They are of the view that such a casual 
approach of the Government towards inspections has made the mockery of the system. 
The earlier recommendations of the Committee in this regard have not been taken 
seriously by the Government. They are gi ven to understand that the Government does 
not have adequate staff to carry on such a stupendous task and a cadre review exercise 
is being carried out in the Ministry which will, on implementation au gment the staff of 
inspection wing. They also express their satisfaction that the expert Committee (Shardul 
Shroff Committee) on outsourcing the routine inspections under Section 209A has 
finalized its report which is yet to be subm itted to the Government. They expect that 
both the reports viz. Cadre Review and Shardul Shroff Committee will be expedited and 
implemented by the Government as early as possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The Ministry takes the function of ins pection as provided under the Companies 
Act with due seriousness and notes the obser vations of the Hon'ble Committee for 
guidance. 
 2. It is submitted that the number of  inspections in the year 2003-2004 has 
been recorded as less compared to the previous years mainly because during this 
period, the Inspecting Officers were deputed in to submit  supplementary inspection 
reports on all the inspections  done in connection with the Stock Market Scam, 2001, 
numbering ninety-six. The suppl ementary reports were, however,  not classified as 
inspections and therefore not taken into account as such for statistical purposes only.   
3. The inspection function of the Minist ry is being geared up by  drawing up 
a framework for regular inspections by a ll the available insp ecting staff, timely 
completion of inspections already taken up and proper follow up for prosecution of 
violations/contraventions of the law. 

4.  The Cadre Review Committee has been constituted in the Ministry and 
is preparing proposals for cadr e review of ICLS.  The observations of Hon’ble 
Committee are being kept in view.  

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI, 
20 December, 2004                                                       Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana, 1926(Saka)                                     Standing Committee on Finance 

Minutes of the Tenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 20 December, 2004 from 1530 to 1600 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta 
3. Shri Shyama Charam Gupt 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6. Shri K. S. Rao 
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary       -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar     -   Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chai rman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX.  
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
5. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX.  
6. The Committee thereafter, took up fo r consideration the draft action taken 
report on the Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of  the Ministry of Company Affairs and 
adopted the same without any amendment.  
7. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX.    
8. The Committee then authorised the Chai rman to finalise the Reports in the 
light of amendments suggested as also to make verbal and other consequential 
changes and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF  THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS(2004-2005) OF THE MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS 
 
  
              Total  % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations   7   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which   3  43 
have been accepted by the Government     
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,6 & 7) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observa tions which the   2  28.5 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view      
of the Government’s replies 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3 & 4)  
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observa tions in respect   2  28.5 
of which replies of the Government have     
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 & 5) 
 
 
(v) (Recommendation/observation in respect  NIL  00.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
 (Nil) 
 
 