25
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
Presented to Lok Sabha on 1.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 1.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 25
Price : Rs. 23.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
APPENDIX
1. Statement of the Suggestions made vis-a-vis the Provisions
in the Bill ...................................................................................... 19
2. Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 14 July,
2005, 9 August, 2005, 10 August, 2005, 22 August, 2005,
30 September, 2005 and 7 November, 2005. ........................ 24
ANNEXURE
The Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005 ......... 37

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised to submit the Report on their behalf present this
Twenty Fifth Report on the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill,
2005.
2. The Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005, introduced
in Lok Sabha on 13th May, 2005, was referred to the Committee on
17th May, 2005 for examination and report thereon, by the Hon’ble
Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), who also briefed them at their sitting
held on 14th July, 2005.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII), Punjab National Bank, Oriental Bank of
Commerce, State Bank of India, HDFC Bank Ltd., ICICI Bank, Fixed
Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA), Indian
Banks’ Association, All India Bank Officers Confederation, National
Confederation of Bank Employees, Bank Employees Federation of India,
Corporation Bank Officers Organisation and State Bank of India
Officers’ Association (Patna Circle).
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 9 August, 2005 heard
the views of the representatives of ICICI Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank
of Commerce. At their sitting held on 10th August 2005, the Committee
heard the views of representatives of Punjab National Bank, Indian
Banks’ Association, Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives
Association and Confederation of Indian Industry.
6. On 22nd August, 2005 the Committee heard the views of State
Bank of India, Bank of India and HDFC Bank Ltd.
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) on 30 September, 2005.
8. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at their
sitting held on 7 November, 2005.
(v)

9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs),
representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Punjab
National Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce, State Bank of India, HDFC
Bank Ltd., ICICI Bank, Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives
Association (FIMMDA), Indian Banks’ Association, All India Bank
Officers Confederation, National Confederation of Bank Employees,
Bank Employees Federation of India, Corporation Bank Officers
Organisation and State Bank of India Officers’ Association (Patna Circle)
for their co-operation in placing before them their considered views
and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for furnishing written
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection
with the examination of the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill,
2005.
10. For facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
30 November, 2005 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Background
The Reserve Bank of India was established on April 1 1935 in
accordance with the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
As the Monetary Authority , Regulator and supervisor of the financial
system, Manager of foreign exchange and Issuer of currency, the
Reserve Bank inter-alia discharges the following functions:
• Formulates, implements and monitors the monetary policy .
•P rescribes broad parameters of banking operations within
which the country’s banking and financial system functions.
• Manages the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
• Issues and exchanges or destroys currency and coins not in
circulation.
2. In addition, the Reserve Bank performs a wide range of
promotional functions to support developmental objectives; acts as
banker to the Government and to the banks; and performs merchant
banking functions for Central and State Governments.
3. The steady progress of financial sector reforms has brought to
the fore more products, participants and better liquidity than before in
the Indian financial markets. For more operational flexibility, the
Reserve Bank is required to have enabling powers to use a larger
variety of financial instruments than hitherto. To meet this end, the
Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was introduced in
Lok Sabha on 13 May, 2005 and referred by the Hon’ble Speaker to
the Standing Committee on Finance for examination and report thereon.
4. On the factors that necessitated imitation of the proposals as
contained in the Reserve Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2005, the Brief
furnished by the Ministry of Finance inter-alia reads as under:
(i) Section 42 (1) RBI Act specifies maintenance of Cash Reserve
Ratio (CRR) by the scheduled banks on their demand and
time liabilities in the form of cash balances to be kept with
RBI. The existing prescription of a 3 per cent floor and a
ceiling of 20 per cent of demand and time liabilities towards

2
CRR restricts manoeuvrability of RBI in its monetary
management. The volatility in the influx of foreign exchange
and the market conditions in a fast changing economy, can
be expected to continue in future as the financial sector
makes more and more progress. To cope with any
unforeseen eventualities in future, such as excess or lack of
liquidity in the banking system and for effective conduct of
monetary policy, there is a need to enable Reserve Bank of
India to determine the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for
scheduled banks without any floor or ceiling. Globally, many
Central Banking authorities have such powers. Further, in
the context of the conduct of monetary policy becoming
more market-based through progressive use of indirect
instruments, the Reserve Bank of India needs more flexibility
to set Cash Reserve Ratio, which is one of the two statutory
pre-emptions in respect of the resources of banks.
(ii) Over-the-counter derivatives play a crucial role in
reallocating and mitigating the risks of corporates, banks
and other financial institutions. The ambiguity regarding
their legal validity has inhibited the growth and stability of
the market for such derivatives. It has become essential to
provide for clear legal validity of such contracts.
(iii) At pr esent, under Section 29A of Securities contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956, the Central Government has
delegated to Reserve Bank of India, by a notification, the
powers exercisable by it under section 16 of that Act, for
regulating the transactions in money market and other
instruments. Therefore, for more effective regulation of the
markets for interest rate contracts, including Government
securities and money market instruments as also derivatives,
it is necessary to confer specific powers on the
Reserve Bank of India, under the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934 to lay down policy and to issue directions to the
agencies operating in these contracts, securities and
derivatives.
5. The amendment proposals contained in the Bill to meet these
concerns are briefly delineated as under:
(a) define the expressions, ’derivative’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’
in Section 17 for the purpose of the business of the Bank
and differently in new Chapter III D for the purposes of
regulatory powers of the Bank.

3
(b) empower the RBI to deal in derivatives, to lend or borrow
securities and to undertake repo or reverse repo;
(c) remove the lower floor and upper ceiling of Cash Reserve
Ratio (CRR) and to provide flexibility to RBI to specify CRR;
(d) remove ambiguity regarding the legal validity of derivatives;
(e) empower RBI to lay down policy and issue directions to
any agency dealing in various kinds of contracts in respect
of Government securities, money-market instruments,
derivatives etc. and to inspect such agencies.
6. The Committee had a briefing meeting with the representatives
of the Ministry of Finance on the provisions of the Reserve Bank of
India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. On the reasons for seeking to enable
the Reserve Bank to deal in derivatives, as also repo and reverse repo
as proposed in the Bill, a representative of the Ministry stated as
follows during the meeting:
“It is not so much the RBI that wanted to be a player but because
all these indirect instruments have come into the money market
that the RBI’s balance sheet itself is subject to certain risks. So, it
is necessary for it to safeguard itself. We have taken particular
care to ensure that those shares that are traded under the stock
exchanges are regulated by SEBI. The securities are the ones that
are being traded over the Counter (OTC) today. Those are the
only instruments, largely money market, and credit instruments,
which are sought to be covered under the OTC derivatives that
have been mentioned in the Amendment Bill. To that extent, the
RBI will regulate whether any bank is involved in any deal that
is OTC deal of derivatives.”
7. Derivative trading became lagalised in India with the enactment
of the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1999. In terms of the
provisions of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, as
amended by the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, only such derivative
contracts which are traded ‘on a recognised stock exchange’ are legal
and valid. Pointing out the limitations on the legal validation of
derivative contracts in terms of the Securities Contracts Act and by
way of giving the rationale behind the proposal to define the term
‘derivative’ in the Reserve Bank Act and enable the Bank to deal in
derivatives, a representative of the Ministry stated as follows during
the briefing meeting:
“It is that the RBI in its normal operations—and as we know they
do our foreign exchange management—is responsible for managing

4
our resources. In international markets, when they are going for
managing their resources, they cannot participate in interest rate
swaps and options. This is creating a difficulty. For example, we
are saying that there is wide validity in the foreign exchange market
abroad and they have to cover their risk but they cannot participate
in interest rate swap or credit derivative.”
8. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the
various provisions of the Bill from Fixed Income Money Market and
Derivatives Association (FIMMDA), Indian Bank’s Association (IBA),
Punjab National Bank, All India Bank Officers’ Federation, HDFC Bank
Ltd., Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), ICICI Bank, Oriental Bank
of Commerce (OBC) and State Bank of India. The Committee also had
personal hearings of the vies of the representatives of these
organisations and the Reserve Bank of India.
The Committee also received written views/suggestions on the
Bill from All India Bank Officers’ Federation, National Confederation
of Bank Employees and Corporation Bank Officers Organisation.
9. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and the reserve
Bank of India to further enlighten themselves on various aspects of
the proposed legislation.
10. The representatives of the Banking Industry and others who
submitted their views and suggestions in writing and also in the course
of personal hearings in general, supported the proposals of the Reserve
Bank (Amendment) Bill, including the move to do away with the
lower floor and upper ceiling of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR), which as,
per the Ministry of Finance, is intended for enabling the Reserve Bank
to have ‘better manoeuvrability in its monetary management’. The
suggestions received on the provisions, mainly center on the scope
and ambit of the definitions of the expressions, ‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’
and ‘Reverse Repo’ as provided in the Bill, or the need to align the
definitions of these expressions in line with global practices.
11. With the proposals of the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2005, the Government seeks to empower the Bank to deal in
derivatives, repo, and reverse repo; do away with the floor and ceiling
limits applicable on prescribing the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)—for
meeting the flexibility requirements of the Reserve Bank in its
monetary management—and validate OTC Derivative Contracts,
which, being different from ‘exchange traded derivative transactions’,

5
are precluded from the purview of the Securities Contracts Regulation
Act.
12. The enactment of the legislation would vest the Reserve Bank
with substantial operational flexibility and powers, inter-alia by
enabling the Bank to determine the policy relating to interest rates
or interest rate products and give directions in this regard to agencies
dealing in money market instruments, foreign exchange as also
derivatives. In view of the larger variety of products and participants
that have entered the financial market and the need on the part of
the Reserve Bank to use newer versions of financial instruments,
the Committee agree with the proposals of the Bill.
13. In their deliberations on the provisions of the Bill, certain
issues emerged, which mainly relate to the definitions of the
expressions, ‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’, and ‘Reverse Repo’ and the method
followed in formulating the provisions under various clauses of the
Bill. Such issues and the observations and recommendations of the
Committee on the proposals of the Bill are detailed in the subsequent
paragraphs.
Clause 2-(Amendment of Section 17) and Clause 4 (Insertion of New
Chapter III D)
A. Clause 2
14. Section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 lists out the
various kinds of business that the Bank is authorised to carry on and
transact. By way of the proposals of Clause 2 of the Bill, Section 17
of the Principal Act is sought to be amended to confer powers on the
Reserve Bank to deal in ‘derivatives’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’ and
also define these expressions for the purposes of the business of the
bank.
15 The proposals of Clause 2, which seeks to amend Section 17 of
the Principal Act in this direction read as under:
“In section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934)
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(i) after clause (6), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6A) dealing in derivatives, and, with the approval of the Central
Board, in any other financial instrument.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “derivative” means
an instrument, to be settled at a future date, whose value is derived

6
from change in one or a combination of more than one of the
following underlyings, namely:—
(a) interest rate,
(b) price of securities of the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local authority as may be
specified in this behalf by the Central Government,
(c) price of foreign securities,
(d) foreign exchange rate,
(e) index of rates or prices,
(f) credit rating or credit index,
(g) price of gold or silver coins, or gold or silver bullion, or
(h) any other variable of similar nature;
(ii) after clause (12A), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(12AA) lending or borrowing of securities of the Central
Government or a State Government or of such securities of a local
authority as may be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government or foreign securities;
(12AB) dealing in repo or reverse repo:
Provided that lending or borrowing of funds by way of repo
or reverse repo shall not be subject to any limitation contained in
this section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) “repo” means an instrument for lending funds by
purchasing securities of the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local authority as may be
specified in this behalf by the Central Government or foreign
securities, with an agreement to resell the said securities on a
mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds lent;
(b) “reverse repo” means an instrument for borrowing funds
by selling securities of the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local authority as may be
specified in this behalf by the Central Government or foreign

7
securities, with an agreement to repurchase the said securities on
a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds borrowed;”.
B. Clause 4-Insertion of new Chapter III D.
16. The proposals of Clause 4 of the Bill aim to add a new Chapter
(Chapter III D) to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 inter-alia by
defining the terms, ‘derivative’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’ for the purpose
of regulatory powers of the Bank. The objectives of the proposed
Chapter III D, which is to be added to Principal Act, are essentially
two-fold: (a) to provide legal validity to certain types of OTC
derivatives, and (b) to consolidate and strengthen the regulatory
oversight of Reserve Bank of India in respect of markets in interest
rate, foreign exchange and credit and loan products.
17. The related provisions under Clause 4 of the Bill read as under:
“After Chapter III C of the principal Act, the following Chapter
shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER III D
REGULATION OF TRANSACTIONS IN DERIVATIVES, MONEY
MARKET INSTRUMENTS OR SECURITIES, ETC.
45U. Definitions.—For the purposes of this Chapter,—
(a) “derivative” means an instrument, to be settled at a future
date, whose value is derived from change in interest rate, foreign
exchange rate, credit rating or credit index, price of securities (also
called “underlying”), or a combination of more than one of them
and includes interest rate swaps, forward rate agreements, foreign
currency swaps, foreign currency-rupee swaps, foreign currency
options, foreign currency-rupee options or such other instruments
as may be specified by the Bank from time-to-time;
(b) “money market instruments” include call or notice money,
term money, repo, reverse repo, certificate of deposit, commercial
usance bill, commercial paper and such other debt instrument of
original or initial maturity up to one year as the Bank may specify
from time-to-time;
(c) “repo” means an instrument for lending funds by
purchasing securities with an agreement to resell the securities on
a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds lent;

8
(d) “reverse repo” means an instrument for borrowing funds
by selling securities with an agreement to repurchase the securities
on a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds borrowed;
(e) “securities” means securities of the Central Government or
a State Government or such securities of a local authority as may
be specified in this behalf by the Central Government and, for the
purposes of “repo” or “reverse repo”, included corporate bonds
and debentures.
45V . Transactions in derivatives.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of
1956) or any other law for the time being in force, transactions in
such derivatives, as may be specified by the Bank from time to
time, shall be valid, if at least one of the parties to the transaction
is the Bank, a scheduled bank, or such other agency falling under
the regulatory purview of the Bank under the Act, the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), or any other Act or instrument
having the force of law, a may be specified by the Bank from
time-to-time.
(2) Transactions in such derivatives, as had been specified by
the Bank from time to time, shall be deemed always to have been
valid, as if the provisions of sub-section (1) were in force at all
material times.
45W. Power to regulate transactions in derivatives, money
market instruments, etc.—(1) The Bank may, in public interest, or
to regulate the financial system of the country to its advantage,
determine the policy relating to interest rates or interest rate
products and give directions in that behalf to all agencies or any
of them, dealing in securities, money market instruments, foreign
exchange, derivatives, or other instruments of like nature as the
Bank may specify from time to time:
Provide that the directions issued under this sub-section shall
not relate to the procedure for execution or settlement of the trades
in respect of the transactions mentioned therein, on the Stock
Exchanges recognised under section 4 of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956).
(2) The Bank may, for the purpose of enabling it to regulate
agencies referred to in sub-section (1), call for any information,

9
statement or other particulars from them, or cause an inspection
of such agencies to be made.
45X. Duty to comply with directions and furnish information.
It shall be the duty of every director or member or other body for
the time being vested with the management of the affairs of the
agencies referred to in section 45W to comply with the directions
given by the Bank and to submit the information of statement or
particulars called for under that section.”
(i) Definitions of ‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’
18. As informed by the Ministry of Finance, in defining the term
‘Derivative’ for incorporation in Section 17 of Principal Act viz.,
for the purposes of the business of the bank; and in the proposed
Chapter III D viz., for regulation of transactions, due care has been
taken to address the need for flexibility for the Reserve Bank for its
own financial requirements, and in enabling the Bank to discharge
regulatory powers ‘in respect of derivatives in interest rate, foreign
exchange and credit and loan products.’
19. The Committee received suggestions on the need for making
the definition of ‘Derivative’ as proposed in the Bill more broad based
by including ‘derivatives based on commodity prices’ and on
‘underlying debt pool.’ Questioned in this regard, the Ministry, in a
written response informed:
“The definition of the term ‘derivatives’ that will apply to Section
17 (6A) includes gold and silver (which are commodities) as
underlyings, since, by virtue of the provisions of Section 17 (12).
Reserve Bank of India can buy and sell gold and silver. However,
for the purposes of Chapter IIID, any particular commodities or
commodities, in general have not been included because the
regulatory jurisdiction of Reserve Bank of India does not cover
commodity markets.”
20. The ‘essential’ or ‘operational portion’ of the definition of the
terms ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’ as proposed for incorporation in
Section 17 (in terms of Clause 2) and also in the Chapter III D (in
terms of Clause 4) of the RBI Act inter alia read as under:
‘Repo’ means an instrument for lending funds by purchasing
Securities.
‘Reverse repo’ means an instrument for borrowing funds by
selling securities.

10
21. The IBA and FIMMDA, in particular, emphasised on aligning
the definitions of these terms,—as proposed in the Bill—to the
international practice and also make them in consonance with the
Reserve Bank’s Circular dated 27 October, 2004 which relates to the
definitions of the terms. As informed by these organisations, on the
basis of this Circular, Banks, including the Reserve Bank, had adopted
the following definition for the term ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’:
“Repo” means an instrument for borrowing funds by selling
securities with the agreement to repurchase the securities on a
mutually agreed future date, at an agreed price, which includes
interest for the funds borrowed.”
“Reverse Repo” means an instrument for lending funds by
purchasing securities with an agreement to resell the securities on
a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds lent.
22. With a view to align the definitions of the terms in line with
international practice, both IBA and FIMMDA suggested that the
definitions of the terms, should be modified inter alia to read as under:
“‘Repo’ means an instrument for injecting liquidity into the system
by the Bank.”
“‘Reverse Repo’ means an instrument for absorption of liquidity
by the bank.”
23. On the basis of the suggestions received from the IBA and
FIMMDA, the Ministry of Finance were questioned whether it would
be necessary to re-word the definitions of the terms as proposed in
the Bill-which would, in effect, amount to a total reversal of the
meaning assigned to them as per the provisions. In responses, the
Ministry, upon considering the matter, informed that the definitions
were proposed to be modified to read as under in the Bill:
— “‘Repo’ means an instrument for borrowing funds by selling
securities.”
—“ ‘Reverse Repo’ means an instrument for lending funds by
purchasing securities.”

11
24. On the suggestion for including the expressions ‘injecting
liquidity/absorption of liquidity to/from the system’ in the definitions-
as received from IBA and FIMMDA-the Ministry, however, informed
that this was ‘not a valid one since the definition should capture the
generic aspects of ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’ transactions and not merely
the effects of these transactions when done for liquidity management
purposes.’
25. In this regard, the Ministry also added:
“The definitions of ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’, as proposed now
conform to the market usage in India and also to the most
commonly used definitions internationally in this regard, whereby
they are seen as transactions in fund against collateral of securities.
‘Repo’ is an instrument for borrowing of fund against securities,
while ‘Reverse repo’ is an instrument for lending of fund against
securities.”
26. The Committee note that for purposes of Section 17 under
Clause 2 as also in the new Chapter III D under clause 4 of the Bill
the expression ‘Repo’ has been defined as ‘an instrument for lending
funds by purchasing securities…’ And ‘Reverse Repo’ to mean ‘an
instrument for borrowing funds by selling securities…’
27. The Committee took up the matter of appropriateness of the
definitions as proposed in the Bill on the basis of the contentions
made by the interested associations and after hearing their views
feel that the above definitions need to be modified so as to mean:
Repo—‘an instrument for borrowing funds by selling
securities…..’
Reverse Repo—‘an instrument for lending funds by purchasing
securities…’
28. The Committee find that the modified definitions are aligned
with the international practice which also make them in consonance
with the stipulations of the related circulars issued by the Reserve
Bank of India.
29. The Ministry of Finance after consultation with Reserve Bank
of India also informed that the modified expressions of ‘Repo’ and
‘Reverse Repo’ are in conformity with the market usage in the
country and the common practice followed internationally.
30. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the
definition of the expressions ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’ be modified
in the Bill as per the revised proposal.

12
(ii) Formulation of the Provisions of the Bill
31. As brought out in the preceding paragraphs, the provisions of
Clause 2 of the Bill seek to amend Section 17 of the Principal Act to
include, dealing in derivatives, repo and reverse repo amongst the
businesses the Reserve Bank is authorised to carry on and transact.
Further, the provisions of Clause 4 aim to add Chapter III ‘D’ to the
Principal Act inter alia for enabling the Reserve Bank to regulate
transactions in Derivatives and money market instruments viz., Repo
and Reverse Repo.
32. The terms, ‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’ are defined
both under the purposed provisions of Clause 2 and Clause 4, albeit
with slight variation to meet the purposes of the ‘business of the
bank’ (under Section 17 of the Act) and ‘regulatory powers of the
Bank. (under the proposed Chapter III)
33. While considering the provisions, as proposed in the Bill, the
Committee, in the course of evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance, expressed the opinion that instead of including
the definitions of the expressions, ‘Derivatives’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse
repo’ separately in two different places in terms of clauses 2 and 4,
the terms could be defined/shown in one place, preferably in the
Section relating to ‘Definitions” in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
The Committee felt that incorporating the definitions in one place and
drawing reference to them in the provisions proposed for enabling the
financial activities of the Bank (in Section 17 of Act as proposed under
Clause 2) and the regulatory role of the Bank (in the proposed Chapter
III D as proposed under Clause 4) would bring in the much more
clarity in the objectives and meeting of the proposals, and also avoid
the possibility of legal ambiguity and complications.
34. The Ministry, upon considering the suggestions of the
Committee, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, vide their
communication dated 1 September, 2005 (Appendix) proposed as
alternate formulation of the provisions of the Bill which inter-alia define
the terms ‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’ in one place in
Section 2 of the Principal Act.
35. The alternate proposals, as seen from the statement of the
Ministry define the expressions ‘derivative’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’
in Section 2 (b vi a); and section 2 (c vi) and (vii) respectively. The
definitions, as proposed read as under:
“Section 2 (b vi a):
‘derivative’ means an instrument, to be settled at a future date,
whose value is derived from change in one or a combination of
more than one of the following underlyings, namely:

13
A. (a) Interest rate,
(b) foreign exchange rate,
(c) credit rating or credit index,
(d) price of securities of the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local authority as
may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.
B. (e) Price of foreign securities,
(f) Price of gold or silver coins, or gold or silver bullion, or
(g) Any other variable of similar nature;
C.    and includes the following instruments, namely
(h) interest rate swaps,
(i) forward rate agreements,
(j) foreign currency swaps,
(k) foreign currency-rupee swaps,
(l) foreign currency options,
(m) foreign currency-rupee options or
(n) such other instruments as may be specified by the Bank
from time to time.
Section 2 (cvi) and (cvii).
(cvi) ‘repo’ means an instrument for borrowing funds by selling
securities being—
(A) securities of the Central Government or a State Government
or of such securities of a local authority as may be specified
in this behalf by the Central Government;
(B) foreign securities; or
(C) corporate bonds and debentures;
with an agreement to repurchase the said securities on a
mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which
includes interest for the funds borrowed.
(cvii) ‘reverse repo’ means an instrument for lending funds by
purchasing securities being—
(A) securities of the Central Government or a State Government
or of such securities of a local authority as may be specified
in this behalf by the Central Government;

14
(B) foreign securities; or
(C) corporate bonds and debentures;
with an agreement to resell the said securities on a mutually
agreed future date at an agreed price which includes interest
for the funds lent.
36. Correspondingly, the provisions of Clause 2 seeking to enable
the Reserve Bank to deal in ‘Derivatives’ ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’ are
proposed to read as follows:
Section 17 (6A): dealing in derivatives specified in paragraphs
A and B of Clause (b vi a ) of Section 2, and, with the approval
of the Central Board, in any other financial instrument;
Section 17 (12) (AB): dealing in repo or reverse repo in respect
of securities mentioned in paragraphs (A) and (B) of clause (cvi)
or, as the case may be, of Clause (cvii), of Section 2.
37. Similarly, the provisions of the proposed Chapter III D (under
Clause 4) for empowering the Reserve Bank to regulate ‘derivative’,
‘repo’ and ‘reserve repo’ contracts are proposed to be re-worded to
read as under:
“Section 45 U (a): For the purposes of this Chapter, ‘derivative’
means the derivatives specified in paragraphs A and C of clause
(b vi a) of Section 2.
Section 45 (U) (c)
‘repo’ means repo in respect of securities mentioned in
paragraphs (A) and (C) of Clause (cvi) of Section 2.
Section 45 U (d):
‘reverse repo’ means reverse repo in respect of securities mentioned
in paragraphs (A) and (C) of Clause (viii) of Section 2.
38. As per the provisions of the Bill, ‘Derivative’ ‘Repo’ and
‘Reverse Repo’ have been defined separately with minor variations—
one under Clause 2 for the purposes of financial activities of the
Bank in Section 17 and the other under Clause 4 in relation to the
regulatory powers of the Bank in the proposed new Chapter III.
The Committee was, however, of the view that the expressions
‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’ should be defined in one

15
place instead of showing them separately under Section 17 and again
in the proposed new Chapter III with minor changes with a view to
provide clarity to the provisions as also to avoid possible
complications.
39. In deference to the suggestions of the Committee, the
Ministry, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, worked out an
alternative proposal of formulating the provisions which has been
furnished in the form of a statement (appendix) as per which the
definitions of the expressions ‘Derivative’, ‘Repo’ and ‘Reverse Repo’
are proposed to be included only in one place in the Section on
Definitions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 with three sub
divided paragraphs, namely, A, B and C. The Committee are of the
view that the proposed reformulation would not only bring in much
more clarity on the objects of the provisions of the Bill but also
avoid possible complications. They, therefore, recommend that the
provisions of the Bill be redrafted on the lines indicated in the
statement.
(i) Derivative Contracts—Regulatory aspects
40. In terms of the provisions of Section 18 A of the Securities
Contracts Regulation Act, as amended in 1999, ‘derivatives’ were
brought within the ambit of ‘Securities’ and the regulatory framework
developed for governing trading in derivatives. The Act makes it clear
that derivative transactions shall be legal and valid only if such
contracts are traded on recognised Stock Exchanges or settled on the
clearing house of the recognised stock exchanges.
41. ‘Over the Counter’ or ‘OTC derivatives’ as they are called
being derivatives traded outside of the recognised stock exchanges, do
not come under the regulatory purview of the Securities Contract Act
for obtaining legal sanctity.
42. As per the Statements of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the
problem of ‘ambiguity regarding the legal validity’ that is said to have
inhibited the growth and stability of the market for ‘Over-the-counter’
derivatives is sought to be addressed.
43. The provisions of the Bill, as proposed however, do not
specifically define or speak of ‘over-the-Counter Derivatives’.
Questioned about the nature of ‘Over-the-Counter Derivative’ contracts
that were sought to be given legal validation with the amendments
proposed in the Bill; and the reasons for choosing to define the
expression ‘Derivatives’, instead of ‘Over-the Counter Derivatives’, in

16
the provisions as proposed under Clause 2 and Clause 4 of the Bill,
the Ministry, in a written response inter alia stated as under:
“OTC transactions are usually non-standard and bilateral in nature.
On account of these characteristics and also in view of the
international experience in this regard, there can be a wide variety
of OTC derivatives, as opposed to the finite types of derivatives
that are likely to be traded on recognised stock exchanges. Globally,
the transaction volumes of different types of OTC derivatives,
particularly of those linked to interest rates have been rising over
the last several years and exceed the volumes of their exchange-
traded counterparts. In India, too, there has been a significant
growth of OTC interest rate derivatives, such as interest rate swaps
and forward rate agreements over the last few years. Hence, it is
an imperative to provide legal validity to OTC derivatives,
especially to those linked to interest rate.”
44. On the forms or types of OTC derivative transactions that
were sought to be given legal validation with the proposed enactment,
the Ministry informed:
“…the proposed Chapter IIID is intended to provide legal validity
to OTC derivatives, that are linked to interest rates, foreign
exchange credit and loan. In other words, OTC derivatives whose
underlying ‘cash’ markets fall under the regulatory domain of
Reserve Bank of India are covered under the proposed Chapter
IIID.”
45. The Ministry also informed that legal validation to ‘OTC
derivatives’ could be achieved though the proposed Section 45V (1) of
the Bill ‘without explicitly defining the expression’. As also informed,
by the Ministry, since ‘OTC derivatives’ were non-Standard and done
bilaterally, it was difficult to frame a clear-cut and proper definition of
the expression for inclusion in the provisions. Also, the intension of
the proposed amendments was to provide legality to ‘only certain
types of OTC derivatives’, which involve atleast ’one party to the
transaction’ being a RBI regulated entity.
46. The Indian Bank Association (IBA) expressed the opinion that
it was essential to very clearly define in the Bill, the term, ‘derivative’
and also specify the rights, duties, obligations and the respective rules
of the regulatory authorities mainly because, apart from the proposals
for amendment in the Reserve Bank Act, the Securities Contract
Regulation Act, 1956 (SCRA) too defines the term ‘derivative’ and the

17
Companies Act also defines the term by referring to the definition
under the SCRA. It was also pointed out by the IBA that there was
a possibility of ambiguity about the validity and enforceability of a
derivative transaction because of the two statutes being in force. When
questioned on these aspects, the Ministry, inter alia submitted as follows:
“The definition of the term ‘derivatives’ used in SCRA, 1956 covers
the underlyings and the instruments traded on recognised stock
exchanges are regulated by SEBI.”
“By virtue of the opining clause ‘notwithstanding anything
contained in the Securities Contracts (Regulation) act, 1956 or any
law for the time being in force’ in the proposed Section 45 V(1),
provisions of the Section 30 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 will
not be attracted in giving legal validity to derivatives, provided
one of the parties involved is the Reserve Bank of India itself or
a RBI—regulated entity.”
47. In this regard, the Ministry also added:
“the amendment proposed will not result in any conflict whatsoever
between the regulatory jurisdiction of RBI and SEBI. This is so
because care has been taken to ensure that there is no overlap
between the provisions of Chapter IIID and provisions of SCRA,
1956 which define the domain of SEBI. Moreover, there are
institutional arrangements in place which enable co-ordination,
exchange of information and discussion on matters of mutual
interest between Reserve Bank of India and SEBI.”
48. The Committee note that in terms of the provisions of the
Clause 45 V (I), OTC Derivative transactions, which involve a Reserve
Bank regulated entity as one of the parties to the transaction, are
sought to be given legal validity. While the provisions of Clause 45
V (I) propose to validate OTC Derivative contracts linked to interest
rates, foreign exchange, credit and loan, the Reserve Bank is sought
to be conferred with specific powers to inter alia formulate the policy
or regulatory framework for agencies operating in money market
instruments as also derivatives. Though OTC derivative contracts
are playing a crucial role in mitigating the risks of financial entities,
the ambiguity regarding the legality of such contracts is said to be
inhibiting their growth. The Committee, therefore, endorse
the measures proposed for providing clear legal validity to such
contracts.

18
49. The Committee, however, expect that in formulating the policy
measures/regulatory framework for OTC derivative contracts, adequate
care would be taken to ensure that there is no scope for ambiguity,
particularly in regard to jurisdictional aspects relating to validation
of such transactions. This, the Committee feel, is required keeping
in view the fact that following the enactment of the present
legislation, there would be two statutes governing derivative
transactions viz., the Securities Contracts Act for exchange traded
derivative transactions and the Reserve Bank of India Act for OTC
derivatives, which involve a Reserve Bank regulated entity as a party.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
30 November, 2005 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

19
APPENDIX I
STATEMENT ON THE SUGGESTIONS BEING MADE VIS-A-VIS
THE PROVISIONS IN THE BILL
Provisions as per the Bill Provisions as suggested by RBI
12
1. Section 2 (b vi a): Not existing 1. Section 2 (b vi a):
‘derivative’ means an instrument, to be
settled at a future date, whose value is
derived from change in one or a
combination of more than one of the
following underlyings, namely:
A- (a) interest rate,
(b) foreign exchange rate,
(c) credit rating or credit index,
(d) price of securities of the Central
Government or a State Government
or of such securities of a local
authority as may be specified in this
behalf by the Central Government;
B- (e) price of foreign securities,
(f) price of gold or silver coins, or gold
or silver bullion, or
(g) any other variable of similar nature;
C- and includes the following instruments,
namely—
(h) interest rate swaps,
(i) forward rate agreements,
(j) foreign currency swaps,
(k) foreign currency—rupee swaps,
(l) foreign currency options,
(m) foreign currency—rupee options, or
(n) such other instruments as may be
specified by the Bank from time to
time.

20
12
2. Section 17 (6A): dealing in Section 17 (6A): dealing in derivatives,
derivatives, and, with the approval specified in paragraphs A and B of clause
of the Central Board, in any other (b vi a) of section 2, and, with the approval
financial instrument. of the Central Board, in any other financial
instrument;
Explanation:-For the purpose of this
clause, ‘derivative’ means an
instrument, to be settled at a future
date, whose value is derived from
change in one or a combination of more
than one of the following underlyings,
namely:
(a) interest rate,
(b) price of securities of the Central
Government or a State
Government or of such securities
of a local authority as may be
specified in this behalf by the
Central Government,
(c) price of foreign securities,
(d) foreign exchange rate,
(e) index of rates or prices,
(f) credit rating or credit index,
(g) price of gold or silver coins, or
gold or silver bullion, or
(h) any other variable of similar
nature.
Section 2 (cvi) (cvii): Not existing Section 2 (cvi) (cvii):
(cvi) ‘repo’ means an instrument for
borrowing funds by selling securities
being—(A) securities of the Central
Government or a State Government or of
such securities of a local authority as may
be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government;
(B) foreign securities; or
(C) corporate bonds and debentures;
with an agreement to repurchase the said
securities on a mutually agreed future date

21
12
at an agreed price which includes interest
for the funds borrowed.
(cvii) ‘reverse repo’ means an instrument
for lending funds by purchasing securities
being—
(A) securities of the Central Government or
a State Government or of such securities of
a local authority as may be specified in this
behalf by the Central Government;
(B) foreign securities; or
(C) corporate bonds and debentures;
with an agreement to resell the said
securities on a mutually agreed future date
at an agreed price which includes interest
for the funds lent.
Section 17 (12 AB): dealing in repo or Section 17 (12) (AB): dealing in repo or
reverse repo: r everse repo in respect of securities
mentioned in paragraphs (A) and (B)
Provided that lending or borrowing of of clause (cvi) or, as the case may be,
funds by way of repo or reverse repo of clause (cvii), of section 2.
shall not be subject to any limitation
contained in this section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
clause,—
(a) ‘repo’ means an instrument for
lending funds by purchasing
securities of the Central
Government or a State
Government or of such securities
of a local authority as maybe
specified in this behalf by the
Central Government or foreign
securities, with an agreement to
resell the said securities on a
mutually agreed future date at an
agreed price which includes
interest for the funds lent;
‘reverse repo’ means an instrument for
borrowing funds by selling securities of
the Central Government or a State

22
12
Government or of such securities of a
local authority as may be specified in
this behalf by the Central Government
or foreign securities, with an agreement
to repurchase the said securities on a
mutually agreed future date at an
agreed price which includes interest for
the funds borrowed.
Section 45U (a): For the purposes of this Section 45U (a):  For the purposes of this
Chapter, Chapter, ‘derivative’ means the derivatives
(a) ‘derivative’ means an instrument, to specified in paragraphs A and C of clause
be settled at a future date, whose (b vi a) of section 2.
value is derived from change in interest
rate, foreign exchange rate, credit rating
or credit index, price of securities (also
called “underlying”), or a combination
of more than one of them and includes
interest rate swaps, forward rate
agreements, foreign currency swaps,
foreign currency-rupee swaps, foreign
currency options, foreign currency-rupee
options or such other instruments as
may be specified by the Bank from time
to time;
Section 45U (c):  ‘repo’ means an Section 45U (c):
instrument for lending funds by ‘repo’ means repo in respect of securities
purchasing securities with an mentioned in paragraphs (A) and (C) of
agreement to resell the said securities clause (cvi) of section 2.
on a mutually agreed future date at an
agreed price which includes interest for
the funds lent;
Section 45U (d): ‘reverse repo’ means an Section 45U (d):
instrument for borrowing funds by ‘reverse repo’ means reverse repo in respect
selling with an agreement to repurchase of securities mentioned in paragraphs (A)
the said securities on a mutually and (C) of clause (cvii) of section 2.
agreed future date at an agreed price
which includes interest for
the funds borrowed.
45V . (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 or any other law
for the time being in force, transactions
in such derivatives, as may be specified

23
12
by the Bank from time to time, shall
be valid, if at least one of the parties
to the transaction is the Bank, a
scheduled bank, or such other agency
falling under the regulatory purview of
the Bank under the Act, the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999, or
any other Act or instrument having the
force of law, as may be specified by
the Bank from time to time.
(2) Transactions in such derivatives, as
had been specified by the Bank from
time to time, shall be deemed always
to have been valid, as if the provisions
of sub-section (1) were in force at all
material times.
45W. (1) The Bank may, in public
interest, or to regulate the financial
system of the country to its advantage,
determine the policy relating to interest
rates or interest rate products and give
directions in that behalf of all agencies
or any of them, dealing in securities,
money market instruments, foreign
exchange, derivatives, or other
instruments of like nature as the Bank
may specify from time to time:
Provided that the directions issued
under this sub-section shall not relate
to the procedure for execution or
settlement of the trades in respect of
the transactions mentioned therein, on
the Stock Exchanges recognised under
section 4 of the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956.
(2) The Bank may, for the purpose of
enabling it to regulate agencies referred
to in sub-section (1), call for any
information, statement or other
particulars from them, or cause an
inspection of such agencies to be made.

24
APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 14th July, 2005 from 1030 to
1200 hours and 1215 to 1320 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.S. Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—
Banking Division)
1. Shri A.K. Jha, Secretary
2. Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary (FS)
3. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA)
4. Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (CM)

25
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses from the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Banking
Division) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to
the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker.
3. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs-Banking Division) briefed the Committee on the
various provisions contained in the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 and the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The
Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by the
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives of
the Ministry that the information with regard to queries of the Members
which were not readily available with them might be furnished to the
Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew
Part-II
(1215 to 1320 hours)
2. ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** **
(The Committee then adjourned.)

26
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 9th August, 2005 from 1500 to
1620 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri Lakshman Seth
9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
ICICI Bank Ltd.
1. Shri K.V . Kamath, Managing Director & CEO
2. Smt. Kalpana Morparia, Deputy Managing Director

27
Oriental Bank of Commerce
1. Shri K.N. Prithviraj, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri M.D. Mallya, Executive Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the First
sitting of the newly constituted Committee. The Chairman informed
the Members that a separate sitting will be convened for selection of
subjects for examination during the year.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of ICICI
Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank of Commerce to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
ICICI Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank of Commerce on the provisions of
the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the Reserve Bank
of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives of ICICI Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank
of Commerce that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
5. The evidence was concluded
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 10th August, 2005 from 1500 to
1620 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Punjab National Bank
Shri S.C. Gupta, Chairman & Managing Director
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
Shri M.R. Umarjee, Consultant

29
Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA)
1. Shri Sudhir Joshi, Chairman
2. Shri C.E.S. Azariah, CEO
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
1. Shri Jayant Bhuyan, Dy. Director General
2. Shri Rana Kapoor, Chairman, CII-Banking Committee
3. Shri Vikram Badshah, Sr. Consultant
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Punjab National Bank, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Fixed Income
Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA) and
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and invited their attention to
the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
Punjab National Bank, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Fixed Income
Money Markets and Derivatives Associations (FIMMDA) and
confederation of Indian Industry (CII) on the provisions of the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the Reserve Bank of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew
The Committee then adjourned.

30
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 22nd August, 2005 from 1500 to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
State Bank of India
Shri A.K. Purwar, Chairman
Bank of India
Shri M. Balachandran, Chairman & Managing Director

31
HDFC Bank Ltd.
1. Shri Aditya Puri, Managing Director
2. Shri Rajender Sehgal, Senior Vice-President
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
State Bank of India, Bank of India and HDFC Bank Ltd. to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
State Bank of India, Bank of India and HDFC Bank Ltd. on the
provisions of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the
Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked
clarificatory questions which were replied to by the representatives.
The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the information
with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available
with them might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
6. *** *** *** *** *** ***
7. *** *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

32
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 30 September, 2005 from 1100 to
1300 hrs. and 1530 to 1640 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. (Dr.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora _ Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(at 1130 hours)
2. *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
Part II
(at 1530 hours)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance
(i) Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary (DEA)
(ii) Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary (FS)

33
(iii) Shri  Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA)
(iv) Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (CM)
Reserve Bank of India
(i) Shri H. Bhattacharya, CGM
(ii) Shri Anand Sinha, CGM
(iii) Shri G.S. Hegde, Joint Legal Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3.  *** *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry on the provisions of the (1) Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 and (ii) Reserve Bank of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were
replied to by the representatives of the Ministry. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

34
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 7 November, 2005 from 1030 to
1145 hrs. and thereafter from 1145 to 1330 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri R.P . Goenka
17. Shri Jairam Ramesh
18. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
19. Shri Yashwant Sinha
20. Shri Amar Singh

35
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(at 1030 to 1145 hrs.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft reports
on:
(i) The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and
(ii) The Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005
4. ** ** ** ** ** ***
5. ** ** ** ** ** ***
6. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft report
on the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and adopted the
same with the modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure.
Part II
(1145 to 1330 hrs.)
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

36
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS  MADE  BY  STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 7 NOVEMBER, 2005]
Page 5
Add sub para to The Committee also received written
para no. 8 views/suggestions on the Bill from All
India Bank Officers’ Federation,
National Confederation of Bank
Employees and Corporation Bank
Officers Organisation.

37
ANNEXURE
AS I NTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 76 of 2005
THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reserve
Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.
2. In section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(i) after clause (6), the following shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(6A) dealing in derivatives, and, with the
approval of the Central Board, in any other
financial instrument.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
clause, “derivative” means an instrument, to be
settled at a future date, whose value is derived
from change in one or a combination of more
than one of the following underlyings,
namely:—
(a) interest rate,
(b) price of securities of the Central
Government or a State Government or of
Short title
and
commen-
cement.
Amendment
of section
17.
2 of 1934

38
such securities of a local authority as may
be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government,
(c) price of foreign securities,
(d) foreign exchange rate,
(e) index of rates or prices,
(f) credit rating or credit index,
(g) price of gold or silver coins, or gold
or silver bullion, or
(h) any other variable of similar nature;
(ii) after clause (12A), the following
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(12AA) lending or borrowing of securities
of the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local
authority as may be specified in this behalf by
the Central Government or foreign securities;
(12AB) dealing in repo or reverse repo:
Provided that lending or borrowing of
funds by way of repo or reverse repo shall not
be subject to any limitation contained in this
section.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
clause,—
(a) “repo” means an instrument for
lending funds by purchasing securities of
the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local
authority as may be specified in this behalf
by the Central Government or foreign
securities, with an agreement to resell the
said securities on a mutually agreed future
date at an agreed price which includes
interest for the funds lent;
(b) “reverse repo” means an instrument
for borrowing funds by selling securities

39
of the Central Government or a State
Government or of such securities of a local
authority as may be specified in this behalf
by the Central Government or foreign
securities, with an agreement to repurchase
the said securities on a mutually agreed
future date at an agreed price which
includes interest for the funds borrowed;”.
3. In section 42 of the principal Act,
(i) in sub-section (l),
(a) for the words, brackets and figure
“three per cent. of the total of the demand
and time liabilities in India of such bank
as shown in the return referred to in sub-
section (2)”, the words, brackets and figure
“such per cent. of the total of the demand
and time liabilities in India of such bank
as shown in the return referred to in sub-
section (2), as the Bank may from time to
time, having regard to the needs of securing
the monetary stability in the country, notify
in the Gazette of India” shall be substituted;
(b) the provision shall be omitted;
(ii) sub-sections (1AA) and (1B) shall be
omitted
4. After Chapter III C of the principal Act,
the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:-
“CHAPTER IIID
R
EGULATION OF T RANSACTIONS IN D ERIV ATIVES,
MONEY MARKET INSTRUMENTS SECURITIES, ETC.
45U. For the purposes of this Chapter,-
(a) “derivative” means an instrument,
to be settled at a future date, whose value
is derived from change in interest rate,
foreign exchange rate, credit rating or credit
index, price of securities (also called
“underlying”), or a combination of more
Amendment
of Section
42.
Insertion of
new
Chapter
IIID.
Definitions.

40
than one of them and includes interest rate
swaps, forward rate agreements, foreign
currency swaps, foreign currency-rupee
swaps, foreign currency options, foreign
currency-rupee options or such other
instruments as may be specified by the
Bank from time to time;
(b) “money market instruments”
include call or notice money, term money,
repo, reverse repo, certificate of deposit,
commercial usance bill, commercial paper
and such other debt instrument of original
or initial maturity up to one year as the
Bank may specify from time to time;
(c) “repo” means an instrument for
lending funds by purchasing securities with
an agreement to resell the securities on a
mutually agreed future date at an agreed
price which includes interest for the funds
lent;
(d) “reverse repo” means an instrument
for borrowing funds by selling securities
with an agreement to repurchase the
securities on a mutually agreed future date
at an agreed price which includes interest
for the funds borrowed;
(e) “securities” means securities of the
Central Government or a State Government
or such securities of a local authority as
may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government and, for the purposes
of “repo” or “reverse repo”, include
corporate bonds and debentures.
45V . (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956 or any other law for the
time being in force, transactions in such
derivatives, as may be specified by the Bank
from time to time, shall be valid, if at least
one of the parties to the transaction is the Bank,
Transactions
in
derivatives.
42 of 1956.

41
a scheduled bank, or such other agency falling
under the regulatory purview of the Bank
under the Act, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,
or any other Act or instrument having the force
of law, as may be specified by the Bank from
time to time.
(2) Transactions in such derivatives, as had
been specified by the Bank from time to time,
shall be deemed always to have been valid, as
if the provisions of sub-section (1) were in force
at all material times.
45W. (1) The Bank may, in public interest,
or to regulate the financial system of the
country to its advantage, determine the policy
relating to interest rates or interest rate products
and give directions in that behalf to all agencies
or any of them, dealing in securities, money
market instruments, foreign exchange,
derivatives, or other instruments of like nature
as the Bank may specify from time to time:
Provide that the directions issued under this
sub-section shall not relate to the procedure for
execution or settlement of the trades in respect
of the transactions mentioned therein, on the
Stock Exchanges recognised under section 4 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
(2) The Bank may, for the purpose of
enabling it to regulate agencies referred to in
sub-section (1), call for any information,
statement or other particulars from them, or
cause an inspection of such agencies to be
made.
45X. It shall be the duty of every director
or member or other body for the time being
vested with the management of the affairs of
the agencies referred to in section 45W to
comply with the directions given by the Bank
and to submit the information of statement or
particulars called for under that section.”.
42 of 1956.
10 of 1949.
42 of 1999.
Power to
regulate
transactions
in
derivatives,
money
market
instruments,
etc.
Duty to
comply
with
directions
and furnish
information.

42
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Financial sector reforms are marking steady progress in India. The
Indian financial markets now have more products, participants and
better liquidity than before. For more operational flexibility, the Reserve
Bank of India needs to have enabling powers to use a larger variety
of financial instruments than hitherto.
2. The volatility in the influx of foreign exchange and the market
conditions in a fast changing economy, can be expected to continue in
future as the financial sector makes more and more progress. To cope
with any unforeseen eventualities in future, such as excess or lack of
liquidity in the banking system and for effective conduct of monetary
policy, there is a need to enable Reserve Bank of India to determine
the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) for scheduled banks without any floor
or ceiling. Globally, many Central Banking authorities have such
powers. Further, in the context of the conduct of monetary policy
becoming more market-based through progressive use of indirect
instruments, the Reserve Bank of India needs more flexibility to set
Cash Reserve Ratio, which is one of the two statutory pre-emptions in
respect of the resources of banks.
3. Over-the-counter derivatives play a crucial role in reallocating
and mitigating the risks of corporates, banks and other financial
institutions. The ambiguity regarding their legal validity has inhibited
the growth and stability of the market for such derivatives. It has
become essential to provide for clear legal validity of such contracts.
4. At present, under Section 29A of Securities contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1956, the Central Government has delegated to the Reserve Bank
of India, by a notification, the powers exercisable by it under section
16 of that Act, for regulating the transactions in money market and
other instruments. Therefore, more effective regulation of the markets
for interest rate contracts, including Government securities and money-
market instruments as also derivatives, it is necessary to confer specific
powers on the Reserve Bank of India, under the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934 to lay down policy and to issue directions to the
agencies operating in these contracts, securities and derivatives.
5. It is, therefore, considered necessary to suitably amend the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. The salient features of the Bill which
seeks to amend the RBI Act are as follows:
(a) define the expressions, ’derivative’, ‘repo’ and ‘reverse repo’
in Section 17 for the purposes of the business of the Bank
and differently in new Chapter III D for the purposes of
regulatory powers of the Bank.

43
(b) empower the Reserve Bank of India to deal in derivatives,
to lend or borrow securities and to undertake repo or reverse
repo;
(c) remove the lower floor and upper ceiling of Cash Reserve
Ratio (CRR) and to provide flexibility to RBI to specify CRR;
(d) remove ambiguity regarding the legal validity of derivatives;
(e) empower RBI to lay down policy and issue directions to
any agency dealing in various kinds of contracts in respect
of Government securities, money-market instruments,
derivatives etc. and to inspect such agencies.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI;P . CHIDAMBARAM.
the 9th May, 2005.

44
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE R ESERVE B ANK OF I NDIA A CT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
* * * * *
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry
on and transact the several kinds of business
hereinafter specified, namely:—
* * * * *
42. (1) Every bank included in the Second
Schedule shall maintain with the Bank an
average daily balance the amount of which
shall not be less than three per cent. of the
total of the demand and time liabilities in India
of such bank as shown in the return referred
to in sub-section (2):
Provided that the Bank may, by notification
in the Gazette of India, increase the said rate
to such higher rate as may be specified in the
notification so however that the rate shall not
be more than twenty per cent. of the total of
the demand and time liabilities.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “average daily balance” shall mean
the average of the balances held at the close
of business on each day of a fortnight;
(b) “fortnight” shall mean the period
from Saturday to the second following
Friday, both days inclusive;
(c) “liabilities” shall not include—
(i) the paid-up capital or the
reserves or any credit balance in the
profit and loss account of the Bank;
Business
which the
Bank may
transact.
Cash
reserves of
scheduled
banks to be
kept with
the Bank.

45
(ii) the amount of any loan taken from
the Bank or from the Exim Bank or from
the Reconstruction Bank or from the
National Housing Bank or from the
National Bank or from the Small Industries
Bank;
(iii) in the case of a State co-operative
bank, also any loan taken by such bank
from a State Government or from the
National Co-operative Development
Corporation established under the National
Co-operative Development Corporation Act,
1962 and any deposit of money with such
bank representing the reserve fund or any
part thereof maintained with it by any co-
operative society within its area of
operation;
(iv) in the case of a State co-operative
bank, which has granted an advance against
any balance maintained with it, such
balance to the extent of the amount out-
standing in respect of such advance;
(v) in the case of a Regional Rural
Bank, also any loan taken by such bank
from its Sponsor Bank;
(d) the aggregate of the “liabilities” of
a scheduled bank which is not a State co-
operative bank, to,—
(i) the State Bank;
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in
section 2 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959;
(iii) a corresponding new bank
constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970;
(iiia) a corresponding new bank
constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980;
26 of 1962.
38 of 1959.
5 of 1970.
40 of 1980.

46
(iv) a banking company as defined in
clause (c) of section 5 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949;
(v) a co-operative bank; or
(vi) any other financial institution
notified by the Central Government in this
behalf,
shall be reduced by the aggregate of the
liabilities of all such banks and institutions
to the scheduled bank;
(e) the aggregate of the “liabilities” of
a scheduled bank which is a State Co-
operative Bank, to,—
(i) the State Bank;
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in
section 2 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959;
(iii) a corresponding new bank
constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970;
(iiia) a corresponding new bank
constituted by section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980;
(iv) a banking company as defined in
clause (c) of section 5 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949; or
(v) any other financial institution
notified by the Central Government in this
behalf,
shall be reduced by the aggregate of
the liabilities of all such banks and
institutions to the State co-operative banks.
* * * * *
(1AA) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A), it shall
not be necessary for any scheduled bank to
maintain with the Bank any balance which shall
be more than twenty per cent. of the total of
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.
40 of 1980.
5 of 1970.
38 of 1959.

47
its demand and time liabilities as shown in the
return referred to in sub-section (2).
(1B) Where any scheduled bank maintains,
in pursuance of a notification issued under the
proviso to sub-section (1) or under sub-section
(1A), any balance with the Bank the amount of
which is not less than that required to be
maintained by such notification, the Bank may
pay to the scheduled bank interest at such rate
of rates as may be determined by the Bank
from time to time on the amount by which
such balance actually maintained is in excess
of the balance which the scheduled bank would
have to maintain, if no such notification was
issued:
Provided that no interest shall be payable
on any such amount actually maintained as is
in excess of the balance required to be
maintained by or under sub-section (1) or under
sub-section (1A):
Provided further that where the Bank does
not, under sub-section (5), demand the payment
of the penalty imposed by sub-section (3), it
may pay interest at such rate or rates as may
be determined by the Bank from time to time
on the amount actually maintained with it by
the scheduled bank, notwithstanding that such
amount is less than the balance required to be
maintained in pursuance of a notification issued
under the proviso to sub-section (1) or under
sub-section (1A).
* * * * *

48
LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
—————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)