34
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE BANKING COMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)
AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LAWS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2006/ Chaitra, 1928 ( Saka)


THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE BANKING COMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)
AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LAWS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.5.2006
Presented to Rajya Sabha on 11.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2006/Chaitra, 1928 (Saka)

COF No. 34
Price : Rs. 111.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
Changes Proposed to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 (Annexure I).............................................. 36
Notes of Dissent .................................................................................... 40
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 30 September,
2005, 7 November, 2005, 8 November, 2005, 5 January, 2006,
6 January, 2006, 19 January, 2006 and 4 April, 2006 .................. 42
A
PPENDIX
The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 .................................................................................................. 57
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2005-2006)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
23. Shri Yashwant Sinha
24. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
25. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
(iii)

26. Shri Amar Singh
27. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
28. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
*29. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
**30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)
 *Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 9.3.2006.
**Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 17.3.2006.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf
present this Thirty-fourth Report on the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
2. The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005
introduced in Lok Sabha on 16 August, 2005 was referred to the
Committee on 30 August, 2005 for examination and report thereon, by
the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), who also briefed them at their sitting
held on 30 September, 2005.
4. Written views/Memoranda were received from State Bank of
India, Punjab National Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce, Bank of
India, Allahabad Bank, Indian Banks’ Association, Industrial
Development Bank of India, PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Associated Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), Institute of Company
Secretaries of India, Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, All
India Bank Officers’ Association, All India Bank Officers’ Confederation,
All India Bank Employees Association, Bank Employees Federation of
India and National Confederation of Bank Employees.
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 7 November, 2005, heard
the views of the representatives of National Institute of Public Finance
and Policy (NIPFP), Indian Banks’ Association and Industrial
Development Bank of India. On 8 November, 2005, the Committee
heard the views of the representatives of Punjab National Bank and
Oriental Bank of Commerce.
6. At their sitting held on 5 January, 2006 the Committee heard
the views of the representatives of All India Bank Officers’ Association,
All India Bank Officers’ Confederation, All India Bank Employees
Association, Bank Employees Federation of India and National

Confederation of Bank Employees. On 6 January, 2006 the Committee
heard the views of the representatives of State Bank of India, Bank of
India and Allahabad Bank.
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 19 January,
2006.
8. The Committee, at their sitting held on 4th April, 2006,
considered and adopted the draft report and authorised the Chairman
to finalise the same and present it to the Hon’ble Speaker/Parliament.
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, representatives
of the Banks, Chambers of Commerce, Officers’ and Employees
Associations/Confederations of public sector banks and other
individuals for their co-operation in placing before them their
considered views and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for
furnishing written notes and information that the Committee had
desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
10. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 April, 2006 Chairman,
22 Chaitra, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
In July, 1969 fourteen major commercial banks, each with deposits
of Rs. 50 crores or more, were nationalised by the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1969, which was
replaced by an Act in 1970. At that time, it was visualised that public
ownership of these banks would help in more effective mobilisation of
savings and their channelisation for productive purposes. In order to
further control the heights of the economy, to meet progressively, and
serve better, the needs of the development of the economy and to
promote the welfare of the people, in conformity with the policy of
the State towards securing the principles laid down in Clause (b) and
(c) of article 39 of the Constitution, six more commercial banks, each
having deposits of Rs. 200 crores or more as on the 14th March, 1980,
were nationalised by the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer
of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1980, promulgated by the President on
the 15th April, 1980. The Ordinance, apart from providing for the
transfer and vesting of the undertakings of the six banks in the
corresponding new banks, provided for payment of an amount for the
acquisition of such undertakings, the management of the corresponding
new banks and other necessary and consequential provisions. The Bill
to replace the ordinance, upon being passed by both the Houses of
Parliament received the assent of the President on the 11th July, 1980,
and came on the statute book as the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.
2. At present, there are 19 nationalised banks. The Government
holds the entire equity in four of these banks and majority equity in
fifteen banks. The nationalised banks to which the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 applies are:
(i) Central Bank of India
(ii) Bank of India
(iii) Punjab National Bank
(iv) Bank of Baroda
(v) UCO Bank
(vi) Canara Bank
(vii) United Bank of India

2
(viii) Dena Bank
(ix) Syndicate Bank
(x) Union Bank of India
(xi) Allahabad Bank
(xii) Indian Bank
(xiii) Bank of Maharashtra
(xiv) Indian Overseas Bank
3. The Banks to which the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 applies are: (i) Andhra Bank,
(ii) Corporation Bank, (iii) Oriental Bank of Commerce, (iv) Punjab &
Sind Bank, and (v) Vijaya Bank.
4. The two Acts of 1970 and 1980 originally envisaged that the
paid up capital of these banks may be raised either by transfer from
the reserve fund or by contribution by the Central Government. Thus,
the entire capital of the public sector Banks was to be held by the
Government. However, the increasing need for capital was felt by these
banks due to introduction of prudential norms on capital adequacy
during 90s, lack of sufficient internal accruals and to meet their
increasing business needs. It was, therefore, considered appropriate to
raise capital by way of public issue to the extent needed. Thus, in
1994, the Acts were amended to provide that the paid up capital of
these banks may be increased by such amounts as the Board of
Directors of the Bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank of
India and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise
by public issue of shares in such manner as may be prescribed, so
that the Central Government shall, at all times, hold not less than 51%
of the paid up capital of each such bank. Presently the shareholding
pattern of the 15 nationalised banks which have gone in for public
issues varies from 51% to 77%.
5. In addition to the changes in the pattern of shareholding in
nationalised banks, need has been felt on the part of the Government
to bring forth amendments in some other provisions of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980
to bring the operation of the nationalized banks in tune with the
changed scenario and modern business practices. To meet this end,
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000 was introduced
in Lok Sabha on the 13th December, 2000. The Bill lapsed due to
dissolution of the 13th Lok Sabha.

3
6. The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005
was introduced in Lok Sabha on 16.8.2005 and referred to the Standing
Committee on Finance by the Hon’ble Speaker on 30.08.2005 for
examination and report.
7. The amendments proposed to be carried out vide the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 as introduced in the
Lok Sabha and referred to the Committee are as follows:
(i) Increasing the number of whole time directors on the boards
of nationalised Banks from existing two whole time directors
to four, to have more functional Directors in view of
expansion of activities of the nationalised banks.
(ii) Modification of clause (c) of sub-section (3) of Section (9) of
the Act to provide for nomination of a Director by RBI as
considered necessary instead of it being mandatory as at
present.
(iii) Deletion of Section 9 (3) (d) which provides for nomination
of not more than two directors from SEBI and other
Financial Institutions on the board of nationalised banks.
(iv) Amendment of Section 9 (3) (i) to provide for a maximum
of three elected shareholder directors on the Board of the
nationalised banks on the basis of issued capital of the
banks, instead of one to six Directors as per the existing
provisions, so as to provide for more equitable representation
which reflects the percentage of ownership in the banks.
(v) Enabling the shareholders to discuss, adopt and approve
the annual accounts and the balance sheet of the bank
concerned at the Annual General Meeting.
(vi) Inclusion of a new section similar to section 212 of the
Companies Act, 1956 providing for attaching the details of
a subsidiary or subsidiaries such as balance-sheet, profit and
loss accounts and reports of Auditors along with the annual
report of the bank.
(vii) Addition of new section for enabling banks to transfer the
unclaimed dividends of over 7 years to Investor Education
and Protection Fund established by the Central Government
under Section 205C of Companies Act, 1956.

4
(viii) Addition of a new section in the Act enabling the Central
Government to supersede the Board of Directors of a Bank
in case the RBI is satisfied that the affairs of the bank are
being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of
depositors and other stake holders.
(ix) Amendment of relevant statutes relating to banks and
financial institutions for prescribing the term of non-official/
elected directors other than workmen/officer employee
directors as three years subject to further re-appointment/
re-election with total continuous period not exceeding six
years.
8. Except for the amendment proposal relating to restricting the
number of share holder directors to provide for more equitable
representation on the Board of Directors of the nationalised banks on
the basis of percentage of ownership [(iv) above] the amendments
proposed in the Bill, as introduced and referred to the Committee, are
broadly the same as the ones that were incorporated in the lapsed Bill
of 2000. However, the amendment relating to reduction of prescribed
minimum shareholding of the Central Government in nationalised
banks from 51% to 33% as incorporated in the earlier Bill has been
omitted in the amendments proposed in the present Bill.
9. On the reasons for proposing to reduce the prescribed minimum
equity of the Government to 33% in the earlier Bill of 2000 that lapsed,
the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply, inter-alia, informed as
follows:
“In 1999 itself, it was felt that the additional capital requirement
of eight public sector banks which had raised capital from the market
was quite large (estimated to be in the range of Rs. 10,000 crore
for the next five years). It was neither feasible nor desirable to
provide this large amount of capital through the Government
budget (or through monetisation by the Reserve Bank of India in
case of SBI). Hence unless the mandatory minimum stake of
Government was reduced and thereby the ‘head room’ was created
for raising the additional capital requirement from the market, it
was not feasible to reach the international standards. It had,
therefore, become necessary to make appropriate legislative changes
to reduce the stipulation regarding minimum Government share
holdings in nationalised banks (From 51% to 33% of the paid-up
capital)”.

5
10. As for the decision to retain the minimum prescribed equity of
the Government in Public Sector banks at 51%, the Ministry’s reply
inter-alia reads as follows:
“All the nationalised Banks have been able to meet the capital
adequacy norm of 9% keeping the Government’s holding intact at
51%. Moreover, it may be possible for banks to meet a part of the
regulatory capital requirement in a non-dilutive manner ( i.e.,
without dilution of the voting rights of the shareholders) through
certain instruments like preference shares, Innovative Tier I and
Upper Tier II instruments in the next few years. Thus, as a matter
of public policy, it was decided to retain the minimum equity
level of the Government at 51%.
11. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the
various provisions of the Bill from (i) State Bank of India, (ii) Punjab
National Bank, (iii) Oriental Bank of Commerce, (iv) Bank of India,
(v) Allahabad Bank, (vi) Indian Banks’ Association, (vii) Industrial
Development Bank of India, (viii) PHD Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, (ix) Bombay Chamber of Commerce and Industry (x) Institute
of Company Secretaries of India, (xi) Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India, (xii) All India Bank Officers’ Association, (xiii) All India Bank
Officers’ Confederation, (xiv) All India Bank Employees Association,
(xv) Bank Employees Federation of India, (xvi) National Confederation
of Bank Employees and (xvii) ASSOCHAM. The Committee also had
personal hearings of the views of the representatives of these Banks/
Associations/Confederations as well as the National Institute of Public
Finance & Policy.
12. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to further
enlighten themselves on various aspects of the proposed legislation.
13. In the course of the Committee’s examination of the amendment
proposals contained in the Bill, certain issues, which primarily relate
to the requirement of uniformity and level playing field vis-à-vis the
provisions applicable or proposed for the Private Sector Banks came
to light. Such issues inter-alia relate to: the legal mechanism for enabling
raising of preference capital by Banks, and provisions relating to
supersession of Board of Directors in the event of the affairs of a bank
being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of depositors
and shareholders as proposed for Private Sector Banks vis-à-vis, the
proposals relating to Public Sector Banks.

6
14. Mainly in response to the Committee’s questioning on the
related issues, the Ministry of Finance, in consultation with the Reserve
Bank, worked out and proposed certain changes in the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 (Annexure I).
15. A summerised account of the changes proposed by the Ministry
for incorporation in the Bill and the rationale/justification given for
the proposed changes is given below:
Proposed changes Rationale
12
(i) Amendment of section 3 for (i) The proposed change is intended
permitting nationalised banks to enable nationalised banks to
to issue preference shares. raise capital in a cost effective
manner at par with private sector
banks and without infusion of
capital from the Government.
(ii) Insertion of new section 18A (ii) In terms of the existing
relating to appointment of pr ovisions of section 9A of
Administrator in lieu of sections the Act, the Central
18A to 18F regarding constitution Government, in consultation
of a Financial Restr ucturing with the RBI, is empowered to
Authority. r evamp/restructure weak/
potentially weak banks; the public
sector banks have been faring well
as of now; and the basic objective
of helping a bank in making a
turnaround could be effectively
achieved with the provisions of
the revised section 18A, whose
contents and approach are in line
with the amendment proposed in
the Banking regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 in respect
of private sector banks.
(iii) Amendment of section 9 for (iii) Inclusion of ‘fit and proper’ status
including ‘fit and proper’ status as a r equirement for elected
as a criteria to be fulfilled by directors would ensure that the
elected directors. Board comprises of persons of
high integrity.

7
12
(iv) Deletion of section 10B of the (iv) The stipulation of section 10B for
Bill relating to  inclusion  of attaching specified documents
certain     particulars    of such as balance sheets has
subsidiaries  in  the balance been observed to be redundant
sheets of nationalised banks. as, in terms of section 29A, which
is to be incorporated in the
Banking Regulation Act (which is
also applicable to nationalised
banks), the RBI can advise the
banks to disclose in the financial
statements information relating to
the business or affairs of any
associate enterprise of the bank
concerned.
16. The proposals of the Banking companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005, inter-alia intend to bring forth certain
changes in the composition of the Board of Directors of Nationalised
Banks by way of increasing the number of whole time Directors
from two to four, and doing away with the compulsory nomination
of an officer of the Reserve Bank on the Boards. The Bill also seeks
to provide for the statutory framework for supersession and
subsequent management of the Boards of the Banks which are
observed to be functioning to the detriment of the interest of the
depositors and the stake holders.
17. The Committee are in agreement with the broad objectives
of the amendment proposals which are aimed at meeting the
requirements of the present day complexities as well as expanding
activities of the banking system. In the course of their deliberations,
however, certain issues which mainly relate to the statutory
framework pertaining to the capital structure, and supersession of
the Boards of weak or potentially weak public sector banks vis-à-
vis the provisions envisaged for the private sector banks came to
light. As a consequence thereof, the Ministry of Finance have, in
consultation with the Reserve Bank proposed certain changes in the
Bill, which, inter-alia, seek to enable public sector banks to raise
‘non-dilutive’ preference capital at par with private sector banks and
provide for appointment of an Administrator to manage the affairs
of a superseded bank in lieu of the proposal to constitute a financial

8
Restructuring Authority (FRA) for the purpose. Such issues, and the
recommendations/observations of the Committee on the provisions
of the Bill are detailed in the subsequent paragraphs.
Capital Structure of Nationalised Banks
18. Section 3 (2B) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 provides that the paid-up
capital of the nationalised banks can be increased either by transfer
from the reserve fund or by contribution for the Central Government
or by public issue of shares with the approval/consultation of
Central Government and RBI.
19. Section 2 (B) (c) of the Act relating to public issue of shares,
provides that the paid-up capital of nationalised banks may, from time
to time, be increased by:—
“Such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with
the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise by public
issue of shares in such manner as may be prescribed, so however
that the Central Government shall at all times hold not less than
fifty-one per cent of the paid-up capital of each corresponding
new bank.”
20. Questioned whether the limitation of 49% for public
shareholding in nationalised banks has been found to be adequate
enough in meeting the capital adequacy requirements of public sector
banks, the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply submitted as under:—
“The banks were able to meet their additional requirements of
capital through public issue/achieve higher business growth and
internal accruals without Government having to make any
additional contribution in case of many banks. However, to sustain
economic growth at about 8% per annum, banking services have
to expand at a rapid rate warranting infusion of capital to a
significant extent in banks. Further, in view of the increased capital
requirement in the wake of implementation of Basle II, the
Government may have to make fresh contribution to maintain their
shareholding of 51% whenever the banks approach market to raise
additional capital. However, with the proposed introduction of new
instruments, banks would be able to meet the capital adequacy
requirements in the near to medium term without the Government
having to infuse additional capital to maintain its holding at 51%
depending on the financial standing of banks concerned.”

9
21. In this regard, the Ministry also informed:
“… for banks to be able to issue preference shares, amendments
to various banking statutes will be required.”
22. In terms of the amendments proposed in Section 12 of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 vide the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Bill, 2005, which was examined and endorsed for enactment by the
Committee in the related report presented to Parliament, private sector
banking companies are to be enabled to issue preference shares subject
to the regulatory guidelines of the RBI. The holders of preference shares
issued by the Banking Companies are not entitled to exercise voting
rights.
23. On the need for providing more avenues to nationalised banks
for raising capital, and with particular reference to the legislative
measures proposed in this direction for private sector banks, the Bank
of India, in a Memorandum submitted to the Committee, inter alia ,
stated as follows:—
“The provisions in regard to capital for nationalised banks are
covered in Section 3 of the Nationalisation Acts. This section is
silent on the class of shares ( viz. equity , preference, etc.) that the
nationalised banks can issue. The section inter alia provides for
issuance of new capital by the banks in the manner that the
Government holding does not fall below 51% of the paid-up capital.
This is crucially important in view of the pressures on capital
adequacy, and need to have new instruments which can provide
the much needed capital without diluting the Government of India
stake to below 51% in voting rights. We strongly suggest that a
Clause may be inserted in Section 3 to provide for the class of
shares that the public sector banks can issue, and other relevant
issues concerning the matter. Preference shares are non-dilutive
and the Government would need to maintain 51% holding only in
respect of the shares with voting rights viz. the equity share
capital.”
24. In this regard, the CMD, Bank of India, in the course of
evidence pointed out before the Committee that while the Capital
structure of private sector banks has been looked into with the
amendments proposed in Section 12 of the Banking Regulation Act,
issues relating to the capital structure of the nationalised banks
remained to be addressed. Emphasising on the need to urgently address

10
issues relating to augmenting the capital structure of nationalised banks,
the CMD stated as follows:—
“The Reserve Bank of India has already started thinking in terms
of introducing new capital instruments to augment tier I and III
capital. There is a necessity for looking at section 3 of the
Nationalisation Act which should provide for preference shares
which can be reckoned as part of tier I capital.”
25. Questioned as to why it was not considered prudent to provide
for an enabling mechanism for public sector banks to raise preference
capital, as proposed in the case of private sector banks, the Ministry,
in a written reply inter alia stated as follows:—
“Although the Act does not explicitly indicate that nationalised
banks can issue preference shares, it can be inferred from the
provisions that they can issue preference share capital but only
through ‘public issue’. However, the manner of issue otherwise
than by way of public issue, the terms/conditions of issue of
preference shares have not been provided either in the Act or in
the General Regulations.
In order to overcome these difficulties and also to keep the
terms/conditions/manner/mode of issue shares similar as in the
case of private sector banks, RBI has recommended amendment to
Section 3 of the Act.”
26. The amendment proposed by the Reserve Bank to Section 3 of
the Nationalisation Act for enabling public sector banks to raise capital
in a cost-effective manner at par with private sector banks, and without
diluting the Central Government’s holding to a level less than 51% of
the paid-up capital consisting of equity shares, provides as follows:—
“Amendment of section 3
In section 3 of the Bank Nationalisation Act:
(i) in sub-section 2B, for clause (c), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:
(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding
new bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with
the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise whether
by public issue or preferential allotment or private placement, of
equity or preference shares;
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in accordance
with the guidelines framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the
class of and the terms and conditions of the issue;

11
Provided further that the Central Government shall, at all times,
hold not less than fifty one per cent of the paid up capital
consisting of equity shares, of the corresponding new bank.
(ii) in sub-section 2BB, the word “public” may be deleted.
(iii) In sub-section 2BBA, in clause (a), the word “public” may be
deleted.
(iv) In sub-section 2C, the word “public” may be deleted.
(v) For sub-section 2E, the following shall be substituted, namely:
(2-E) No shareholder of the corresponding new bank, other than
the Central Government, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights
in respect of any shares held by him in excess of one per cent of
the total voting rights of all the shareholders of the corresponding
new bank;
Provided that the shareholder holding any preference share capital
in the corresponding new bank shall, in respect of such capital,
have a right to vote only on resolutions placed before corresponding
new bank, which directly affects the rights attached to his
preference shares.
Provided further that in the case of preference shareholders, the
ceiling of one per cent on voting rights shall be of the total voting
rights of all the shareholders holding preference share capital only.”
27. On the factors that led to the thinking to propose the change
to this effect in the Bill at a stage later to its introduction, the Secretary,
Economic Affairs inter-alia stated as follows during evidence:
“…since the banks now require more capital, particularly in view
of the fact that they  have to now adopt to Basel II norms and
capital adequacy would be higher. This would enable them to
raise more capital without diluting the equity.”
28. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance in a post-evidence written
reply, inter alia  stated that with the proposed introduction of new
methods of raising capital by issue of preference shares, ‘banks would
be able to meet the capital adequacy requirements in the near to
medium term without the government having to infuse additional
capital to maintain its holdings at 51% depending on the financial
standing of banks concerned. Thus, the amendment of this section
would enable the banks to raise capital in cost-effective manner at par
with private sector bank without Government’s contribution’.

12
29. The Committee note the proposal to enable capital
restructuring of nationalised banks by way of allowing the banks to
issue non-dilutive preference shares did not find a place in the
amendments proposed in the Bill which was introduced in Lok Sabha
on 16 August, 2005. It was only after questioning by the Committee
that the Government have, in consultation with RBI, proposed for
substitution of Clause (c) of Sub-Section (2B) of Section 3 of the
Nationalisation Acts 1970/1980 for enabling public sector banks to
raise preference capital at par with the private sector banks as
envisaged under the proposals relating to the Banking Regulation
Act. In terms of the existing provisions, effective since 1994,
nationalised banks are entitled to raise capital by way of public
issue of shares in such manner as may be prescribed so that the
Central Government shall always hold a minimum of 51% of the
shareholding. From the information furnished, the Committee note
that though, till date, the public sector banks have been able to
meet the additional capital requirements through public issue of
shares without the Government having to infuse additional capital
to maintain its shareholding at a level above 51%, this may not be
possible in future, particularly in the wake of the implementation
of Basel II norms.
30. The proposed amendment is in consonance with the related
provisions envisaged for the private sector banks and is expected to
enable public sector banks to meet the capital adequacy requirements
of the future in a cost effective manner, without infusion of
additional capital from the Government, or ‘diluting the voting
rights’. The Committee, while endorsing the same for inclusion in
the Bill for enactment, however, feel the need to emphasize on
ensuring that the regulatory aspects relating to the terms and
conditions for issue of preference shares by public sector banks are
not in variance with or detrimental to the public sector banks
vis-à-vis private sector banks.
Clause 3-Amendment of section 9 (Power of Central Government to
make Scheme)
31. Clause 3 reads as under:
“In section 9 of the Bank Nationalisation Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) the manner in which the excess number of directors shall
retire under second proviso to clause (i) of sub-section (3)”;
(b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words “not more than two whole-time
directors”, the words “not more than four whole-time directors”
shall be substituted;

13
(ii) clauses (c) and (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
(i) where the capital issued under clause (c) of sub-section (2B) of
section 3 is—
(I) not more than sixteen per cent of the total paid-up capital, one
director;
(II) more than sixteen per cent but not more than thirty-two
per cent of the total paid-up capital, two directors;
(III) more than thirty-two per cent of the total paid-up capital,
three directors, to be elected by the shareholders, other than the
Central Government, from amongst themselves:
Provided that on the assumption of charge after election of any
such director under this clause, equal number of directors
nominated under clause (h) shall retire in such manner as may be
specified in the scheme:
Provided further that in case the number of directors elected, on
or before the commencement of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005, in a corresponding new
bank exceed the number of directors specified in sub-clause (I) or
sub-clause (II) or sub-clause (III), as the case may be, such excess
number of directors elected before such commencement shall retire
in such manner as may be specified in the scheme and no such
directors shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the
premature retirement of their term of office.”
Reduction in the number of Elected Shareholder Directors
32. In terms of the existing provisions of Section 9 (3) (i) of the
Banks Nationalisation Acts the number of directors entitled to be elected
by the shareholders, other than the Central Government nominee
director, from amongst themselves is as follows:—
(Public Shareholding)
Percentage No. of Shareholder Directors
0-20 Not more than 02
20-40 Not more than 04
40-49 Not more than 06

14
33. The provisions provide that all the six non-official directors
nominated by the Government under section 9 (3) (h) of the Act, get
replaced by shareholders directors once Government shareholding
comes below 60%. As per the Ministry of Finance, this representation
of directors does not correctly reflect the ownership pattern. Hence, to
provide for a more equitable representation which appropriately reflects
the percentage of ownership, it has been proposed to allow a maximum
of three shareholder directors on the board-one for public shareholding
upto 16%, two for shareholding upto 32% and three for shareholding
above 32%. With the enactment of the proposed amendment, the
number of Government nominee non-official directors and shareholder
directors will be as follows:—
Government shareholding Public shareholding
(rounded off to lower digit)
Percentage No. of Percentage No. of
shareholder shareholder
directors directors
100% 06 0% None
84-99% 05 1-16% 01
67-83% 04 17-32% 02
51-66% 03 33-49% 03
34. An issue raised by the Oriental Bank of Commerce and
Punjab National Bank in particular was that with the proposed increase
in the number of whole-time Directors to a maximum of four and
limiting the elected shareholder Directors to a maximum of 3, certain
public sector Banking Companies could face difficulties in adhering to
the requirements of Clause 49 of the stock Listing Agreement prescribed
by SEBI, which, inter alia , provides that at least 50% of the Boards
should comprise of independent directors.
35. Asked whether the move to bring down the number of elected
directors by the shareholders would be in consonance with the
principles of corporate governance, the Ministry, in a written reply
inter alia , stated:
“…reducing the number of elected shareholders directors to a
maximum of 3 is not against the principles of corporate governance
and the banks will not face any difficulty in complying with the
listing agreements.”

15
36. Responding specifically to the issue of likely problems that
some of the Banking Companies may face—as pointed out by the
Punjab National Bank and the Oriental Bank of Commerce—in adhering
to the requirements of the ‘listing agreement’ with the coming into
force of the proposed amendments, the Ministry, in a written reply
stated as under:
“As per SEBI, the definition of the term ‘independent directors’
means a non-executive director who:
— Does not have a pecuniary relationship with company, its
promoters, Senior Management or affiliate companies.
— Is not related to promoters or the Senior Management.
— Has not been an executive with the company in the
immediately three preceding financial years.
— Is not a partner or executive of the auditors/lawyers/
consultants of the company.
— Is not a supplier, service provider or customer of the
company.
— Does not hold 2% or more of the shares of the company.
In this connection it would appear from the definition of
‘independent director’ contained in clause 49 of the Listing
Agreement of SEBI that the Government nominated directors would
qualify to be treated as independent directors. Further, nominee
directors appointed by the investing or lending institutions are
deemed to be independent directors. The directors nominated by
the Government should also be similarly treated as independent
directors. The workmen and non-workmen directors also do not
seem to be disqualified from being treated as independent directors.
Their receiving remuneration may not be equated with having
material pecuniary relationship or transaction with the bank. In
this situation, the number of non-executive nominated directors
will invariably be equal to or more than 50% of the total strength
of the board…”
37. The Ministry also informed that in terms of para 5 of the SEBI
Circular on the Listing Agreement; ‘for other listed entities which are
not companies, but body corporate (e.g. private and public sector banks,
financial institutions, insurance companies etc.) incorporated under other
statutes, the revised Clause 49 will apply to the extent that it does not
violate their respective statutes and guidelines or directives issued by
the relevant regulatory authorities’.

16
38. In terms of the second proviso to Section 9 (3) (i), as proposed
in the Bill, the excess number of elected directors representing the
shareholders shall retire in such manner as may be specified in the
scheme viz, Nationalised Banks (Management and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Scheme, 1970/1980 and ‘no such directors shall be entitled,
to claim any compensation for the premature retirement of their term
of office’.
39. As the existing provisions of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 1970/1980 entitle for a
maximum number of six directors representing the shareholders as
compared to the proposal to restrict the number of such  elected
directors to a maximum of three, with the enactment of the proposed
legislation, such number of elected directors, who may be rendered to
be in excess, will have to retire.
40. In this regard, the Punjab National Bank, in their Memorandum
submitted as follows:
“As and when the amendment comes into force, it will create a
tight corner situation to the elected directors, who are in surplus
than the number prescribed… Elected directors stand on a higher
pedestal and they are elected after going through a process of
election and as such, they should not be shunted out just like
that. Better view seems to be that the directors already elected
may be allowed to complete their term and vacancy arising out of
their exit needs not be filled up further. This may require a specific
provision.”
41. On the issue of retirement of the elected directors who may be
rendered to be in excess, the CMD, Oriental Bank of Commerce, stated
as follows while tendering evidence:
“……….in our bank, we have got six directors representing the
shareholders. When the Central Government is going to appoint
three as per the new dispensation, the manner in which we have
to retire the three out of the six may have to be specified.
Otherwise, the tenure is unto three years, and they have been
recently appointed.”
42. The Bank also submitted as under in a written memorandum:
“…….the directors already elected may be allowed to complete
their term and the amendment may be effective from the
subsequent elections only. Any vacancy in the present directors

17
need not be filled. This will avoid the awkward situation of retiring
some of the directors when the remaining directors are elected on
the same date.”
43. Questioned whether it would not be appropriate to prescribe
that the elected directors, rendered to be in excess with the coming
into force of the proposed amendments, would be entitled to complete
their term, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated as follows:
“The suggestion is in conformity with the principles of corporate
governance and democratic norms. It, is therefore, felt that the
elected directors may be allowed to continue to complete their
term of three years.”
44. The Committee note that as per the prevailing position, the
number of elected directors representing the shareholders of public
sector banks could be a maximum of six in situations where the
Government’s shareholding comes below 60%. With the proposed
amendment of Section 9 (3) (i), the number of shareholder directors
is sought to be restricted to a maximum of three in the case of
banks where the public shareholding ranges from 33% to 49%.
Further, the elected directors rendered to be in excess of the
prescribed number of three will have to retire following the
enactment of the proposed legislation. Banks with an issued capital
base in excess of 40%, and have, as many as six directors on the
Boards representing the shareholders, in particular, emphasized before
the Committee on the need for ensuring that such directors, rendered
to be in excess with the coming into force of the proposed
amendment, should be allowed to complete their term of office. The
Government have agreed to this proposal which is in consonance
with the principles of Corporate Governance and the same needs to
be incorporated in the Scheme.
45. The Committee also note that as suggested by them it has
been proposed to address issues relating to ‘fit and proper’ status of
shareholder directors on the Boards by adding the new Section 9
(3AA). The Committee endorse the same.
46. The Committee also note from the information furnished that
with a view to overcome the problem of a large number of
Government Nominee Directors continuing to hold office even after
the expiry of their term owing to non-appointment of the successors,
the relevant provisions of the Nationalised Banks (Management and
Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme, 1970/1980 as effective since 2000,
provides that ‘non-official directors including elected directors shall

18
hold office for a period of 3 years and can be reappointed/reelected
as the case may be, subject to the total continuous period not
exceeding 6 years’. While the avowed purpose of this stipulation in
ensuring that non-official directors do not continue to hold office
beyond the expiry of their term is understandable, the Committee
are of the strong view that the onus of ensuring that the vacancies
that arise in the Boards are filled without any delay or lapse of time
should squarely rest on the Government. The Committee, therefore,
recommend for incorporation of appropriate provisions in the Scheme
to provide for mandatory initiation of prior action for filling up the
vacancies on the Boards, three months in advance to their likely
occurrence, so that neither retiring directors continue to hold office
beyond the expiry of their term nor the vacancies caused by their
retirement remain unfilled.
Clause 5—Amendment of Section 10 A (Shareholders’ Rights at
Annual General Meeting)
47. Clause 5 of the Bill states as below:
“In section 10A of the Bank Nationalisation Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “shall be entitled to discuss”,
the words “shall be entitled to discuss, approve and adopt” shall
be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:-
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply during the period
for which the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank
had been superseded under sub-section (1) of section 18A:
Provided that the Financial Restructuring Authority may, if it
considers it appropriate in the interest of the corresponding new
bank whose Board of Directors had been superseded, call annual
general meeting in accordance with the provisions of this section.”
48. Section 10 A (2) of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 entitles the shareholders’
present at an Annual General Meeting (AGM) to discuss the balance
sheet and the profit and loss accounts, the report of the board of
directors and activities of the nationalised banks but without any voting
rights. The proposed amendment seeks to entitle the shareholders to
discuss the annual accounts and the balance sheet of the concerned
bank at the AGM and also to adopt and approve such accounts.

19
49. Pubic Sector Banks such as the State Bank of India and
Allahabad Bank as well as the Indian Banks’ Association have perceived
the proposed amendment as a step towards corporate governance,
which was in accordance with the provisions applicable to companies
under the Companies Act. However, the Punjab National Bank and
the Oriental Bank of Commerce, in particular, inter alia , expressed the
following views on the proposals to enable the shareholders to approve
the balance sheet and profit and loss accounts in addition to discussing
the same:
(i) The proposal would not have any meaningful purpose or
give any value addition so long as the government holding
in banks is in excess of 50%.
(ii) The proposal may only result in long drawn AGMs and
additional expenses, if poll is conducted.
(iii) The regulations relating to conduct of AGMs need to be
amended by incorporating the procedure and the manner
in which the accounts are to be approved and adopted;
and the approved accounts should be filed with the RBI (as
the companies do with the ROCs) within 30 days.
50. Further, the All India Bank Officers’ Association expressed the
following view on the proposed amendment:
“Shareholders entitled to discuss, approve and adopt as the
shareholders (other than Government) cannot be more than 49%.
What if they do not adopt? Provisions need to be clarified to state
that in case of voting, Government will have its full ownership
right exhibited.”
51. On the background to the proposed amendment, the Ministry,
in a written note, stated as follows:
“The Parliamentary Committee has commented that the existing
provisions are not in consonance with corporate governance. In
view of the observations of the Parliamentary Committee and the
practice followed by companies under Companies Act, 1956, it is
proposed to amend the relevant section to enable the shareholders
to discuss the annual accounts and the balance sheet of the
concerned bank at the AGM and to adopt and approve such
accounts. The proposal to entitle the shareholders to adopt the
balance sheet, profit and loss account, was aimed at enhancing the
quality of corporate governance in nationalised banks.”

20
52. On the need expressed by the representatives of Banks for
prescribing the procedure to be followed, in the matter of discussing,
approving and adopting the balance sheet and ‘profit and loss accounts’
and ‘auditor’s reports’ at the AGMs, the Ministry, inter alia , informed
as under in written note:
“Chapter IV of the General Regulations of the Public Sector Banks
provides the details regarding meeting of shareholders. As per
Regulation 56, a notice for convening an Annual General Meeting
has to be published which will state, among other things, the
business that shall be transacted at the meeting. The procedure for
quorum of general meeting, voting at general meeting, the persons
entitled to attend such meetings have also been prescribed in the
General Regulation.”
53. As per the written reply furnished by the Ministry, inter alia ,
on the consequences of non-adoption of the balance sheet at the AGMs,
in the case of companies, in terms of Section 173 of the Companies
Act, the ‘business relating to the consideration of the accounts, balance
sheet and reports of Board and auditors, is deemed to be ordinary’.
As regards Banks, Section 31 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,
which also applies to nationalised banks provides for ‘submission of
accounts and balance sheet to RBI within the specified period’.
54. As informed by the Ministry, ‘non-adoption of balance sheet
by AGM has no consequence’ and this aspect could be added in the
provisions.
55. The proposed amendment of Section 10A seeks to enable the
shareholders to ‘adopt and approve the balance sheet and profit and
loss accounts’ of banking companies, in addition to ‘discussing’ them,
as presently provided for. Though the proposal is in consonance
with the principles of Corporate Governance and the procedure
followed by companies under the Companies Act, the Committee
cannot help taking note of the concerns expressed before them by
the representatives of some banking companies on aspects relating
to likely problems in regulating the AGMs to enable for ‘approval
and adoption’ of the balance sheets and accounts. The Committee
also take note of the information furnished by the Ministry that the
‘business relating to the consideration of the accounts, balance sheet
etc. is deemed to be ordinary’ and ‘non-adoption of balance sheets
and reports of Boards and auditors’ being of no consequence. Mainly
in view of the concerns expressed before them, the Committee feel
that it may be desirable to have a relook at the general regulations

21
relating to convening and conduct of the AGMs of Banks so as to
assess the requirement of changes needed therein, if any, in the
light of the proposal to enable for ‘approval’ and ‘adoption’ of the
balance sheets/accounts in addition to ‘discussing them’.
Clause 6—Insertion of New Section 10 C (Transfer of Unpaid or
Unclaimed Dividend to Unpaid Dividend Account)
56. Clause 6 (Insertion of new section 10 C regarding transfer of
unpaid or unclaimed dividend to unpaid dividend Account) states as
below:
“(1) Where, after the commencement of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005, a dividend has been
declared by a corresponding new bank but has not been paid or
claimed within forty-two days from the date of declaration, to or
by, any shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend, the
corresponding new bank shall, within seven days from the date of
the expiry of such period of forty-two days, transfer the total
amount of dividend which remains unpaid or unclaimed within
the said period of forty-two days, to a special account to be called
“Unpaid Dividend Account of… (the name of the corresponding
new bank)”.
Explanation. —In this sub-section, the expression “dividend
which remains unpaid” means any dividend the warrant in respect
thereof has not been encashed or which has otherwise not been
paid or claimed.
(2) Where the whole or any part of any dividend, declared by
a corresponding new bank before the commencement of the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and
Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005, remains unpaid
at such commencement, the corresponding new bank shall, within
a period of six months from such commencement, transfer such
unpaid amount to the account referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid dividend account of
a corresponding new bank in pursuance of this section which
remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the
date of such transfer, shall be transferred by the corresponding
new bank to the Investor Education and Protection Fund established
under sub-section (1) of section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956).

22
(4) The money transferred under sub-section (3) to the Investor
Education and Protection Fund shall be utilised for the purposes
and in the manner specified in section 205C of the Companies
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
57. Presently, the unclaimed dividends remain in the books of the
nationalised banks for a long-time. The proposed addition of the new
section 10 C to the Nationalisation Acts seeks to enable the banks to
transfer the unclaimed or unpaid dividends of over seven years to the
Investor Education and Protection Fund established under sub-section
(1) of Section 205 (C) of the Companies Act, 1956.
58. It was pointed out to the Committee that the proposed Section
10 C needed to be recast on the lines of the amended Sections 205
and 205 A of the Companies Act, which, inter alia , provide for:
“— Deposit of the amount of dividend including interim
dividend in a separate bank account within five days from
the date of declaration of such dividend.
— Application of the provisions relating to dividend, as far as
possible, to any interim dividend.
—T ransfer of unpaid/unclaimed dividend to a special account
within seven days from the expiry of thirty days, where
the dividend remains unpaid/unclaimed for a period for
thirty days (instead of 42 days) and in case of default to
pay interest at the rate of twelve percent per annum which
shall ensure to the benefit of members of the company.”
59. Further, as regards utilisation of the accruals to the Investor
Education Fund by way of transfer of individual dividends etc., the
‘explanation’ under Section 205 (C) provides that ‘no claim shall lie
against the funds or the company in respect of individual amounts
which were unclaimed and unpaid for a period of seven years from
the dates that they first became due for payment and no payment
shall be made in respect of any such claims’.
60. On this specific provision which prohibits a shareholder to
stake claim on any unpaid dividend beyond a seven year period, the
Indian Banks’ Association expressed the following view point:
“….this provision is against public interest. There can be situations
where for genuine reasons a person is unable to make a claim in
respect of dividend payable to him and to totally bar any such
claim after a period of seven years is unreasonable. There is a

23
need to modify this provision by adding a further sub-section
stating that it shall be permissible for any person to make a claim
in respect of any unclaimed dividend credited to the fund from
the concerned bank and if such claim on verification is found to
be genuine and payable, the bank shall pay the same with interest
and claim reimbursement from the fund. While amendment to
section 205 (C) of the Companies Act may not be feasible by
making a change in the present Bill under consideration it will be
permissible to make the provisions of section 205 (C) applicable to
the unclaimed dividends of nationalised banks with a modification
as suggested above. The amendment of Section 205 (C) can be
taken up separately.”
61. In a similar vein, the ASSOCHAM, in a written Memorandum
emphasised on the need for being a mechanism ‘wherein a shareholder
is able to claim his due dividend even after seven years’.
62. Asked to respond to the suggestions, as enumerated above in
this regard, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated as follows:
“Government agrees to the suggestion. Necessary changes, as
already been made to sections 205 A to 205 C to the Companies
Act, may be incorporated.”
63. The Committee note that though the proposed addition of
new Section 10C is intended to enable transfer of unclaimed dividend
amounts on the books of nationalized banks to the Investor Education
and Protection Fund, as pointed out before them, the proposals are
not in line with the relevant provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.
The provisions of the Companies Act inter alia provide for ‘deposit
of the dividend amount, inclusive of interim dividend in a separate
bank account within five days of the declaration of the dividend’,
which is not the case as per the proposals of the Bill. Questioned
in this regard, the Government have agreed to incorporate necessary
changes in the proposals of Clause 10C so as to make the provisions
in consonance with those of the Companies Act. The Committee
accordingly recommend that necessary changes, as agreed to, be
carried out in the proposed Section 10C so as to make them in
conformity with the Companies Act.
64. As per the provisions applicable, the unclaimed dividend
amounts cease to be payable beyond a seven year period, which
may deprive bonafide claimants of their rightful dues. In response
to the suggestion made by the Committee to address such cases, by
way of incorporating a separate sub-section to 10C to provide for a
mechanism whereby, a shareholder could, owing to bonafide reasons,

24
and subject to verification, claim his dividend dues even after the
seven year limitation, the Government have expressed concurrence.
The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary changes be made in
the amendment proposals to provide for legitimate space to bonafide
claimants of dividend amounts even after the seven year time
stipulation.
Clause 7:—Insertion of New Sections 18A to 18F (Power of Central
Government to supersede Board of Directors of New Corresponding
Bank)
65. The existing provisions of the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/1980 do not provide any
mechanism regarding supersession of board of directors of the
nationalised banks, which may, sometimes be necessary in case of weak
or potentially weak banks. The amendment proposals under Clause 7,
by way of seeking to add Sections 18A to 18F to the Bank
Nationalisation Acts 1970/1980, as incorporated in the Bill referred to
the Committee seek to empower the Central Government to supersede
the Board of Directors of any nationalised bank and constitute a
Financial Restructuring Authority and appoint a Chief Executive Officer
of such bank.
66. The Amendment proposals under Clause 7 as proposed in the
Bill read as follows:
“After section 18 of the Bank Nationalisation Act, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
18A (1) if at any time the Central Government, on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank, is of the opinion—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the
corresponding new bank, such bank is unable to discharge the
functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act, or
(b) that a corresponding new bank has persistently made default
in complying with any direction given by the Reserve Bank of
India or the Central Government under this Act or any other law
for the time being in force or in discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act or any other law for the time being in force and as a
result of such default the financial position of the corresponding
new bank or the administration of such bank has deteriorated, or

25
(c) the affairs of the corresponding new bank are being conducted
in a manner detrimental to the interest of its depositors or banking
policy, or
(d) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public
interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be
specified therein, supersede the Board of Directors of such
corresponding new bank for such period, not exceeding three years,
as may be specified in the notification and appoint establish under
section 18B, an authority to be known as the Financial Restructuring
Authority:
Provided that the Central Government may , for reasons to be
recorded in writing, extend such period from three years to five
years:
Provided further that before issuing any such notification, the
Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the
Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank to make
representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider
the representations, if any, of the Board of Directors.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1)
superseding the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank,—
(a) the Chairperson and other directors shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under
the provisions of this Act, or any other law for the time being in
force, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank or by a resolution passed
in general meeting of that bank, shall, until the Board of Directors
of such corresponding new bank is re-constituted under sub-section
(3), be exercised and discharged by the Financial Restructuring
Authority:
Provided that the powers, exercised by the Financial Restructuring
Authority shall be valid notwithstanding that such powers are
exercisable by a resolution passed in the general meeting of such
a corresponding new bank.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central

26
Government shall re-constitute the Board of Directors of such
corresponding new bank by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson
and other directors and in such case any person who had vacated
his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed
to be disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification
issued under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to
be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
18B. Establishment of Financial Restructuring Authority. (1) The
Central Government shall, on supersession of the Board of Director
of the corresponding new bank under sub-section (1) of section
18A, establish an authority to be known as Financial Restructuring
Authority.
(2) The Financial Restructuring Authority shall consist of not less
than three, but not exceeding seven members to be appointed by
the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity
and standing who have knowledge and experience in banking,
finance, economics, law, accountancy, administration or any other
discipline which would in the opinion of the Central Government
be useful to the corresponding new bank.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the Members as
the Chairperson of the Financial Restructuring Authority .
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of the Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority shall be such as may be specified, by rules
made by the Central Government.
(5) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of
the Chairperson and Members of the Financial Restructuring
Authority shall not be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to the Chairperson and
Members of the Financial Restructuring Authority and the Chief
Executive Officer of the corresponding new bank shall be borne
by the corresponding new bank in respect of which such an
Authority has been established and a Chief Executive Officer
appointed.
18C. Meeting of Financial Restructuring Authority. (1) The Financial
Restructuring Authority shall meet at such times and places and

27
shall observe such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of
business at its meeting (including quorum of such meeting) as
may be specified, by rules made by the Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reasons, is unable to attend a
meeting of the Financial Restructuring Authority, any other Member
chosen by the Members present amongst themselves at the meeting
shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Financial Restructuring Authority shall be decided by a majority
of votes by the Members present and voting, and in the event of
an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence the person
presiding shall have second or casting vote.
18D. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Financial
Restructuring Authority. (1) No act or proceeding of the Financial
Restructuring Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Financial
Restructuring Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member
of the Financial Restructuring Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Financial Restructuring
Authority not affecting the merits of the case.
18E. Chief Executive Officer. (1) The Central Government shall, on
supersession of the Board of Directors of a corresponding new
bank under section 18B, by notification, appoint any person not
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or
an Executive Director of any corresponding new bank as the Chief
Executive of the bank whose board of Directors had been
superseded under that section.
(2) The Chief Executive officer shall hold office for a term not
exceeding three years from the date on which he enters upon his
office or reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the
corresponding new bank referred to in section 18B, whichever is
earlier.
(3) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive
Officer shall be such as may be specified, by rules made by the
Central Government.

28
(4) Subject to general superintendence, direction and management
of the affairs by the Financial Restructuring Authority , the Chief
Executive officer shall be the Chief Executive Authority of the
corresponding new bank whose Board of Directors had been
superseded.
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall be ex officio Member of the
Financial Restructuring Authority .
(6) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise and discharge such
powers and duties of the corresponding new bank, whose Board
of Directors had been superseded, as may be specified by the
Financial Restructuring Authority .
18F. Power to make rules. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of the Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority  under sub-section (4) of section 18B;
(b) the time and places of the meeting of the Financial Restructuring
Authority under sub-section (1) of section 18C;
(c) the other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive
Officer under sub-section (3) of section 18E.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule.”
67. In terms of the provisions, as envisaged under the provisions
proposed in the Bill, the Central Government will be empowered to

29
constitute a Financial Restructuring Authority (FRA) which would take
over the management and affairs of the bank which would consist of
experts drawn from areas such as management, banking, accountancy ,
law and such other fields which may be decided in consultation with
RBI.
68. On the proposed provisions, as envisaged in the Bill, while the
Chiefs of public sector Banks have not expressed disfavour to
empowering the Central Government to supersede the Board of
nationalised banks if the situation necessitates, the views expressed by
others, particularly the representatives of employees and officers unions
of Banks inter alia centered on the aspect of the proposed period of
supersession under the provisions being too long viz., 3 to 5 years;
and the need for having a mandatory system of consultation with the
Reserve Bank in the matter of appointment of the authorities who
could take charge of the affairs of a bank following the supersession
of the Board of Directors.
69. A specific issue brought before the Committee was that the
proposed provisions (Section 18A to 18F) need to be in consonance
with the provisions applicable or envisaged to the private sector Banks
in terms of the amendment proposals pertaining to the Banking
Regulation Act.
70. As regards private sector Banks, the proposed addition of Part
II AB to the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 inter alia
provides for supersession of Board of Directors of private sector banks
for a period not exceeding six months (as opposed to 3 to 5 years
proposed for public sector banks) as may be specified in the order
provided that the period of supersession of the Board of directors
may be extended from time to time but not beyond twelve months on
the whole.
71. Questioned about the proposed provisions for appointment of
FRA etc., in respect of the Board of nationalised banks following
supersession vis-a-vis provisions proposed in respect of private sector
banks, the Ministry of Finance, in a written reply, informed that the
Reserve Bank had proposed to replace the Section 18A to 18F
incorporated in the Bill with a revised section 18A, which was in line
with the proposal pertaining to private sector Banks. In this regard,
the Ministry informed as under:
“Reserve Bank has proposed to replace by a revised Section 18A
which is in lines with the amendment already proposed in the

30
Banking Regulation Act (Amendment) Bill, 2005 so that uniformity
in contents, approach and legal provisions with regard to
supersession of the boards is maintained. RBI has also pointed out
certain deficiencies such as (a) period of supersession proposed
in the above Bill is too long i.e. 3 to 5 years, (b) appointment of
CEO in addition to FRA may lead to clash of interest,
(c) opportunity for representation will also delay the process of
restructuring and proposed to replace sections 18A to 18F by a
new section 18A.”
72. The revised section 18A proposed by the Reserve Bank reads
as follows:
“Amendment of Section 3
18A. (1) Where the Central Government, on the recommendation
of Reserve Bank, is satisfied that in the public interest or for
preventing the affairs of any corresponding new bank being
conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors
or any corresponding new bank or for securing the proper
management of any corresponding new bank, it is necessary so to
do, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, by order, supersede the Board of directors of such
corresponding new bank for a period not exceeding six months as
may be specified in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of directors
may be extended from time to time, so, however, that total period
shall not exceed twelve months.
2. The Central Government may, on supersession of the Board of
Directors of the corresponding new bank under sub-section (1),
appoint an Administrator for such period as it may determine.
3. The Central Government may issue such directions to the
Administrator as it may deem appropriate and the Administrator
shall be bound to follow such directions.
4. Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of Directors
of a corresponding new bank, notwithstanding anything contained
in the Companies Act, 1956,—
(a) the Chairman, Managing Director and other Directors shall, as
from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;

31
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or this Act, or any
other law for the time being in force, be exercised and discharged
by or on behalf of the Board of directors of such corresponding
new bank, or by a resolution passed in general meeting of such
corresponding new bank, shall, until the Board of directors of such
corresponding new bank is reconstituted, be exercised and
discharged by the Administrator appointed by the Central
Government Bank under sub-section (2):
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall
be valid notwithstanding that such power is exercisable by a
resolution passed in the general meeting of such corresponding
new bank.
5. The Central Government may constitute a committee of three or
more persons who have experience in law, finance, banking,
administration or accountancy to assist the Administrator in the
discharge of his duties.
6. The Committee shall meet at such times and places and observe
such rules of procedure as may be specified by the Central
Government.
7. The salary and allowances to the Administrator and the members
of the committee constituted by the Central Government shall be
such as may be specified by the Central Government and be
payable by the concerned corresponding new bank.
8. On and before the expiration of two months before expiry of
the period of supersession of the Board of directors as specified in
the order issued under sub-section (1), the Administrator of the
corresponding new bank, shall call the general meeting of the
company to elect new directors and reconstitute its Board of
directors.
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or in any
contract, the memorandum or articles of association no person shall
be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or termination
of his office.
10. The Administrator appointed under sub-section (2) shall vacate
office immediately after the Board of directors of such
corresponding new bank has been reconstituted.”
73. As per the revised section 18A proposed by RBI for supersession
of Board of Directors, the Central Government will appoint an

32
Administrator and a Committee of three or more persons having
experience in law, finance, banking administration or accountancy to
assist the Administrator in the discharge of his duties.
74. Questioned on the reasons for seeking to replace Sections 18A
to 18F as proposed in the Bill, with the revised section 18A, a
representative of the Ministry of Finance stated during evidence:
“We have brought three Acts for amendment before the hon’ble
House-the RBI Act, the Banking Regulation Act and the Acquisition
Act. Our thinking has also gone along with the thinking that the
hon’ble Committee has brought about and we have been guided
in large number of ways by the thought process in discussions
with this hon’ble Committee. One of the things that we have sought
to do subsequently is to bring about a consistency which is a
uniformity across all the three Acts with the multi-state cooperative
where the RBI has now been empowered with powers of a
regulator. If you would recall in the Cooperative Act, the power is
there to dismiss or supersede a Board and appoint an administrator.
We had thought that the Financial Restructuring Authority would
be appointed for public sector banks. But when we compared across
the Board of these three of our different Acts, we found that the
system which has worked best is that of appointment of an
administrator who will be normally a government official. That
has acted well in Cooperatives and the same kind of a system we
have introduced through the Bill in the Banking Regulation Act
and we want to introduce that as the best and most improved
version which will be consistent among all the Acts in these
process.”
75. By way of giving a detailed rationale/justification for proposing
to replace Section 18A to 18F with the revised Section 18A, the Ministry,
in a post-evidence reply, inter alia stated as under:
“Section 9 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980, inter alia , empowers Central
Government to make scheme, after consultation with the Reserve
Bank for the following matters, such as:
(a) Reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two or
more corporations.
(b) The amalgamation of any corresponding new bank with any
other corresponding new bank or with another banking institution.

33
(c) The transfer of the whole or any part of the undertaking of
corresponding new bank or banking institution or the transfer of
the whole or any part of the undertaking of any other banking
institution to a corresponding new bank.
Central Government can therefore, exercise the above powers in
consultation with RBI to revamp/restructure weak/potentially weak
nationalised banks. It was therefore felt that there was no need for
a FRA exclusively for restructuring of weak banks. Moreover, as
of now, all the public sector banks have fared well and there is no
immediate concern as to weakness of public sector banks.
It was also felt that the Act should provide enabling provision to
supersede the Boards of directors in extreme exigencies. The basic
objective is to help the bank make a turnaround and help in
reconstitution of the Board without prolonged interference in the
affairs of the banks.
In view of the above, on the reconsideration, Reserve Bank
proposed to replace all sections from 18A to 18F by a revised
Section 18A which is in lines with the amendment already proposed
in the Banking Regulation Act (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and
amendment already passed by the Parliament in case of multi-
state co-operative banks in the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2004 so that uniformity in
contents, approach and legal provisions with regard to supersession
of the Boards is maintained.
RBI has also pointed out certain deficiencies such as (a) Period of
supersession proposed in the above Bill is too long i.e. 3 to 5
years, (b) Appointment of CEO in addition to FRA may lead to
clash of interest, (c) Opportunity for representation will also delay
the process of restructuring; and proposed to replace sections 18A
to 18F by a new section 18A.
• As per the revised section 18A proposed by RBI for supersession
of Board of Directors, the Central Government will appoint an
Administrator and a Committee of three or more persons having
experience in law, finance, banking administration or accountancy
to assist the Administrator in the discharge of his duties. This is
proposed in lieu of FRA and CEO and is in lines with the
amendment proposed to Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which has
already been approved by the Standing Committee on Finance
and amendment already passed by the Parliament in case of Multi-
State Co-operative banks in the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2004.”

34
76. With regard to private sector Banks, the Committee had in
their report on the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005
recommended that the qualifications required to be met for election of
the Administrator who would take charge of the affairs of a Bank
following the supersession of the Board of Directors should be confined
to experience in the fields of law, finance, banking and accountancy
only and no bureaucrat should be chosen for the assignment.
77. In response to a query made in this regard, the Ministry
informed as under:
“It is proposed to agree with the recommendation of the Standing
Committee made in Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005
to delete the word ‘administration’ and specify the qualification
such as law, finance, banking or accountancy for the administrator
who will be appointed by the Government in consultation with
RBI.”
78. As regards the related provisions of the present Bill in respect
of nationalised banks, the Ministry informed as under:
“It is proposed to include ‘economics’ as a subject for qualification
as has been proposed in case of Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 pursuant to the suggestion of the Standing Committee.”
79. On the issue of ensuring a system of consultation with the
Reserve Bank in the matter of appointment of the Administrator and
members of the Committee, which may be constituted to assist the
Administrator in terms of the proposed Section 18A, the Ministry, in
a post-evidence reply informed as under:
“The Government agrees to the proposal of consultation with RBI
for appointments in this regard.”
80. The Committee note that the proposed provisions relating to
the supersession of the Board of Directors of weak or potentially
weak banks originally envisaged in the Bill (Sections 18A to 18F)
inter alia sought to provide for constituting a Financial Restructuring
Authority (FRA) and also appoint a CEO to take charge of the
management and affairs of the bank concerned, for a period which
could range from three to five years. Mainly in view of the fact that
the contents and approach of the legal provisions proposed under
Sections 18A to 18F not being in consonance with the provisions
envisaged for supersession of the Boards of private sector banks
under the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 which has
been examined and reported upon by the Committee, these have
been sought to be replaced by the revised Section 18A, as formulated
by the Reserve Bank.

35
81. As in the case of private sector banks, the provisions of the
revised Section 18A inter alia seek to empower the Central
Government to appoint an Administrator, who would be assisted by
a Committee of three to four persons to oversee the management of
the affairs of the superseded bank for a maximum permissible period
of twelve months. The Committee note from the information
furnished by the Ministry that the legal provisions as proposed in
the revised section 18A would bring about consistency and uniformity
across the Acts pertaining not only to the public and private sector
banks but the multi-state co-operative banks as well, where the
system is reported to have worked well. Given the reasons advanced
for the replacement of the proposed provisions, which include, the
permissible period of supersession of three to five years as per the
original provisions being too long, and the possibility of clash of
interest of the CEO and FRA, the Committee are inclined to
recommend the newly proposed provision for enactment.
82. The Committee also note from the information furnished that
as recommended by them and accepted for implementation in the
case of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005, the
Government have decided to omit ‘administrative experience’ as a
criteria to be met for selection of the ‘Administrator’. The
Government have also accepted the proposal for having a mandatory
system of consultation with the Reserve Bank in the matter of
appointment of Administrator and related authorities. The Committee,
accordingly recommend that appropriate changes be carried out in
the provisions/regulations to specify the qualifications of
Administrator and provide for a system of consultation with the
Reserve Bank in the matter of appointing the Administrator and his
assisting authorities.
83. The Committee further note that with the proposed
replacement of Sections 18A to 18F, defining the offices of FRA and
CEO in the Nationalisation Acts, as envisaged under Clause 2 of the
Bill would be redundant. The Committee, therefore, expect the
Government to delete the proposals of Clause 2, whereby these
offices are sought to be defined.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
17 April, 2006 Chairman,
27 Chaitra, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

36
ANNEXURE I
(vide Para 14)
CHANGES PROPOSED TO THE BANKING COMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) AND
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
In section 3 of the Bank Nationalization Act:
(i) in sub-section 2B, for clause (c), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:
“(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the
corresponding new bank may, after consultation with
the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of
the Central Government, raise whether by public issue
or preferential allotment or private placement, of equity
or preference shares;
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in
accordance with the guidelines framed by the Reserve
Bank specifying the class of and the terms and
conditions of the issue;
Provided further that the Central Government shall, at
all times, hold not less than fifty one per cent of the
paid up capital consisting of equity shares, of the
corresponding new bank.”
(ii) in sub-section 2BB, the word “public” may be
deleted.
(iii) in sub-section 2BBA, in clause (a), the word
“public” may be deleted.
(iv) in sub-section 2C, the word “public” may be
deleted.
(v) for sub-section 2E, the following shall be
substituted, namely:
“(2-E) No shareholder of the corresponding new bank,
other than the Central Government, shall be entitled
Amendment
of section 3.

37
to exercise voting rights in respect of any shares held
by him in excess of one percent of the total voting
rights of all the shareholders of the corresponding new
bank;
Provided that the shareholder holding any preference
share capital in the corresponding new bank shall, in
respect of such capital, have a right to vote only on
resolutions placed before corresponding new bank,
which directly affects the rights attached to his
preference shares;
Provided further that in the case of preference
shareholders, the ceiling of one percent on voting rights
shall be of the total voting rights of all the shareholders
holding preference share capital only .”
In section 9 of the Bank Nationalisation Act,—
(a) after sub-section (3A), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3AA) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (3A) and notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in this Act or in any law for the
time being in force, no person shall be eligible to be
elected as director under clause (i) of sub-section (3)
unless he is a person having fit and proper status based
upon track record, integrity and such other criteria as
the Reserve Bank may notify from time to time in this
regard.
(3AB) The Reserve Bank may also specify in the
notification issued under sub-section (3AA), the
authority to determine the fit and proper status, the
manner of such determination, the procedure to be
followed, and such other matters as may be considered
necessary or incidental thereto.”
(b) in sub-section (3B), after the words “sub-section
(3A)” wherever they occur, the words “and sub-section
(3AA)”, shall be inserted.
Supersession of Board of Directors of Corresponding
New Bank
18A. (1) Where the Central Government, on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank, is satisfied that
Amendment
of section 9.
Insertion of
new section
18A.

38
in the public interest or for preventing the affairs of
any corresponding new bank being conducted in a
manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors or
any corresponding new bank or for securing the proper
management of any corresponding new bank, it is
necessary so to do, the Central Government may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, supersede
the Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank
for a period not exceeding six months as may be
specified in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board
of Directors may be extended from time to time, so,
however, that total period shall not exceed twelve
months.
(2) The Central Government may, on supersession of
the Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank
under sub-section (1), appoint an Administrator for such
period as it may determine.
(3) The Central Government may issue such directions
to the Administrator as it may deem appropriate and
the Administrator shall be bound to follow such
directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board
of Directors of a corresponding new bank,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies
Act, 1956,—
(a) the chairman, managing director and other directors
shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their
offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 or
this Act, or any other law for the time being in force,
be exercised and discharged by or on behalf of the
Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank,
or by a resolution passed in general meeting of such
corresponding new bank, shall, until the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank is
reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the
Administrator appointed by the Central Government
Bank under sub-section (2):
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator
shall be valid notwithstanding that such power is

39
exercisable by a resolution passed in the general
meeting of such corresponding new bank.
(5) The Central Government may constitute a committee
of three or more persons who have experience in law,
finance, banking, administration or accountancy to assist
the Administrator in the discharge of his duties.
(6) The Committee shall meet at such times and places
and observe such rules of procedure as may be
specified by the Central Government.
(7) The salary and allowances to the Administrator and
the members of the committee constituted by the
Central Government shall be such as may be specified
by the Central Government and be payable by the
concerned corresponding new bank.
(8) On and before the expiration of two months before
expiry of the period of supersession of the Board of
Directors as specified in the order issued under sub-
section (1), the Administrator of the corresponding new
bank, shall call the general meeting of the company to
elect new directors and reconstitute its Board of
Directors.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law or in any contract, the memorandum or articles of
association no person shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the loss or termination of his office.
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (2)
shall vacate office immediately after the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank has been
reconstituted.”

40
NOTE OF DISSENT
Shri Rupchand Pal, MP
This has reference to the draft report on Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. I would like to submit my “Note of
Dissent” in respect of the following:
(i) Page 9, para 16, line 5—sentence beginning—“and do away
with the compulsory nomination of an officer of the Reserve
Bank on the Boards”— be deleted .
(ii) Page 14, para 30, add at the end “The terms and conditions
for issue of preference shares by public sector banks should
be made fully transparent and is to be reviewed on regular
basis to prevent misuse of the same.”
Sd/-
(Shri Rupchand Pal, MP)

41
NOTE OF DISSENT
Shri Chittabrata Majumdar, MP
The Committee is going to finalise the report on Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. I would like to submit the
following points to amend some paragraphs contained in the draft
report on the said Bill and request for including the same in the final
report otherwise treat this as my “Note of Dissent”:
1. Page 9, para 16, line 5—Delete the sentence starting from
“……and do away with the compulsory nomination of an
officer of the Reserve Bank on the Boards.”
2. Page 14, para 30— add the following at the end:
“The terms and conditions for issue of preference shares by
public sector banks should be made fully transparent and
need regular monitoring to prevent misuse of the same.”
Sd/-
(Shri Chittabrata Majumdar, MP)

42
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 30 September, 2005 from 1100 to
1300 hrs. and 1530 to 1640 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(at 1130 hours)
2. ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** **

43
Part II
(at 1530 hours)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance
(i) Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary (DEA)
(ii) Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary (FS)
(iii) Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA)
(iv) Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (CM)
Reserve Bank of India
(i) Shri H. Bhattacharya, CGM
(ii) Shri Anand Sinha, CGM
(iii) Shri G.S. Hedge, Joint Legal Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs) and Reserve Bank of India briefed the Committee
on the various provisions contained in the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives of the Ministry that the information
with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available
with them might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4.** ** ** **
5.** ** ** **
6.** ** ** **
7. The briefing was concluded.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

44
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, 7 November, 2005 from 1030 to
1145 hrs. and thereafter from 1145 to 1330 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri R.P . Goenka
17. Shri Jairam Ramesh
18. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
19. Shri Yashwant Sinha
20. Shri Amar Singh

45
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
** ** ** **
Part II
(1145 to 1330 hrs.)
WITNESSES
1. Shri V .P . Shetty, Chairman and Managing Director, IDBI Bank
2. Dr. (Smt.) Indira Rajaraman, Senior Fellow, National Institute
of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP)
3. Shri M.R. Umarji, Consultant and Chief Advisor (Legal),
Indian Banks’ Association
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri V .P . Shetty,
Dr. (Smt.) Indira Rajaraman and Shri M.R. Umarji to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then heard the views of Shri V .P . Shetty,
Dr. (Smt.) Indira Rajaraman and Shri M.R. Umarji on the provisions of
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. Thereafter,
the Members sought clarifications and the Chairman asked the
representatives to furnish written information/replies to the queries
raised by the Members in respect of which information was not readily
available with them.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

46
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 8 November, 2005 from 1030 hrs.
to 1200 hrs. and thereafter from 1200 to 1330 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Part I
(1030 hrs. to 1200 hrs.)
1. PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK (PNB)
Shri S.C. Gupta, Chairman and Managing Director
2. ORIENTAL BANK OF COMMERCE
Shri K.N. Prithviraj, Chairman & Managing Director

47
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Punjab National Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
Punjab National Bank and Oriental Bank of Commerce on the
provisions of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
The Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by
the representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives
that the information with regard to queries of the Members which
was not readily available with them might be furnished to the
Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
(1200 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)
** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

48
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 5th January, 2006 from
1030 hours to 1215 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri R.P . Goenka
11. Shri Jairam Ramesh
12. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
13. Shri Yashwant Sinha
14. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

49
WITNESSES
1. All India Bank Officers’ Association
(i) Shri Alok Khare, President
(ii) Shri R.J. Sridharan, General Secretary
(ii) Shri S. Nagarajan, Deputy General Secretary
2. All India Bank Officers’ Confederation
(i) Shri R.C. Agrawal, President
(ii) Shri T.R. Bhatt, Joint General Secretary
3. All India Bank Employees Association
(i) Shri Rajen Nagar, President
(ii) Shri C.H. Venkatachalam, General Secretary
(iii) Shri Ramanand, Joint Secretary
4. Bank Employees Federation of India
(i) Shri S. Bardhan, General Secretary
(ii) Shri M.L. Malkuntia, Joint Secretary
5. National Confederation of Bank Employees
Shri L. Balasubramanian, President
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
(i) All India Bank Officers’ Association, (ii) All India Bank Officers’
Confederation, (iii) Bank Employees Federation of India, (iv) All India
Bank Employees Association, and (v) National Confederation of Bank
Employees to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention
to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
2. The Committee then took the oral evidence of the representatives
of above Associations/Confederations on the provisions of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
3. Thereafter, the members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

50
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 6th January, 2006 from
1030 hours to 1230 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
7. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
8. Shri Rupchand Pal
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.P . Goenka
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
14. Shri Yashwant Sinha
15. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.C. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary

51
WITNESSES
1. State Bank of India
Shri A.K. Purwar, Chairman
2. Bank of India
Shri M. Balachandran, Chairman and Managing Director
3. Allahabad Bank
Shri O.N. Singh, Chairman and Managing Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the (i) State Bank of India, (ii) Bank of India, and (iii) Allahabad Bank
to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took the oral evidence of the representatives
of above Banks on the provisions of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
4. Thereafter, the members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses. The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written
replies to some of the queries in respect of which information was not
readily available with them during the evidence.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

52
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 19th January, 2006 from 1030 hrs.
to 1210 hrs. and 1225 hrs. to 1305 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Ashok K. Jha, Secretary
2. Shri Vinod Rai, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary

53
National Housing Bank
1. Shri R.V . Verma, Executive Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Ministry of Finance and invited their attention to the provisions
contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
Part I
(1030—1210 hours)
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005. Thereafter, the Members
asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by the
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that
the information with regard to queries of the Members which was not
readily available with them might be furnished to the Committee later
on.
Part II
(1225—1305 hours)
4. ** ** ** **
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

54
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 4th April, 2006 from 1030 hrs. to
1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
17. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
18. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
19. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
20. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary

55
WITNESSES
Investors’ Grievances Forum
1. Dr. Kirit Somaiya, President
2. Shri Hinesh Doshi, Vice President
3. Shri S. Vedula, General Secretary
2. ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** **
6. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft
report on the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
The Committee, after deliberation, adopted the same with the
modifications/amendments shown in the Annexure.
7. Some Members desired to submit notes of dissent on certain
proposals of the Bill. The Chairman informed them that they could
send the notes by 7 April, 2006.
8. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
report in the light of the amendments/suggestions made by the
Members and also to make consequential verbal changes and present
the same to the Hon’ble Speaker/both Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

56
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS  MADE  BY  STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) AND FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 4 APRIL, 2006]
Page No. 21
Para No. 46,
Line 4 from below
For “…to provide for mandatory initiation of prior action for filling
up the vacancies on the Boards, well in advance to their likely
occurrence,.…”
Substitute “… to provide for mandatory initiation of prior action
for filling up the vacancies on the Boards, three months in advance
to their likely occurrence,.…”

57
APPENDIX
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
16 August, 2005
Bill No. 103 of 2005
THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER
OF UNDERTAKINGS) AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LAWS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, the State Bank of India Act,
1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, the Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, the Export-
Import Bank of India Act, 1981 and the National Housing Bank Act,
1987.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

58
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1970
2. In section 2 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Bank Nationalisation Act),—
(a) after clause (b), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ba) “Chief Executive Officer” means
the Chief Executive Officer appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 18E;’;
(b) for clause (fa), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(fa) “Financial Restructuring Authority”
means the Authority established under sub-
section (1) of section 18B;
(fb) “prescribed” means prescribed by
regulations made under this Act;’.
3. In section 9 of the Bank Nationalisation
Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (c),
the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ca) the manner in which the excess
number of directors shall retire under
second proviso to clause (i) of sub-section
(3);”;
(b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words “not
more than two whole-time directors”,
the words “not more than four whole-
time directors” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 2.
Amendment
of section 9.
5 of 1970.

59
(ii) clauses (c) and (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) for clause (i), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(i) where the capital issued under
clause (c) of sub-section (2B) of section 3
is‚—
(I) not more than sixteen per cent of
the total paid-up capital, one director;
(II) more than sixteen per cent but not
more than thirty-two per cent. of the total
paid-up capital, two directors;
(III) more than thirty-two per cent of
the total paid-up capital, three directors,
to be elected by the shareholders, other
than the Central Government, from
amongst themselves:
Provided that on the assumption of
charge after election of any such director
under this clause, equal number of directors
nominated under clause (h) shall retire in
such manner as may be specified in the
scheme:
Provided further that in case the
number of director selected, on or before
the commencement of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005, in a
corresponding new bank exceed the number
of directors specified in sub-clause (I) or
sub-clause (II) or sub-clause (III), as the case
may be, such excess number of directors
elected before such commencement shall
retire in such manner as may be specified
in the scheme and no such directors shall
be entitled to claim any compensation for
the premature retirement of their term of
office.”.

60
4. After section 9 of the Bank
Nationalisation Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘9A. (1) If the Reserve bank is of the
opinion that in the interest of banking
policy or in the public interest or in the
interests of the corresponding new bank or
its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it
may, from time to time, by order in writing,
appoint, with effect from such date as may
be specified in the order, one or more
persons to hold office as additional directors
of the corresponding new bank.
(2) Any person appointed as an
additional director in pursuance of this
section—
(a) shall hold office during the pleasure
of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for
a period not exceeding three years or such
further periods not exceeding three years
at a time as the Reserve Bank may specify;
(b) shall not incur any obligation or
liability by reason only of his being a
director or for anything done or omitted to
be done in good faith in the execution of
the duties of his office or in relation thereto;
and
(c) shall not be required to hold
qualification shares in the corresponding
new bank.
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any
proportion of the total number of directors
of the corresponding new bank, any
additional director appointed under this
section shall not be taken into account.”.
5. In section 10A of the Bank
Nationalisation Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words
“shall be entitled to discuss”, the words
“shall be entitled to discuss, approve and
adopt” shall be substituted;
Insertion of
new section
9A.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
appoint
additional
director.
Amendment
of section
10A.

61
(b) after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section
shall apply during the period for which the
Board of Directors of a corresponding new
bank had been superseded under
sub-section (1) of section 18A:
Provided that the Financial
Restructuring Authority may, if it considers
it appropriate in the interest of the
corresponding new bank whose Board of
Directors had been superseded, call annual
general meeting in accordance with the
provisions of this section.”.
6. After section 10A of the Bank
Nationalisation Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘10B. (1) There shall be attached to the
balance-sheet of corresponding new bank
having a subsidiary, or, subsidiaries at the
end of the financial year as at which the
corresponding new bank’s balance-sheet is
made out, the following documents in
respect of such subsidiary or of each such
subsidiary, as the case may be:—
(a) a copy of the balance-sheet of the
subsidiary;
(b) a copy of its profit and loss account;
(c) a copy of the report of its Board of
Directors;
(d) a copy of the report of its auditors;
(e) a statement of the corresponding
new bank’s interest in the subsidiary as
specified in sub-section (3);
(f) the statement referred to in
sub-section (5), if any; and
Insertion of
new
sections 10B
and 10C.
Balance-
sheet of
corresponding
new bank
to include
certain
particulars
as to its
subsidiary.

62
(g) the report referred to in sub-section
(6), if any.
(2) (a) The balance-sheet referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be made
out in accordance with the requirements of
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or any
other law for the time being in force,—
(i) as at the end of the financial
year of the subsidiary, where such
financial year coincides with the
financial year of the corresponding new
bank;
(ii) as at the end of the financial
year of the subsidiary last before that
of the corresponding new bank where
the financial year of the subsidiary does
not coincide with that of the
corresponding new bank.
(b) The profit and loss account and the
reports of the Board of Directors and of
the auditors, referred to in clauses (b), (c)
and (d) of sub-section (1), shall be made
out, in accordance with the requirements
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or any
other law for the time being in force, for
the financial year of the subsidiary referred
to in clause (a).
(c) Where the financial year of the
subsidiary does not coincide with that of
the corresponding new bank, the financial
year aforesaid of the subsidiary shall not
end on a day which precedes the day on
which the corresponding new bank’s
financial year ends by more than six
months.
(d) Where the financial year of the
subsidiary is shorter in duration than that
of its corresponding new bank, references
to the financial year of the subsidiary in
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.

63
clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall be construed
as references to two or more financial years
of the subsidiary the duration of which, in
the aggregate, is not less than the duration
of the corresponding new bank’s financial
year.
(3) The statement referred to in clause (e)
of sub-section (I) shall specify—
(a) the extent of the corresponding new
bank’s interest in the subsidiary at the end
of the financial year or of the last of the
financial years of the subsidiary referred to
in sub-section (2);
(b) the net aggregate amount, so far as
it concerns shareholders of the
corresponding new bank and is not dealt
with in the bank’s accounts, of the
subsidiary’s profits after deducting its losses
or vice versa —
(i) for the financial year or years of
the subsidiary aforesaid; and
(ii) for the previous financial years
of the subsidiary since it became the
corresponding new bank’s subsidiary;
(c) the net aggregate amount of the
profits of the subsidiary after deducting its
losses or vice versa —
(i) for the financial year or years of
the subsidiary aforesaid; and
(ii) for the previous financial years
of the subsidiary since it became the
corresponding new bank’s subsidiary,
so far as those profits are dealt with,
or provision is made for those losses,
in the bank’s accounts.

64
(4) Clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section
(3) shall apply only to profits and losses of
the subsidiary which may properly be
treated in the corresponding new bank’s
accounts as revenue profits or losses, and
the profits or losses attributable to any
shares in a subsidiary for the time being
held by the corresponding new bank or any
other of its subsidiaries shall not (for that
or any other purpose) be treated as
aforesaid so far as they are profits or losses
for the period before the date on or as from
which the shares were acquired by the bank
or any of its subsidiaries and for the
purpose of determining whether any profits
or losses are to be treated as profits or
losses for the said period, the profit or loss
for any financial year of the subsidiary may,
if it is not practicable to apportion it with
reasonable accuracy by reference to the
facts, be treated as accruing from day-to-
day during that year and be apportioned
accordingly.
(5) Where the financial year or years
of a subsidiary referred to in sub-section
(2) do not coincide with the financial year
of the corresponding new bank, a statement
containing information on the following
matters shall also be attached to the
balance-sheet of the corresponding new
bank, namely:—
(a) whether there has been any, and, if
so, what change in the corresponding new
bank’s interest in the subsidiary between
the end of the financial year or of the last
of the financial years of the subsidiary and
the end of the corresponding new bank’s
financial year;
(b) details of any material changes
which have occurred between the end of
the financial year or of the last of the

65
financial years of the subsidiary and the
end of the corresponding new bank’s
financial year in respect of—
(i) the subsidiary’s fixed assets;
(ii) its investments;
(iii) the moneys lent by it;
(iv) the moneys borrowed by it for
any purpose other than that of meeting
current liabilities.
(6) If, for any reason, the Board of
Directors of the corresponding new bank
is unable to obtain information on any of
the matters required to be specified by
sub-section (4), a report in writing to that
effect shall be attached to the balance-sheet
of the corresponding new bank.
(7) The documents referred to in clauses
(e), (f) and (g) of sub-section (1) shall be
signed by the persons by whom the
balance-sheet of the corresponding new
bank is required to be signed.
(8) The Central Government may, on
the application or with the consent of the
Board of Directors of the bank, direct that
in relation to any subsidiary, the provisions
of this section shall not apply, or shall
apply only to such extent as may be
specified in the direction.
10C. (1) Where, after the
commencement of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2005, a dividend has
been declared by a corresponding new bank
but has not been paid or claimed within
forty two days from the date of declaration,
to, or by, any shareholder entitled to the
payment of the dividend, the corresponding
new bank shall, within seven days from
the date of the expiry of such period of
forty two days, transfer the total amount
Transfer of
unpaid or
unclaimed
dividend to
unpaid
dividend
Account.

66
of dividend which remains unpaid or
unclaimed within the said period of forty-
two days, to a special account to be called
“Unpaid Dividend Account of … (the name
of the corresponding new bank).”.
Explanation.— In this sub-section, the
expression “dividend which remains unpaid”
means any dividend the warrant in respect
thereof has not been encashed or which has
otherwise not been paid or claimed.
(2) Where the whole or any part of any
dividend, declared by a corresponding new
bank before the commencement of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2005, remains unpaid at such
commencement, the corresponding new bank
shall, within a period of six months from such
commencement, transfer such unpaid amount
to the account referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid
dividend account of a corresponding new bank
in pursuance of this section which remains
unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven
years from the date of such transfer, shall be
transferred by the corresponding new bank to
the Investor Education and Protection Fund
established under sub-section (1) of section
205C of the Companies Act, 1956.
(4) The money transferred under sub-section
(3) to the investor Education and Protection
Fund shall be utilised for the purposes and in
the manner specified in section 205C of the
Companies Act, 1956.’.
7. After section 18 of the Bank
Nationalisation Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“18A. (1) If at any time the Central
Government, on the recommendation of the
Reserve Bank, is of the opinion—
(a) that, on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the corresponding
new bank, such bank is unable to discharge
Insertion of
new sections
18A, 18B,
18C, 18D,
18E and 18F.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Board of
Directors of
new
corresponding
bank.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

67
the functions or perform the duties imposed
on it by or under the provisions of this
Act, or
(b) that a corresponding new bank has
persistently made default in complying with
any direction given by the Reserve Bank of
India or the Central Government under this
Act or any other law for the time being in
force or in discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it
by or under the provisions of this Act or
any other law for the time being in force
and as a result of such default the financial
position of the corresponding new bank or
the administration of such bank has
deteriorated, or
(c) the affairs of the corresponding new
bank are being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interest of its depositors
or banking policy, or
(d) that circumstances exist which
render it necessary in the public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by
notification and for reasons to be specified
therein, supersede the Board of Directors
of such corresponding new bank for such
period, not exceeding three years, as may
be specified in the notification and appoint
establish under section18B, an authority to
be known as the Financial Restructuring
Authority:
Provided that the Central Government may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend
such period from three years to five years:
Provided further that before issuing any
such notification, the Central Government shall
give a reasonable opportunity to the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank to

68
make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the
representations, if any, of the Board of Directors.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section (1) superseding the Board of
Directors of a corresponding new bank,—
(a) the Chairperson and other directors
shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, or any other law for the time
being in force, be exercised or discharged
by or on behalf of the Board of Directors
of such corresponding new bank or by a
resolution passed in general meeting of that
bank, shall, until the Board of Directors of
such corresponding new bank is re-
constituted under sub-section (3), be
exercised and discharged by the Financial
Restructuring Authority:
Provided that the powers, exercised by
the Financial Restructuring Authority shall
be valid notwithstanding that such powers
are exercisable by a resolution passed in
the general meeting of such a
corresponding new bank.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period
of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall re-constitute the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank by
a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and
other directors and in such case any person
who had vacated his office under clause (a) of
sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be
disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a
copy of the notification issued under sub-

69
section (1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each
House of Parliament at the earliest.
18B. (1) The Central Government shall, on
supersession of the Board of Directors of the
corresponding new bank under sub-section (1)
of section 18A, establish an authority to be
known as Financial Restructuring Authority.
(2) The Financial Restructuring Authority
shall consist of not less than three, but not
exceeding seven members to be appointed by
the Central Government from amongst persons
of ability, integrity and standing who have
knowledge and experience in banking, finance,
economics, law, accountancy, administration or
any other discipline which would in the
opinion of the Central Government be useful
to the corresponding new bank.
(3) The Central Government shall appoint
one of the Members as the Chairperson of the
Financial restructuring Authority .
(4) The salary and allowances payable to
and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority shall be such as may
be specified, by rules made by the Central
Government.
(5) The salary and allowances and other
conditions of service of the Chairperson and
Members of the Financial Restructuring
Authority shall not be varied to his
disadvantage after appointment.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to
the Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority and the Chief Executive
Officer of the corresponding new bank shall be
borne by the corresponding new bank in
respect of which such an Authority has been
Establishment
of Financial
Restructuring
Authority.

70
established and a Chief Executive Officer
appointed.
18C. (1) The Financial Restructuring
Authority shall meet at such times and places
and shall observe such rules and procedures in
regard to transaction of business at its meeting
(including quorum of such meeting) as may be
specified, by rules made by the Central
Government.
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reasons, is
unable to attend a meeting of the Financial
Restructuring Authority , any other Member
chosen by the Members present amongst
themselves at the meeting shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any
meeting of the Financial Restructuring
Authority shall be decided by a majority of
votes by the Members present and voting, and
in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence the person
presiding shall have second or casting vote.
18D. (1) No act or proceeding of the
Financial Restructuring Authority shall be
invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in
the constitution of, the Financial
Restructuring Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person acting as a Member of the Financial
Restructuring Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the Financial Restructuring Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
18E. (1) The Central Government shall, on
supersession of the Board of Directors of a
corresponding new bank under section 18B, by
notification, appoint any person not below the
Meeting of
Financial
Restructuring
Authority.
Vacancy,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Financial
Restructuring
Authority.
Chief
Executive
Officer.

71
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of
India or an Executive  Director of any
corresponding new bank as the Chief Executive
of the bank whose Board of Directors had been
superseded under that section.
(2) The Chief  Executive Officer shall hold
office for a term not exceeding three years from
the date on which he enters upon his office or
reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the
corresponding new bank referred to in section
18B, whichever is earlier.
(3) The other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Executive Officer shall be
such as may be specified, by rules made by
the Central Government.
(4) Subject to general superintendence,
direction and management of the affairs by the
Financial Restructuring Authority, the Chief
Executive Officer shall be the Chief Executive
Authority of the corresponding new bank
whose Board of Directors had been superseded.
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall be
ex officio Member of the Financial Restructuring
Authority.
(6) the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise
and discharge such powers and duties of the
corresponding new bank, whose Board of
Directors had been superseded, as may be
specified by the Financial Restructuring
Authority.
18F. (1) the Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the salary and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of the
Power to
make rules.

72
Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority under sub-section
(4) of section 18B;
(b) the time and places of the meeting
of the Financial Restructuring Authority
under sub-section (1) of section 18C;
(c) the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Executive Officer under
sub-section (3) of section 18E.
(3) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.”.
CHAPTER III
A
MENDMENTS TO THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1980
8. In section 2 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1980 [hereafter in this Chapter referred to as
the Bank (Second) Nationalisation Act],—
(a) after clause (a), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ab) “Chief Executive Officer” means
the Chief Executive Officer appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 18E;’;
Amendment
of section 2.
40 of 1980.

73
(b) for clause (da), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(da) “Financial Restructuring
Authority” means the authority established
under sub-section (1) of section 18B;
(db) “Prescribed” means prescribed by
regulations made under this Act;’.
9. In section 9 of the Bank (Second)
Nationalisation Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (c),
the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ca) the manner in which the excess
number of directors shall retire under the
second proviso to clause (i) of sub-section
(3);”;
(b) in sub-section (3),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words “not
more than two whole-time directors”, the
words “not more than four whole-time
directors” shall be substituted;
(ii) clauses (c) and (d) shall be omitted;
(iii) for clause (i), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(i) where the capital issued under
clause (c) of sub-section (2B) of section 3
is—
(I) not more than sixteen per cent, of
the total paid-up capital, one director;
(II) more than sixteen per cent, but not
more than thirty-two per cent of the total
paid-up capital, two directors;
(III) more than thirty-two per cent of
the total paid-up capital, three directors,
Amendment
of section 9.

74
to be elected by the shareholders, other
than the Central Government, from
amongst themselves:
Provided that on the assumption of
charge after election of any such director
under this clause, equal number of directors
nominated under clause (h) shall retire in
such manner as may be specified in the
scheme:
Provided further that in case the
number of directors elected, on or before
the commencement of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005, in a
corresponding new bank exceed the number
of directors specified in sub-clause (I) or
sub-clause (II) or sub-clause (III), as the case
may be, such excess number of directors
elected before such commencement shall
retire in such manner as may be specified
in the scheme and no such directors shall
be entitled to claim any compensation for
the premature retirement of their term of
office.’.
10. After section 9 of the Bank (Second)
Nationalisation Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“9A. (1) If the Reserve Bank is of the
opinion that in the interest of banking
policy or in the public interest or in the
interests of the corresponding new bank or
its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it
may, from time to time, by order in writing,
appoint, with effect from such date as may
be specified in the order, one or more
persons to hold office as additional directors
of the corresponding new bank.
(2) Any person appointed as an additional
director in pursuance of this section—
(a) shall hold office during the pleasure
of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for
Insertion of
new section
9A.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
appoint
additional
director.

75
a period not exceeding three years or such
further periods not exceeding three years
at a time as the Reserve Bank may specify;
(b) shall not incur any obligation or
liability by reason only of his being a
director or for anything done or omitted to
be done in good faith in the execution of
the duties of his office or in relation thereto;
and
(c) shall not be required to hold
qualification shares in the corresponding
new bank.
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any
proportion of the total number of directors
of the corresponding new bank, any
additional director appointed under this
section shall not be taken into account.”.
11. In section 10A of the Bank (Second)
Nationalisation Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words
“shall be entitled to discuss”, the words
“shall be entitled to discuss, approve and
adopt” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section
shall apply during the period for which the
Board of Directors of a corresponding new
bank had been superseded under sub-
section (1) of section 18A:
Provided that the Financial
Restructuring Authority may, if it considers
it appropriate in the interest of the
corresponding new bank whose Board of
Directors had been superseded, call annual
general meeting in accordance with this
provision of this section.”.
Amendment
of section
10A.

76
12. After section 10A of the Bank (Second)
Nationalisation Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘10B (1) There shall be attached to the
balance sheet of corresponding new bank
having a subsidiary or, subsidiaries at the
end of the financial year as at which the
corresponding new bank’s balance sheet is
made out, the following documents in
respect of such subsidiary or of each such
subsidiary, as the case may be:—
(a) a copy of the balance sheet of the
subsidiary;
(b) a copy of its profit and loss account;
(c) a copy of the report of its Board of
Directors;
(d) a copy of the report of its auditors;
(e) a statement of the corresponding
new bank’s interest in the subsidiary as
specified in sub-section (3);
(f) the statement referred to in sub-
section (5), if any; and
(g) the report referred to in sub-section
(6), if any.
(2) (a) The balance-sheet referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be made
out in accordance with the requirements of
the Banking Regulation act, 1949 or any
other law for the time being in force,—
(i) as at the end of the financial
year of the subsidiary, where such
financial year coincides with the
financial year of the corresponding new
bank;
(ii) as at the end of the financial
year of the subsidiary last before that
Insertion of
new
sections 10B
and 10C.
Balance
sheet of
corresponding
new bank
to include
certain
particulars
as to its
subsidiary.
10 of 1949

77
of the corresponding new bank where
the financial year of the subsidiary does
not coincide with that of the
corresponding new bank.
(b) The profit and loss account and the
reports of the Board of Directors and of
the auditors, referred to in clauses (b), (c)
and (d) of sub-section (1), shall be made
out, in accordance with the requirements
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or any
other law for the time being in force, for
the financial year of the subsidiary referred
to in clause (a).
(c) Where the financial year of the
subsidiary does not coincide with that of
the corresponding new bank, the financial
year aforesaid of the subsidiary shall not
end on a day which precedes the day on
which the corresponding new bank’s
financial year ends by more than six
months.
(d) Where the financial year of the
subsidiary is shorter in duration than that
of its corresponding new bank, references
to the financial year of the subsidiary in
clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall be construed
as references to two or more financial years
of the subsidiary the duration of which, in
the aggregate, is not less than the duration
of the corresponding new bank’s financial
year.
(3) The statement referred to in clause (e)
of sub-section (1) shall specify—
(a) the extent of the corresponding new
bank’s interest in the subsidiary at the end
of the financial year or of the last of the
financial years of the subsidiary referred to
in sub-section (2);
(b) the net aggregate amount, so far as
it concerns shareholders of the
10 of 1949.

78
corresponding new bank and is not dealt
with in the bank’s accounts, of the
subsidiary’s profits after deducting its losses
or vice versa —
(i) for the financial year or years of
the subsidiary aforesaid; and
(ii) for the previous financial years
of the subsidiary since it became the
corresponding new bank’s subsidiary;
(c) the net aggregate amount of the
profits of the subsidiary after deducting its
losses or vice versa —
(i) for the financial year or years of
the subsidiary aforesaid; and
(ii) for the previous financial years
of the subsidiary since it became the
corresponding new bank’s subsidiary,
so far as those profits are dealt with,
or provision is made for those losses,
in the bank’s accounts.
(4) Clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (3)
shall apply only to profits and losses of the
subsidiary which may properly be treated in
the corresponding new bank’s accounts as
revenue profits or losses, and the profits or
losses attributable to any shares in a subsidiary
for the time being held by the corresponding
new bank or any other of its subsidiaries shall
not (for that or any other purpose) be treated
as aforesaid so far as they are profits or losses
for the period before the date on or as from
which the shares were acquired by the bank or
any of its subsidiaries and for the purpose of
determining whether any profits or losses are
to be treated as profits or losses for the said
period, the profit or loss for any financial year
of the subsidiary may, if it is not practicable to
apportion it with reasonable accuracy by

79
reference to the facts, be treated as accruing
from day-to-day during that year and be
apportioned accordingly.
(5) Where the financial year or years of a
subsidiary referred to in sub-section (2) do not
coincide with the financial year of the
corresponding new bank, a statement containing
information on the following matters shall also
be attached to the balance-sheet of the
corresponding new bank, namely:—
(a) whether there has been any, and, if
so, what change in the corresponding new
bank’s interest in the subsidiary between
the end of the financial year or of the last
of the financial years of the subsidiary and
the end of the corresponding new bank’s
financial year;
(b) details of any material changes
which have occurred between the end of
the financial year or of the last of the
financial years of the subsidiary and the
end of the corresponding new bank’s
financial year in respect of—
(i) the subsidiary’s fixed assets;
(ii) its investments;
(iii) the moneys lent by it;
(iv) the moneys borrowed by it for
any purpose other than that of meeting
current liabilities.
(6) If, for any reason, the Board of Directors
of the corresponding new bank is unable to
obtain information on any of the matters
required to be specified by sub-section (4), a
report in writing to that effect shall be attached
to the balance-sheet of the corresponding new
bank.
(7) The documents referred to in clauses
(e), (f) and (g) of sub-section (l) shall be signed

80
by the persons by whom the balance-sheet of
the corresponding new bank is required to be
signed.
(8) The Central Government may, on the
application or with the consent of the Board of
Directors of the bank, direct that in relation to
any subsidiary, the provisions of this section
shall not apply, or shall apply only to such
extent as may be specified in the direction.
10C. (1) Where, after the commencement
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005, a
dividend has been declared by a corresponding
new bank but has not been paid or claimed
within forty-two days from the date of
declaration, to, or by, any shareholder entitled
to the payment of the dividend, the
corresponding new bank shall, within seven
days form the date of the expiry of such period
of forty-two days, transfer the total amount of
dividend which remains unpaid or unclaimed
within the said period of forty-two days, to a
special account to be called “Unpaid Dividend
Account of … (the name of the corresponding
bank).”.
Explanation.— In this sub-section, the
expression “dividend which remain unpaid”
means any dividend the warrant in respect
thereof has not been encashed or which has
otherwise not been paid or claimed.
(2) Where the whole or any part of any
dividend, declared by a corresponding new
bank before the commencement of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2005, remains unpaid at such
commencement, the corresponding new bank
shall, within a period of six months from such
commencement, transfer such unpaid amount
to the account referred to in sub-section (1).
Transfer for
Unpaid or
unclaimed
Dividend to
Unpaid
Dividend
Accounts.

81
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid
dividend account of a corresponding new bank
in pursuance of this section which remains
unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven
years from the date of such transfer, shall be
transferred by the corresponding new bank to
the Investor Education and Protection Fund
established under sub-section (1) of section
205C of the Companies Act, 1956.
(4) The money transferred under sub-section
(3) to the Investor Education and Protection
Fund shall be utilised for the purposes and in
the manner specified in section 205C of the
Companies Act, 1956.”.
13. After section 18 of the Bank (Second)
Nationalisation Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“18A. (1) If at any time the Central
Government, on the recommendation of the
Reserve Bank, is of the opinion—
(a) that, on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the corresponding
new bank, such bank  is unable to
discharge the functions or perform the
duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)
Act, 1980, or
(b) that a corresponding new bank has
persistently made default in complying with
any direction given by the Reserve Bank of
India or the Central Government under this
Act or any other law for the time being in
force or in the discharge of the functions
or performance of the duties imposed on it
by or under the provisions of this Act or
any other law for the time being in force
and as a result of such default the financial
position of the corresponding new bank or
the administration of such bank has
deteriorated, or
Insertion of
new sections
18A, 18B,
18C, 18D,
18E and 18F.
Power of
Central
Government
to
supersede
Board of
Directors of
new
corresponding
bank.
40 of 1980.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

82
(c) the affairs of the corresponding new
bank are being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interest of its depositors
or banking policy, or
(d) that circumstances exist which
render it necessary in the public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by notification
and for reasons to be specified therein,
supersede the Board of Directors of such,
corresponding new bank for such period, not
exceeding three years, as may be specified in
the notification and establish under section 18B,
an authority to be known as the Financial
Restructuring Authority:
Provided that the Central Government may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend
such period from three years to five years:
Provided further that before issuing any
such notification, the Central Government shall
give a reasonable opportunity to the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank to
make representations against the proposed
supersession and shall consider the
representations, if any, of the Board of Directors.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section (1) superseding the Board of
Directors of a corresponding  new bank,—
(a) the Chairperson and other directors
shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, or any other law for the time
being in force, be exercised or discharged
by or on behalf of the Board of Directors
of such corresponding new bank or by a
resolution passed in general meeting of that

83
bank, shall, until the Board of Directors of
such corresponding new bank is re-
constituted under sub-section (3), be
exercised and discharged by the Financial
Restructuring Authority:
Provided that the powers, exercised by the
Financial Restructuring Authority shall be valid
notwithstanding that such powers are
exercisable by a resolution passed in the general
meeting of such a corresponding new bank.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period
of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall reconstitute the Board of
Directors of such corresponding new bank by
a fresh appointment of its Chairperson and
other directors and in such case any person
who had vacated his office under clause (a) of
sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be
disqualified for re-appointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a
copy of the notification issued under sub-
section (1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances
leading to such action to be laid before each
House of Parliament at the earliest.
18B. (1) The Central  Government shall, on
supersession of the Board of Directors of the
corresponding new bank under sub-section (1)
of section 18A, establish an authority to be
known as Financial Restructuring Authority.
(2) The Financial Restructuring Authority
shall consist of not less than three, but not
exceeding seven members to be appointed by
the Central Government from amongst persons
of ability, integrity and standing who have
knowledge and experience in banking, finance,
economics, law, accountancy, administration or
any other discipline which would in the
opinion of the Central Government be useful
to the corresponding new bank.
Establishment
of Financial
Restructuring
Authority.

84
(3) The Central Government shall appoint
one of the Members as the Chairperson of the
Financial Restructuring Authority .
(4) The salary and allowances payable to
and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority shall be such as may
be specified, by rules made by the Central
Government.
(5) The salary and allowances and other
conditions of service of the Chairperson and
Members of the Financial Restructuring
Authority shall not be varied to his
disadvantage after appointment.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to
the Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority and the Chief Executive
Officer of the corresponding new banks shall
be borne by the corresponding new bank in
respect of which such an Authority has been
established and a Chief Executive Officer
appointed.
18C. (1) The Financial Restructuring
Authority shall meet at such times and places
and shall observe such rules and procedures in
regard to the transaction of business at its
meeting (including quorum of such meeting)
as may be specified, by rules made by the
Central Government.
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reasons, is
unable to attend a meeting of the Financial
Restructuring Authority , any other Member
chosen by the Members present amongst
themselves at the meeting shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any
meeting of the Financial Restructuring
Authority shall be decided by a majority of
votes by the Members present and voting, and
Meeting of
Financial
Restructuring
Authority.

85
in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence the person
presiding shall have second or casting vote.
18D. (1) No act or proceeding of the
Financial Restructuring Authority shall be
invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in
the constitution of, the Financial
Restructuring Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person acting as a Member of the Financial
Restructuring Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the Financial Restructuring Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
18E. (1) The Central Government shall, on
supersession of the Board of Directors of a
corresponding new bank under section 18BN,
by notification, appoint any person not below
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government
of India or an Executive Director of any
corresponding new bank as the Chief Executive
of the bank whose Board of Directors have been
superseded under that section.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall hold
office for a term not exceeding three years from
the date on which he enters upon his office or
reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the
corresponding new bank referred to in section
18B, whichever is earlier.
(3) The other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Executive Officer shall be
such as may be specified by rules made by the
Central Government.
(4) Subject to the general superintendence,
direction and management of the affairs by
the Financial Restructuring Authority , the
Vacancy,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of Financial
Restructuring
Authority.
Chief
Executive
Officer.

86
Chief Executive Officer shall be the Chief
Executive Authority of the corresponding new
bank whose Board of Directors have been
superseded.
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall be
ex-officio Member of the Financial Restructuring
authority.
(6) The Chief Executive Officer shall
exercise and discharge such powers and duties
of the corresponding new bank, whose Board
of Directors had been superseded, as may be
specified by the Financial Restructuring
Authority.
18F. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the salary and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and Members of the Financial
Restructuring Authority under sub-section
(4) of section 18B;
(b) the time and places of the meeting
of the Financial Restructuring Authority
under sub-section (1) of section 18C;
(c) the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chief Executive Officer under
sub-section (3) of section 18E.
(3) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
Power to
make rules.

87
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.”.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENTS TO THE S TATE B ANK OF
INDIA A CT, 1955
14. In section 20 of the State Bank of India
Act, 1955 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to
as the State Bank Act), in sub-section (3), the
words “and thereafter until his successor shall
have been duly elected” shall be omitted.
15. In section 21A of the State Bank Act, in
sub-section (1), the words “and thereafter until
his successor has been duly nominated” shall
be omitted.
CHAPTER V
A
MENDMENTS TO THE S TATE B ANK OF INDIA
(SUBSIDIARY B ANK) A CT, 1959
16. In section 26 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959,—
(a) in sub-section (2), the words “and
thereafter until his successor is duly
elected” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (2A), for the words
“and thereafter until his successor shall
have been duly nominated or appointed”,
the words “and thereafter until his
successor shall have been duly appointed”
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
20.
Amendment
of section
21A.
Amendment
of Act 38
of 1959.

88
CHAPTER VI
AMENDMENTS TO C ERTAIN OTHER E NACTMENTS
17. In section 6 of the Deposit Insurance
and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961,
in sub-section (2), in clause (ii), the words “and
thereafter until his successor assumes office”
shall be omitted.
18. In section 6 of the Export-Import Bank
of India Act, 1981, in sub-section (6), the words
“and thereafter until his successors enters upon
his office” shall be omitted.
19. In section 7 of the National Housing
Bank Act, 1987, in sub-section (2), the proviso
shall be omitted.
Amendment
of Act 47
of 1961.
Amendment
of Act 28
of 1981.
Amendment
of Act 53
of 1987.

89
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Fourteen major Indian Scheduled banks, each with deposits of
rupees fifty crores or more, were nationalised in July, 1969 by the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1969. However, the Supreme Court by a majority judgment delivered
on the 10 th day of February, 1970 declared the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969, void. With a
view to resume control over these banks, the President promulgated,
on the 14 th day of February, 1970, the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1970. The said Ordinance
was replaced by the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970. Subsequently, six Indian private banks, each
having deposits of rupees two hundred crores or more, were
nationalised by the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Ordinance, 1980, promulgated by the President, on the
15
th day of April, 1980. The said Ordinance was also replaced by the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1980. Following the merger of two of the nationalised banks there are
presently 19 nationalised banks.
2. The aforesaid two Acts of 1970 and 1980 originally envisaged
that the paid-up capital of these banks may be raised either by transfer
from the reserve fund or by contribution by the Central Government.
In 1994, the said Acts were amended to provide that the paid-up
capital of these banks may be increased by such amounts as the Board
of Directors of the bank may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank
of India with the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise
by public issue of shares in such manner as may be prescribed, so
that the Central Government shall, at all times, hold not less than 51%
of the paid-up capital of each such bank. The shareholding pattern of
the fifteen nationalised banks which had gone in for public issues
varies from 51% to 77%. The Central Government holds the entire
equity in four nationalised banks and has majority equity shareholding
in fifteen nationalised banks.
3. In addition to the changes in the pattern of shareholding in
nationalised banks introduced in 1994, some other provisions of the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Acts,
1970 and 1980 also require amendments so as to bring the operation
of these banks in tune with the changed scenario and modern business
practices.

90
4. The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2000
was introduced on 13 th December, 2000 in the Lok Sabha and had
lapsed due to dissolution of the 13 th Lok Sabha. The proposed
amendment mentioned in sub-paragraphs (b) to (h) of paragraph
5 below are broadly the same which were incorporated in the earlier
Bill. However, the amendment relating to reduction of prescribed
minimum shareholding of the Central Government in nationalised
banks from 51% to 33% as mentioned in the earlier Bill has been
omitted in the amendments proposed in the present Bill.
5. It is proposed to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, inter alia, to—
(a) allow one to three shareholder directors on the Board of
the nationalised banks on the basis of issued capital of the bank
instead of one to six directors as per existing provisions so as to
provide for a more equitable representation on the Board of
Directors of the nationalised banks on the basis of percentage of
ownership in such banks;
(b) omit the provisions relating to mandatory nomination of
directors by the Reserve Bank of India and financial institutions
on the Board of nationalised banks, etc.;
(c) confer power upon the Reserve Bank to appoint one or
more additional directors;
(d) increase the number of whole-time directors from two to
four to have more functional directors in view of expansion of
activities of the nationalised banks;
(e) empower the shareholders of nationalised banks to discuss,
adopt and approve the Directors’ report, the annual accounts and
the balance-sheet of the bank for the period covered by such
accounts at their annual general meeting;
(f) the enable the banks to transfer the unclaimed dividends
for more than seven years to Investor Education and Protection
Fund established by the Central Government under section 205C
of the Companies Act, 1956;
(g) prescribe annexing of the details of the subsidiary or
subsidiaries such as balance-sheet, profit and loss accounts and
reports of auditors along with the annual report of the bank;

91
(h) empower the Central Government to supersede, on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank of India, the Board of
Directors of any nationalised bank and constitute the Financial
Restructuring Authority and appoint a Chief Executive Officer of
such bank.
6. The State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, the Deposit Insurance and Credit
Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961, the Export-Import Bank of India Act,
1981, and the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, provide that the part-
time non-official directors on the Boards of Directors of financial
institutions under the said Acts shall hold office for a period of three
years or until a successor is appointed subject to a maximum period
of six years. Since a large number of part-time non-official directors in
banks and financial institutions continued to hold office even after
expiry of their term as their successor could not be appointed in time,
it is proposed to amend the said Acts so as to provide that such non-
official directors will vacate their office whether their successor is
appointed or not. These amendments are on the lines of the provisions
for part-time non-official directors in the nationalised banks. For the
workmen and officer directors, the existing provisions are proposed to
be continued.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
New Delhi; P . CHIDAMBARAM.
The 8th August, 2005.

92
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill, inter alia,  contains provisions that the Central
Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein,
supersede the Board of Directors of any corresponding new bank for
such period, not exceeding three years, as may be specified in the
notification and appoint under section 18B an authority to be known
as the Financial Restructuring Authority and a Chief Executive Officer
under section 18E. Similarly provisions relating to the corresponding
new banks constituted under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 are provided in clause 13 of the
Bill. The expenditure on the Financial Restructuring Authority and the
Chief Executive Officer will be borne by the concerned corresponding
new bank and no expenditure is envisaged from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
2. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure
of recurring or non-recurring nature.

93
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert new section 18F in the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970 which confers power upon the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the said Act. The matters in respect
of which such rules may be made relate, inter alia,  to the salary and
allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of the
Chairperson and Members of the Financial Restructuring Authority
under sub-section (4) of section 18B; the time and places of the meeting
of the Financial Restructuring Authority under sub-section (1) of section
18C; the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer
under sub-section (3) of section 18E.
2. Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to insert new section 18F in the
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1980, which confers power upon the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the said Act. The matters in
respect of which such rules may be made relate, inter alia,  to the
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
the Chairperson and Members of the Financial Restructuring Authority
under sub-section (4) of section 18B; the time and places of the meeting
of the Financial Restructuring Authority under sub-section (1) of section
18C; the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer
under sub-section (3) of section 18E.
3. The rules made by the Central Government shall be laid, as
soon as may be, after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.

94
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE B ANKING C OMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND
TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS) A CT, 1970
(5 OF 1970)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
* * * * *
(fa) “prescribed” means prescribed by
regulations made under this Act;
* * * * *
9. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, the said
scheme may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(3) Every Board of Directors of a
corresponding new bank, constituted under any
scheme made under sub-section (1), shall
include—
(a) not more than two whole-time
directors to be appointed by the Central
Government after consultation with the
Reserve Bank;
(b) one director who is an official of
the Central Government to be nominated
by the Central Government:
Provided that no such director shall be a
director of any other corresponding new bank.
Definitions.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
scheme.

95
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
clause, the expression “corresponding new
bank” shall include a corresponding new
bank within the meaning of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980;
(c) one director who is an officer of
the Reserve Bank to be nominated by the
Central Government on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this
clause, “an officer of the Reserve Bank”
includes an officer of the Reserve Bank who
is deputed by that Bank under section
54AA of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 to any institution referred to therein;
(d) not more than two directors to be
nominated by the Central Government from
amongst the Securities and Exchange Board
of India established under section 3 of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992, the National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development established under
section 3 of the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development Act,
1981, public financial institutions as
specified in sub-section (1), or notified from
time to time under sub-section (2) of section
4A of the Companies Act, 1956 and other
institutions established or constituted by or
under any Central Act or incorporated
under the Companies Act, 1956 and having
not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid-
up share capital held or controlled by the
Central Government;
* * * * *
(i) where the capital issued under
clause (c) of sub-section (2B) of section (3)
is—
(I) not more than twenty per cent
of the total paid-up capital, not more
than two directors,
40 of 1980.
2 of 1934.
15 of 1992.
61 of 1981.
1 of 1956.

96
(II) more than twenty per cent but
not more than forty per cent of the total
paid-up capital, not more than four
directors,
(III) more than fourty per cent, of
the total paid-up capital, not more than
six directors,
to be elected by the shareholders, other
than the Central Government, from the
amongst themselves:
Provided that on the assumption of charge
after election of any such directors under this
clause, equal number of directors nominated
under clause (h) shall retire in such manner as
may be specified in the scheme.
10A. (1) * * * * *
(2) The shareholders present at an annual
general meeting shall be entitled to discuss the
balance-sheet and the profit and loss account
of the corresponding new bank made up to
the previous 31
st day of March, the report of
the Board of Directors on the working and
activities of the corresponding new bank for
the period covered by the accounts and the
auditor’s report on the balance-sheet and
accounts.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1980
(40 OF 1980)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
* * * * *
Definitions.
Annual
general
meeting.

97
(de) “prescribed” means prescribed by
regulations made under this Act;
* * * * *
9. (1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, the said
scheme may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(3) Every Board of Directors of a
corresponding new bank, constituted under any
scheme made under sub-section (1), shall
include—
(a) not more than two whole-time
directors to be appointed by the Central
Government after consultation with the
Reserve Bank;
(b) one director who is an official of
the Central Government to be nominated
by the Central Government:
Provided that no such director shall be
a director of any other corresponding new
bank.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
clause, the expression “corresponding new
bank” shall include a corresponding new
bank within the meaning of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970;
(c) one director who is an officer of
the Reserve Bank to be nominated by
the Central Government on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this
clause, “an officer of the Reserve bank”
Power of
Central
Government
to make
scheme.
5 of 1970.

98
include an officer of the Reserve Bank who
is deputed by that Bank under section
54AA of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 to any institution referred to therein;
(d) not more than two directors to be
nominated by the Central Government from
amongst the Securities and Exchange Board
of India established under section 3 of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992, the National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development established under
section 3 of the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development Act,
1981, public financial institutions as
specified in sub-section (1), or notified from
time to time under sub-section (2), of
section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
other institutions established or constituted
by or under any Central Act or
incorporated under the Companies Act,
1956 and having not less than fifty-one per
cent of the paid-up share capital held or
controlled by the Central Government;
* * * * *
(i) where the capital issued under
clause (c) of sub-section (2B) of section (3)
is—
(i) not more than twenty per cent
of the total paid-up capital, not more
than two directors,
(ii) more than twenty per cent but
not more than forty per cent of the total
paid-up capital, not more than four
directors,
(iii) more than forty per cent, of the
total paid-up capital, not more than six
directors,
to be elected by the shareholders, other than
the Central Government, from amongst
themselves:
2 of 1934.
15 of 1992.
1 of 1956.
61 of 1981.

99
Provided that on the assumption of charge
after election of any such directors under this
clause, equal number of directors nominated
under clause (h) shall retire in such manner as
may be specified in the scheme.
10A. (1) * * * * *
(2) The shareholders present at an annual
general meeting shall be entitled to discuss the
balance sheet and the profit and loss account
of the corresponding new bank made up to
the previous 31st day of March, the report of
the Board of Directors on the working and
activities of the corresponding new bank for
the period covered by the accounts and the
auditor’s report on the balance-sheet and
accounts.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA A CT,
1955
(23 OF 1955)
* * * * *
20. (1) * * * * *
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in
section 19, a director elected under clause (c)
of that section shall hold office for three years
and thereafter until his successor shall have
been duly elected, and shall be eligible for
re-election.
Provided that no such director shall hold
office continuously for a period exceeding six
years.
* * * * *
21A. (1) Subject to the provisions contained
in this section and in sub-section (2) of section
21, a member of a Local Board nominated
under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 21
Annual
general
meeting.
Term of
office of
chairman,
managing
director, etc.
Term of
office of
members of
Local
Board.

100
shall hold office for such term, not exceeding
three years, as the Central Government may
specify in this behalf and thereafter until his
successor has been duly nominated and shall
be eligible for re-nomination:
Provided that no such director shall hold
office continuously for a period exceeding six
years.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA
(SUBSIDIARY B ANKS) A CT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
* * * * *
26. (1) * * * * *
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in
section 25, a director elected  under clause (d)
of sub-section (1) of that section shall hold
office for three years and thereafter until his
successor is duly elected, and shall be eligible
for re-election:
Provided that no such director shall hold
office continuously for a period exceeding six
years.
(2A) Subject to the provisions contained in
section 25 and in sub-section (1), a director
nominated under clause (c) and not being an
officer of the State Bank or a director appointed
under clause (ca) or clause (cb) or a director,
not being an officer of the Central Government,
nominated under clause (e) of sub-section (1)
of section 25 shall hold office for such term
not exceeding three years, as the Central
Government may specify and thereafter until
his successor shall have been duly nominated
or appointed, and shall be eligible for
Term of
office of
directors.

101
re-nomination or re-appointment, as the case
may be:
Provided that no such director shall hold
office continuously for a period exceeding six
years.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE D EPOSIT I NSURANCE AND
CREDIT G UARANTEE C ORPORATION A CT, 1961
(47 OF 1961)
* * *              *  *
6. (1) * * * * *
(2) (i) * * * * *
(ii) A director nominated under clause
(d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1), shall
hold office for such period not exceeding
four years as may be specified by the
Central Government and thereafter until his
successor assumes office.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE E XPORT-IMPORT B ANK OF I NDIA
ACT, 1981
(28 OF 1981)
* * * * *
6. (1) * * * * *
(6) Subject to the provisions contained in
sub-section (7), any director nominated under
clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (e) of sub-
section (1) and not being an official of
Government or not being a whole-time director
Board of
Directors.
Constitution
of Board.

102
or official of the Reserve Bank or the
Development Bank or the said Export Credit
and Guarantee Corporation Limited or a
scheduled bank, shall hold office for such term,
not exceeding three years, as the Central
Government or, as the case may be, the
authority nominating him, may specify in this
behalf and thereafter until his successor enters
upon his office, and shall be eligible for re-
nomination:
Provided that no such director shall hold
office continuously for a period exceeding six
years.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE N ATIONAL H OUSING B ANK
ACT, 1987
(53 OF 1987)
* * * * *
7. (1) * * * * *
(2) The directors referred to in clauses (b)
and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 6 shall hold
office for a term of three years:
Provided that any such director shall,
notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
continue to hold office until his successor enters
upon his office.
* * * * *
Term of
office of
chairman,
managing
director and
other
directors,
service
conditions,
etc.

103
LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, the State Bank of India Act,
1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, the
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961,
the Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981 and the National
Housing Bank Act, 1987.
—————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)

THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE BANKING COMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)
AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LAWS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 24.4.2006
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.5.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2006/Chaitra, 1928 (Saka)