61 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
 
Demands for Grants 
(2007-08)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fifty -third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Planning] 
 
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


 2   
 
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2007-2008) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
Demands for Grants 
(2007-08)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fifty -third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Planning] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4 December, 2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 December,2007 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2007/ Agrahayana ,1929 (Saka)


 3   
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………        (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………    (iv) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………                 6 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/observations which have been  
accepted by the Government …………………..                10 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies ……………………………………………                   33 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee …………………………………….            34 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited ……..        35 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 28 November, 2007. ….36 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance  
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning……..          39 
 
 

 4   
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2007-2008) 
 
        Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe 
12. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
13. Shri R. Prabhu 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
17. Shri Lakshman Seth 
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
23. Shri Raashid Alvi 
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda 
30. Shri S. Anbalagan 
31. Shri Moinul Hassan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu   —  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   —  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.B. Arora    —  Director 
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  —  Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   —  Committee Officer 
(iii) 

 5   
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committe e on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Sixty-first Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty -third Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  
Demand for Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Planning. 
2. The Fifty -third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 th April, 2007 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3 rd May, 2007. Replies indicating action taken on all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government 
on 9th August, 2007. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held 
on 28 November, 2007. 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-third Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       ANANTH KUMAR, 
28 November, 2007            Chairman, 
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 6   
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Fifty -third Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Planning 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 April, 2007. 
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the six recommendations contained in the Report.  These have 
been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6            (Chapter II, Total 6) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies: 
Nil  
                (Chapter III, Total Nil) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Nil  
                       (Chapter IV, Total Nil) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Nil     
                  (Chapter V, Nil) 
3. The Committee desire that replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter I should be furnished to the 
Committee expeditiously. 
 4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 

 7   
A. Effectiveness of implementation of policies 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, para No. 29) 
5. The Committee had expressed the need for hav ing a relook at the 
effectiveness of the implementation of socio -economic development oriented 
policies which have a bearing on the living conditions of the people at large and 
take immediate corrective measures. 
6. The Planning Commission have stated in t heir action taken reply as 
follows:- 
“During 11 th Plan every effort would be taken for augmenting 
allocations and ensuring mechanism for proper supervision, 
monitoring, evaluation and mid term corrections of strategies 
which are needed to improve the healt h and nutritional status of 
the population.” 
 
7. The Government have merely stated that efforts would be made to 
augment allocations and ensure proper supervision of programmes during 
the 11th Plan and has not addressed the issue raised by the Committee on  
the need for having a re -look at the socio -economic development oriented 
policies, which have a bearing on the living conditions of the people at 
large.  The Committee hope that the Government have taken note of this 
suggestion for appropriate action. 
B. Irrigation Projects 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 2, para No. 44) 
8. The Committee found that though there was a significant increase in the 
investment in the sectors related to water/irrigation from Rs. 11938 crore (actual 
expenditure) in 2002 -03 to Rs. 32599 crore in 2006 -07 (approved outlay),  the 
targets set for the irrigation sector could not be achieved.  While, as per the 
target envisaged under the Tenth Plan, a total of 16.743 mha of irrigation 
potential was to be added (9.936 mha from major and medium i rrigation projects 
and 6.807 mha from minor irrigation schemes),  the likely achievement to this 

 8   
end was expected to be only 8.818 mha, which amounted to 53 percent of the 
originally envisaged target for the Plan period.  This meant that the percentage of 
achievement of ultimate irrigation potential (93.883 m.ha) would just increase 
from 67% at the end of Ninth Plan to 73% by the end of Tenth Plan.  Considering 
these aspects, the Committee were of the view that focused attention needed to 
be given for ensur ing effective formulation and progress of irrigation projects, 
which would contribute to the improvement of agricultural growth. 
9. The reply of the Planning Commission is as under: 
 
“The Planning Commission has suggested fixed price turn key no 
cost overrun contracts with incentives/disincentive for 
timely/delayed completion of irrigation projects to be funded under 
Accelerated irrigation Benefit Programme.  Ministry of Water 
Resources has circulated a Cabinet Note for Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme  funding which also includes similar 
suggestion.  States need to take similar action for their 
ongoing/proposed non AIBP assisted projects for completing 
them at the earliest.” 
 
10. There is nothing in the reply of the Government to indicate how 
the Planning C ommission/Ministry of Water Resources propose to ensure 
effective formulation and implementation of irrigation projects.  The 
Committee hope that suitable mechanism would be evolved to ensure that. 
C.  Identification of BPL Households 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 3, para No. 54) 
 
11.   The Committee had, in their report on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) 
of the Ministry of Planning, inter alia, emphasized on standardizing the criteria for 
estimation of BPL households.  The emphasis laid by the Committee on 
standardizing the criteria was on account of the fact that there was a dichotomy 
in the estimates of BPL household as made by the Planning Commission and the 
estimates made by the States on the basis of the surveys carried out by them.  
The BPL household surv eys carried out by the State Governments were based 
on the format prescribed by the Ministry of Rural Development.  The Committee 
took note of the fact that an Expert Committee was looking into issues relating to 

 9   
‘poverty rate measurement’.  As per the ins urance given to the Committee by the 
Member Secretary while tendering evidence, the issue of harmonizing the criteria 
for estimation of BPL households, which would inter alia enable in overcoming 
the dichotomy/variation in the population estimates of BPL h ouseholds as 
brought out by different Government Departments/bodies, was to be referred to 
the Expert Committee.  The Committee expected that the Expert Committee 
engaged in addressing issues relating to poverty measurement would look into 
this aspect and evolve a standardised criteria, which would facilitate an objective 
and realistic assessment of the BPL households in the country. 
 
12. The Planning Commission has replied as under:- 
 
“The Planning Commission in December, 2005 constituted an Expert 
Group t o review the Methodology for Estimation of Poverty under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar with the terms of reference as: 
 
(a) To examine the issues relating to the comparability of the 50 th, 55th 
and 61 st round, and to suggest methodologies for d eriving such 
comparability with past and future surveys. 
(b) To review alternative conceptualizations of poverty and the 
associated  technical aspects of procedures of measurement and 
data base for empirical estimation including procedures for 
updating over time and across states. 
(c) In the light of (b), to recommend any changes in the existing 
procedures of official estimates of poverty. 
 
The Expert Group was to submit an interim report by February, 2006 and 
its final report to the Planning Commission within a ye ar. The Expert 
Group has met twice, in January, 2006 and June, 2006.  It has not yet 
submitted its report to the Planning Commission”. 
 
13. It is not clear from the reply of the Government whether the issue of 
harmonizing the criteria for estimation of BPL  households has been referred to 
the Expert Group which is looking into issues relating to “Poverty rate 
measurement”.  The Committee hope that the matter has been referred to the 
Expert Group, as recommended by the Committee.  The Committee desire that 
the Expert Group should be impressed upon to finalise its report at the earliest. 

 10   
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Growth Performance in Tenth Plan – An overview 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Paragraph No. 26 
 
An over-view of the GDP growth progress in the Tenth Plan (2002 -03 to 2006 -
07) inter alia reveals that while the growth rate of agricultural sector is estimated to be 
2.1% per annum as against the annual target of 4%; the growth of manufacturing sector is 
likely to be 8.7% per annum as against the target of 8.9%; and the services sector is likely 
to register a growth of 9.3% per annum, which equals the plan target of growth rate for 
the sector.  The actual growth rate of aggregate Gross Domestic Produc t (GDP), which is 
estimated at 7.8% per annum for the Tenth Five year plan is short of the plan target of 
8.1%. The shortfall in achieving the targeted growth rate, the Committee note, is mainly 
on account of the shortfall in the growth witnessed in the agriculture sector. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 No action is required. 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Paragraph No. 27 
 
 
The factors attributable to the shortfall in agricultural growth during the Tenth 
Plan period include, inter alia, erratic monsoon (whose  effect was very significantly 
pronounced in the first year of the plan (2002 -03), when the agricultural sector registered 
a negative growth of -6.9%); decline in the investment in the agriculture sector-which fell 
from 8% of total investment in 1999 -2000 to 6% of total investment in 2005 -2006; 
inadequate power and rural infrastructure; and poor maintenance of existing irrigation 

 11   
and traditional water harvesting structures.  From the information and data furnished as 
well as the oral submissions made by the  representatives of Ministry of Planning, the 
Committee gather the impression that the slow pace of agricultural growth witnessed 
during the plan period, apart from contributing to the ‘distress’ of a significant section of 
the population dependent on agri culture; would also have the negative impact of 
increasing the income disparities between agricultural and non -agricultural households.  
As admitted by the Member Secretary while tendering evidence, the policy intervention 
of the Government to promote agri cultural growth ‘has not produced the desired results’.  
However, the approach to the agriculture sector in the Eleventh Plan, as per the Member 
Secretary’s submission, would be ‘substantially better’.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the specia l measures which the Government propose to take during the 
Eleventh Plan to achieve the intended growth rate in agriculture of around 4%. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 In view of the fact that agriculture plays a very vital role in the country’s 
economy, around 4% per annum growth rate has been targeted in agriculture in 11 th Five 
Year Plan which is double of that likely to be achieved in 10 th Five Year Plan. The 11 th 
Plan strategy to raise agricultural output, as reflected in the Approach Paper, emphasizes 
on the following elements:- 
 Double the rate of growth of irrigated area;  
 Improve water management, rain water harvesting and watershed 
development;  
 Reclaim degraded land and focus on soil quality; 
 Bridge the knowledge gap through effective extension; 
 Diversify into high value outputs, fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs and 
spices, medicinal plants, bamboo, bio -diesel etc., but with adequate 
measures to ensure food security.     
 Promote animal husbandry and fishery; 
 Provide easy access to credit at affordable rates; 

 12   
- Improve the incentive structure and functioning of markets; 
 Refocus on land reforms issues. 
 Energize the National Agricultural Research System and improve its 
capacity to develop and deliver innovative and effective technologies 
relevant to the current contexts and needs. 
 
  The share of investment in agriculture ( in terms of gross capital formation in 
agriculture sector as percentage of total gross capital formation in the economy) is 
presented for the period of 1999 -2000 to 2005 -06 in the tab le below. In the recent years 
i.e. since 2003-04, public investment in agriculture sector has increased which is reflected 
in higher share of public sector gross capital formation. It has increased from 20% to 24%  
as may be seen from the figures given in the following table:  
 
Gross Capital Formation in Agriculture Sector (At 1999-00 prices) 
 
 
Year 
Gross Fixed 
Capital 
Formation in 
the Economy 
Annual 
Increase 
in 
Column  
2 
GCF in Agriculture proper 
Public 
Sector 
Total Annual 
Increase 
in Col 5 
Public 
Sector 
as % of 
Total 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
              
1999-2000 456416   7716 43473   17.7 
2000-01 478317 4.80 7155 38735 -10.90 18.5 
2001-02 525452 9.85 8746 47043 21.45 18.6 
2002-03 584366 11.21 7962 46823 -0.47 17.0 
2003-04 687150 17.59 9376 45132 -3.61 20.8 
2004-05 822786 19.74 10267 48576 7.63 21.1 
2005-06 1000760 21.63 13219 54539 12.28 24.2 
              
 
 The approach paper for the 11th Five Year Plan projects a total new potential of 
about 11 million hectares in the 11 th plan consisting of 5.5 million hectares in major and 
medium, 3.5 million hectares through minor irrigation and about 2 million hectares 
through ground water development. This is in addition to another 3 -4 million hectares of 

 13   
land to be restored through modernizatio n of major, medium, and minor projects and 
restoration of tanks.  
  The 53rd Meeting of the National Development Council has reaffirmed its 
commitment to achieve 4% annual growth in agriculture sector during the 11 th Plan and 
towards this end resolved to l aunch a Food Security Mission covering wheat, rice and 
pulses as well as to introduce a new additional central assistance to incentivise States to 
draw up plans for agriculture sector more comprehensively. The resolution lays out the 
actions to be taken by the Central Government and the State Governments. A copy of the 
resolution is enclosed at appendix. 

 14   
Appendix 
53rd NDC Resolution     
 
 The National Development Council resolves that agricultural development 
strategies must be reoriented to meet the needs  of the farmers and calls upon the 
Central and the State governments to evolve a strategy to rejuvenate agriculture. 
The NDC reaffirms its commitment to achieve 4 per cent annual growth in the 
agricultural sector during the 11 th plan and, towards this end,  resolves that the 
following steps will be taken by the Central and State Governments: 
 
 Actions to be taken by the Central Government 
 
(1) Launch a Food Security Mission covering wheat, rice and pulses as a 
central scheme aimed at producing over the next four  years an additional 8 
million tonnes of wheat, 10 million tonnes of rice and 2 million tonnes of 
pulses over the base year (triennium ending 2006-07).   
(2) Introduce a new Additional Central Assistance scheme to incentivise States 
to draw up plans for their agriculture sector more comprehensively, taking 
agro-climatic conditions, natural resource issues and technology into 
account, and integrating livestock, poultry and fisheries more fully.  This 
will involve a new scheme for Additional Central Assistance (A CA) to 
State Plans, administered by the Union Ministry of Agriculture over and 
above its existing Centrally Sponsored Schemes, to supplement the State -
specific strategies including special schemes for beneficiaries of land 
reforms.  The newly created Natio nal Rainfed Area Authority will on 
request assist States in planning for rainfed areas. 
(3) Provide additional resources for irrigation via AIBP, including a component 
on modernization, linked to adoption of improved participatory irrigation 

 15   
management and com mand area development. Schemes involving linkages 
of rivers within  a state could also be considered for AIBP.   
(4) Give the national agriculture research effort a strategic focus by providing 
additional resources for the National Strategic Research Fund unde r the 
Ministry of Agriculture with a governance and implementation structure 
appropriate to fund Universities, CSIR laboratories and private institutions 
besides ICAR.  Additional funding will also be provided to support 
regionally focused research projects in State Agricultural Universities.  
(5) Restructure the pattern of RIDF funding by NABARD and replace the 
present pattern of year by year fund allocation by State -wise indicative 
allocations for the entire 11 th Plan period, which will keep in mind the 
needs of States with low rural credit -deposit ratios.  Activities eligible for 
funding will be reviewed in the light of the needs identified in State 
agriculture plans for potential growth areas like horticulture, livestock, 
poultry and fishery including infrastructure for these areas.    
(6) Initiate steps to restructure the fertilizer subsidy programme and its delivery 
to the farmer, and move to a system that provides balanced plant nutrition 
without adverse effects on soils.  The use of bio -fertilizers, organic manure 
and micro-nutrients to enhance soil health will be promoted.   
(7) Take new initiatives to improve skill development in the farming 
community, including training of farmers in modern methods of agriculture 
as well as imparting skills relevant for non-agricultural activity.  
 
Actions to be taken by State Governments: 
 
(1) Formulate District plan for each District that fully utilizes resources 
available from all existing schemes, State or Central, including resources at 
the district level from schemes such as B RGF and NREG.  The District 
agricultural plan will include livestock and fishing and be integrated with 

 16   
minor irrigation projects, rural development works and with other schemes 
for water harvesting and conservation.  Each State Government will set up 
appropriate unit(s) at District level for this purpose.    
(2) Prepare a State agricultural plan based on district plans aimed at achieving 
the State’s agricultural growth objective, keeping in view the sustainable 
management of natural resources and technological  possibilities in each 
agro-climatic region.  Each State will ensure that the baseline share of 
agriculture in its total State Plan expenditure is at least maintained, and 
upon its doing so, it will be able to access the new ACA to meet the Central 
contribution to the expenditure on the agricultural plan beyond the base 
line.  
(3) Make special efforts to complete all projects taken up under AIBP without 
time and cost overrun and prioritize irrigation projects in consonance with 
their agriculture production targ ets.  States will make special efforts to 
ensure better water management and enhance water use efficiency.  
(4) Accord the highest priority to seed production so that adequate supply of 
quality seeds of relevant major crops and fodder is available at reasonabl e 
prices and at the right time. This is necessary to improve seed replacement 
rates, which help reduce yield gaps. There should be close liaison between 
State Governments and State agricultural universities or ICAR institutions 
for ensuring production of s eeds of varieties suitable for each agro climatic 
region. Public Private partnership between SAUs, State departments 
concerned and public sector for varietal development can be considered. 
(5) Undertake a major expansion and revamping of State agricultural ext ension 
systems.  This will involve the State Agricultural Universities and Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras; and include support animal resources development, 
expansion of soil testing capacity in each district and facilities to test input 
quality.  The public -private partnership (PPP) mode should be used 
wherever possible. 

 17   
 
(6) Expedite signing of the MOU (if not done so far) for early implementation 
of the Vaidyanathan Committee recommendations and set monitorable 
deadlines for meeting the commitments so that the co -operative credit 
structure can be revamped. 
(7) Encourage development of modern markets by completing the process of 
amending the APMC Act and notify the rules thereunder, and also 
encourage development of linkages to markets through a variety of 
instruments including co-operatives of farmers, contract farming and other 
means preferred by the States.  The process of notifying rules under the 
amended APMC legislation should be completed during 2007-08.    
 
Concrete proposals to implement these steps will be spelt o ut in detail as 
quickly as possible both by the Central Government and by the State 
Governments. 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C      dated     8th August, 2007. 
 

 18   
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Paragraph  No. 28 
 
The Committee are well aware that the agriculture sector does not lend itself to 
double digit growth, as would be possible in the case of other sectors such as 
manufacturing and services.  At the same time one can not lose sight of the fact that there 
is a huge population even now dep endent on agriculture.  Given the ground reality 
relating to the distress being faced in the agricultural sector, the Committee are of the 
view that the policy initiatives of the Government have to be necessarily focused on 
attaining a substantial improvem ent in the agriculture growth rate, apart from creating 
avenues for non -agricultural rural employment inter -alia in labour intensive 
manufacturing sectors such as food processing and service sectors like tourism, 
construction etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
As mentioned in reply to Point No. 27 it is proposed to increase agricultural 
growth rate to 4% per annum during the 11 th Five Year Plan from its present level of 
around 2% per annum. The Government is also aware of the need to increase non -
agricultural rural employment. The Approach Paper of the Eleventh Plan (2007 -12) titled 
‘Towards Faster and More Inclusive Growth’ emphasizes the need to enhance the quality 
of employment in the agriculture sector. It has noticed that it is vital to increase 
agricultural incomes as this sector still employs nearly 60% of our labour force. Further, 
the Approach Paper at para1.6.5 on page 6 makes the following observations:-  
 
 “Doubling the growth of agricultural GDP to 4% per annum will improve 
rural employment conditio ns by raising real wages and reducing 
underemployment. However, even if this is attained, and overall growth of 9% 
will further increase income disparity between agricultural and non -agricultural 
households unless around 10 million workers currently in agr iculture find 
remunerative non-agricultural employment. To make this possible, and absorb all 
new entrants into the labour force, non -agricultural employment would need to 

 19   
increase at over 6% per annum during 11 th Plan. This poses a major challenge not 
only in terms of generating non -agricultural employment but also in matching its 
required location and type. Care has to be taken to manage the resulting livelihood 
changes and to ensure that employment is generated at all levels of skill in non -
agricultural sector……. all avenues for increasing employment opportunities, 
including those that can be provided by micro and small enterprises need to be 
explored”. 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C      dated    8th August, 2007. 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Paragraph No. 29 
 
Enabling human well being in terms of all socio -economic indicators has been 
central to the Tenth Plan.  The Committee, however, feel constrained to note that in 2004-
05, the percentage of poor in the country’s population (poverty r atio) was as much as 
27.5%. Further, as per the figures furnished by the Planning Commission, the Infant 
Mortality Rate (IMR) was as much as 58 per 1000 births in 2005; and the Maternal 
Morality Rate (MMR), as much as 3 per 1000 births in 2001 -03.  At this  rate it appears 
very unlikely to the Committee that the targets of 45 in respect of IMR and 2 in respect of 
MMR by 2007 would be achieved.  The Committee, therefore, express the need for 
having a relook at the effectiveness of the implementation of socio -economic 
development oriented policies which have a bearing on the living conditions of the 
people at large and take immediate corrective measures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During 11 th Plan every effort would be taken for augmenting allocations and 
ensuring mechanisms for proper supervision, monitoring, evaluation and mid term 
corrections of strategies which are needed to improve the health and nutritional status of 
the population. 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No.38/10/2007-OM&C    dated the  8th August, 2007. 

 20   
Irrigation and Agriculture Growth 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Paragraph No. 43  
 
 The Committee are well aware of the fact that the deficiency in rainfall during the 
monsoon in the years 2002, 2004 and 2006 of the 10 th Plan period contributed 
significantly to the poor agricultural growth, reduction in the share of agriculture in GDP, 
creation of inflationary pressure in some primary products and reduction in the potential 
growth of other sectors by dampening demand.  Had the dependency on monsoon for 
agricultural production been lessened over the years inter alia  by way of proper and 
effective implementation of irrigation projects/schemes and policies relating to water 
management, the agricultural sector would not possibly have suffered and faced the 
distress being witnessed in the current times. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Dependency on monsoon can be lessened through expediting the completion of 
the ongoing and proposed storages in the states, improved water use efficiency and 
modern agricultural practi ces.  Regarding proper and effective implementation of 
irrigation projects, these projects are planned, funded, executed and maintained by the 
states based on their own priorities. The revised National Water Policy was adopted in 
April 2002 and was circulated to the states for formulation of State Water Policies within 
the overall ambit of National Water Policy.  Water being a State subject, states have a 
major role to play in effective implementation of irrigation projects and water 
management policies.  T he Planning Commission during Annual Plan discussions 
impress upon the states for allocating higher outlays to the irrigation sector, so the 
irrigation potential could be developed.  Allocations for irrigation projects by the states 
have been rising and so been the provision of resources under AIBP.  There is progress in 
the speedier completion of ongoing projects.   
 
          Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C      dated    8th  August, 2007. 
 

 21   
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Paragraph No. 44 
 
            From the information furnished, the Committee find that there has been a 
significant increase in the investment in the sectors related to water/irrigation from 
Rs.11938 crore (actual expenditure) in 2002 -03 to Rs.32599 crore in 2006 -07 (approved 
outlay).  Nevertheless, the targets set for the irrigation sector could not be achieved.  
While, as per the target envisaged under the Tenth Plan, a total of 16.743 mha of 
irrigation potential was to be added (9.936 mha from major and medium irrigation 
projects and 6.807 mha from minor irrigation schemes), the likely achievement to this 
end is expected to be only 8.818 mha, which amounts to 53 percent of the originally 
envisaged target for the Plan period.  This would mean that the percentage of 
achievement of ultimate irrigation potential (93.883 m. ha) would just increase from 67% 
at the end of Ninth Plan to 73% by the end of Tenth Plan.  Considering these aspects, the 
Committee are of the view that focused attention needs to be given for ensuring effectiv e 
formulation and progress of irrigation projects, which would contribute to the 
improvement of agricultural growth. 
 
Reply of the Government 
     
The Planning Commission has suggested fixed price turn key no cost overrun 
contracts with incentives/disincentive for timely/delayed completion of irrigation projects 
to be funded under Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme.  Ministry of Water 
Resources has circulated a Cabinet Note for Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme 
funding which also includes simil ar suggestion.  States need to take similar action for 
their ongoing/proposed non AIBP assisted projects for completing them at the earliest.  
 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C      dated   8th August, 2007. 
 

 22   
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Paragraph No. 45  
 
The Committee note that the National Water Resources Council headed by the 
Prime Minister, in which, the States and Central Ministries are represented guides the 
policy issues in water sector.  The Committee also observe that the National W ater 
Policy, 2002, emphasizes on management of water resources by incorporating a 
participatory approach by involving not only the government agencies but also the 
stakeholders in various aspects of planning, design and management. The Committee 
understand in this connection, that in recognition of the need for providing a legal 
framework for participatory irrigation management a Model Act was brought out by the 
Ministry of Water Resources, which has since been adopted by eleven States.  A few of 
the remaining States are reported to be encouraging participation of farmers in irrigation 
management at the outlet level under the co -operative/societies Acts.  In the opinion of 
the Committee much more is desired to be done in this direction.  The Committee, in th is 
regard, emphasize that, apart from encouraging the remaining States to adopt the 
legislation on participatory irrigation management, issues relating to changes required in 
cropping pattern, siltation of reservoirs, low water use/traditional irrigation m ethods 
should be adequately addressed and remedied for yielding better results. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
     
The enactment of Participatory Irrigation Management Act would be made 
mandatory for states to receive assistance under the Command Area Developm ent 
Programme during the XI Plan.  Also the repair restoration and renovation of water 
bodies (traditional water bodies, lakes, tanks aiding irrigation) is proposed to be included 
under the AIBP for assistance by ring fencing the funds. External assistance  also would 
be encouraged for this purpose.  The major agriculture renovation programme decided in 
the 53 rd NDC meeting would address the other issues raised appropriately for states to 
follow.  
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C      dated    8th  August, 2007. 

 23   
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Paragraph No. 46  
 
The Committee also understand that in addition to the ongoing schemes of the 
Central Ground Water Board, a central sector scheme for artificial recharge of 
groundwater is proposed to be im plemented, which, as per the master plan formulated, 
involves an estimated cost of Rs.24500 crore.  The Scheme is expected to enable in 
recharging 36 billion cubic meters of water.  As per the related announcement, as made in 
the Budget-2007-08, 100% subsidy is to be provided to small and marginal farmers under 
the scheme, and 50% subsidy to the others.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
progress of implementation of this scheme and its efficacy in enabling recharge of 
groundwater levels.  The Committee also desire to be apprised of the progress of schemes 
relating to rehabilitation of existing systems, renovation and modernization projects, and 
the extent to which such schemes help the farmers in getting adequate water for 
irrigation, and improve agricultural yield and production within the next three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Regarding the artificial recharge of groundwater scheme announced in Budget 
2007-08, Ministry of Water Resources has circulated a Cabinet Note for comments to 
various Ministries and the note includes provision for evaluation to understand the 
efficacy of recharge of groundwater through such schemes. Regarding progress of 
Extension Renovation and Modernisation projects, the Working Group Report on Water 
Resources consti tute by the Planning Commission for the formulation of 11 th Plan has 
reported that 86 such projects spilled over from IX to X Plan and 46 new projects were 
commenced in the X Plan.  39 projects are likely to be completed in the X Plan and four 
are deferred/merged/reclassified.  89 ERM projects would spillover to the XI Plan.  In all 
215 ERM projects were taken up during the Plan period and cumulatively 126 projects 
are likely to be completed by the end of X Plan.  
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C      dated   8th August, 2007. 

 24   
 
Identification of BPL Households 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
Paragraph No. 54 
 
The Committee had, in their report on the Demands for Grants (2005 -06) of the 
Ministry of Planning inter alia emphasized on standardizing t he criteria for estimation of 
BPL households.  The emphasis laid by the Committee on  standardizing the criteria was 
on account of the fact that there is a dichotomy in the estimates of BPL household as 
made by the Planning Commission and the estimates mad e by the States on the basis of 
the surveys carried out by them.  The BPL household surveys carried out by the State 
Governments are based on the format prescribed by the Ministry of Rural Development.  
The Committee understand that an Expert Committee is presently looking into issues 
relating to ‘poverty rate measurement’.  As per the assurance given by the Member 
Secretary while tendering evidence, the issue of harmonizing the criteria for estimation of 
BPL households which would inter alia enable in over coming the dichotomy/variation in 
the population estimates of BPL households as brought out by different Government 
Departments/bodies would be referred to the Expert Committee.  The Committee expect 
that the Expert Committee currently engaged in addressin g issues relating to poverty 
measurement would look into this aspect and evolve a standardised criteria, which would 
facilitate an objective and realistic assessment of the BPL household in the country. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Planning Commission i n December, 2005 constituted an Expert Group to 
review the Methodology for Estimation of Poverty under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
Suresh D. Tendulkar with the terms of reference as: 
 
(d) To examine the issues relating to the comparability of the 50 th, 55 th and 
61st round, and to suggest methodologies for deriving such comparability 
with past and future surveys. 
 

 25   
(e)        To review alternative conceptualizations of poverty and the associated 
technical aspects of procedures of measurement and data base for 
empirical estimation including procedures for updating over time and 
across states. 
(f) In the light of (b), to recommend any changes in the existing procedures of 
official estimates of poverty. 
 
The Expert Group was to submit an interim report by February, 2006 and it s 
final report to the Planning Commission within a year. 
 The Expert Group has met twice, in January, 2006 and June, 2006.  It has         
not yet submitted its report to the Planning Commission. 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C         dated    8th August, 2007. 
 

 26   
Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme 
 Other Administrative Expenses 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
Paragraph No. 62 
 
  The Committee understand that the object head, ‘Tsunami Rehabilitation 
Programme’ was budgeted mainly for organizing Na tional and International 
Seminars/Conferences on coastal protection in Tsunami affected States/UTs, in 
connection with which, IIT Madras and International Ocean Institute (India) also 
collaborated.  As per the information furnished, the required allocation  (B.E.) could not 
be proposed under the Head of the year 2005-06, as the related approval was given by the 
Empowered Group of Ministers at the fag end of the year, which left little time for taking 
up the activities relating to making allocation for the pr ogramme.  The Committee, 
however, are not satisfied with the reason advanced by Government for the wide gap 
between the Revised Estimates and the Actuals of the year 2005 -06 that there was very 
little time left to take up the activities.  They are of the v iew that the time available 
should have been taken into account while formulating the estimates. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Soon after the Tsunami, a Core Group under the Planning Commission was 
constituted in January, 2005 to address the long term issues and to plan and coordinate 
measures relating to reconstruction, rehabilitation and re -development phase of the 
Disaster Management Cycle.  The Core Group comprises representatives from Central 
Ministries/Departments, State Governments, Research Institution s and the Planning 
Commission.  Based on a consultative process, the Core Group proposed component wise 
rehabilitation initiatives for Tsunami affected States/UTs.  Considering the 
recommendations, draft Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme which included phas ing of 
funds for the first two years of the four year Programme was prepared and circulated to 
all concerned Ministries in July 2005 for their comments.  After receiving the comments, 
the proposal was placed before the Cabinet which was considered by the C abinet in its 
meeting held on 17.11. 2005 and decided that the matter be considered by an Empowered 
Group of Ministers (EGOM).  The EGOM considered the proposal on 8.12.2005 and 

 27   
approved the programme including the amount for Planning Commission.  The amou nt 
became available only through the last batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants. As 
programme size including the provision for Planning Commission was proposed at the 
draft stage and no review with regard to the provisions was undertaken before the 
proposal was actually placed before the Cabinet and the EGOM, wide gap between 
Revised Estimates and the Actuals in 2005 -06 existed.  However, Planning Commission 
has noted the recommendation of the Standing Committee on Finance and ensures its 
compliance while formulating estimates. 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C     dated   8th August, 2007. 

 28   
Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme  
Payment for Professional and Special Services 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
Paragraph No. 70 
 
The Committee note that t he provision under this head of account, is meant to 
incur expenditure on Professional Services for  Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme and 
undertaking studies on environment assessment, interventions in fisheries sector, 
livelihoods, and other interventions  including social assessment impact Studies.  The 
funds for the head were made available through the 3 rd and final batch of supplementary 
Demands for Grants of 2005 -06 as the programme approval was given in the last month 
of 2005.  The Committee regret to note that there have been significant variations in 
making the budget estimates, as the activities proposed, could not be taken up during the 
year 2005 -06.  This led to huge variations between the Revised Estimates (Rs.9.73 
crores) and the Actuals (Rs.76.7 9 lakhs) for the year 2005 -06.  This is indicative of lack 
of seriousness towards this important issue of national importance.  Again, the 
Committee are given to understand that the trend of expenditure could not be used as a 
guiding factor for making the budget estimates for the year, 2006 -07 and a huge B.E. to 
the tune of Rs. 13.45 crore was proposed.  Once again, as informed., though a large 
number of Impact Studies were expected to be conducted during the financial year 2006 -
07, very few proposals were received from the States/UTs for funding the Impact Studies 
which resulted in the revised estimates for the year being confined to Rs.75 lakhs only.  
Besides this, disengagement of programme management consultants for the Tsunami 
Rehabilitation Programme i s also said to be a factor for  under -utilisation of the fund.  
The Committee while emphasizing that utmost care should be taken for making the 
estimates judiciously to keep the programme in tune with the outcome of the objectives 
envisaged, cannot also he lp taking note of the sensitive nature of the Tsunami 
Rehabilitation Programme.  The Committee, therefore, desire to be furnished with a 
status paper on the environment, social impact studies etc., envisaged and actually 
undertaken in regard to the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme within one month. 
 
 
 

 29   
Reply of the Government 
 
During 2006-07, Planning Commission envisaged to get the following Impact 
Studies conducted:- 
(i)   Benefit monitoring study for permanent shelters;  
(ii)   Evaluation of rehabilitation of agriculture lands; 
(iii)  Techno-economic feasibility study for setting up of Modern Fishing   
Harbors for deep sea fishing of world class standard, hiring international 
consultants/ advisors; 
(iv)   Study for drinking water master plan for long term solution for drinki ng 
water in ANI; 
(v)   An assessment on coastal fishery resources study for Tamil Nadu;  
(vi)   An assessment on coastal fishery resources study for Kerala; 
(vii) Study on various Marine culture options to augment fish protein    
production in Tamil Nadu; 
(viii) Restoration/ Rehabilitation of Pulicat lake in Tamil Nadu;  
(ix)  Study along the affected coastline for augmenting, upgrading and 
modernizing the infrastructure so that improved livelihoods can be 
assured for fishing; 
(x)  Study for establishing marina / ot her facilities for increasing possibility of 
tourism in the erstwhile Tsunami affected areas; 
      (xi)  Study for additional facilities to be provided for affected ports & jetties in 
Tsunami Affected Areas to improve fisheries infrastructure;   
(xii) Stu dy on energy management options including exploring options for 
non-conventional energy sources;  
      (xiii) Study for long term solution for solid waste management, sanitation for 
ANI & comparative study with Lakshwadeep; 
                  (xiv)Study of  possible restoration of coopertisation                                                                                                                                  
& trade routes for promotion of copra based industries and other 
environmentally sensitive livelihood measures ; and  

 30   
(xv) Study for backward and forward linkages for development of fisheries for 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu including Cold Storage/ Warehouses for the 
same. 
 To facilitate the Studies, Planning Commission provided draft Terms of 
Reference (TOR) to the concerned State Governments / UT Administrations / Central 
Ministries for seeking Expression of Interest (EOI) with an offer to provide necessary 
funds from the Technical Assistance Component of the Planning Commission under 
TRP.  Howeve r, only the Government of Tamil Nadu responded positively and sent the 
following proposals for approval:-   
 
(i) Impact Assessment of Rehabilitation Programme for the Tsunami 
affected people in Nagapattinam District of Tamil Nadu.  
(ii) Preparation of case studies with special focus on vulnerable groups. 
(iii) Quality audit of 10 Tsunami Rehabilitation Housing Projects in 
Kanyakumari and Kanchipuram Districts. 
 Of the above three studies, the study on Impact Assessment of Rehabilitation 
Programme for the Tsunami affected people in Nagapattinam district was approved at a 
cost of Rs. 3,01,500/ - and the funds were transferred to the Government of Tamil Nadu 
during 2006-07.  The decision on the other two proposals was not taken in 2006-07. 
 
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C     dated     8th August, 2007. 

 31   
 
Planning Commission/Planning Board  
Office Expenses 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
Paragraph No. 78  
 
The Committee feel constrained to note that year after year, there has been gross 
under-utilisation of the provis ions made under the head ‘Office Expenses of 
Modernisation of Office System’ which are inter -alia, intended mainly for renovation of 
rooms/divisions/toilets etc. by CPWD at Yojana Bhawan and in Economic Advisory 
Council to the Prime Minister at Vigyan Bhaw an.  From the figures made available to 
them, they find that an outlay of Rs. 7 crore was provided for office expenses against the 
projected B.E. of Rs. 1.15 crore which was revised to Rs. 5.16 crore at R.E. stage during 
the year 2004-05.  However, the amo unt could not be utilised and had to be surrendered 
due to non-undertaking of the entire work assigned to CPWD which was to be completed 
during that year itself.  This also resulted in not entrusting/assigning of fresh additional 
work in the following year , owing to which, the Government had to reduce the 
provisioning to Rs. 2 crore in 2005 -06.  The Committee note in this regard that, had the 
Ministry pursued the matter vigorously with CPWD, the amount could have been fully 
utilised. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation/observation of the Committee for taking utmost care has 
been noted for future compliance. 
 
 
     Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C   dated    8th August, 2007. 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
Paragraph No.  79 
 
Further in the year 2006-07, the amount allocated at the B.E. stage was again at a 
higher level of Rs. 2 crore which was revised to Rs. 1.30 crore at R.E. stage and the 
actual expenditure was confined to about Rs. 85.63 lakhs.  The reason adduced for the 
surrendering of  funds is that certain ongoing civil/electricals works undertaken by the 

 32   
CPWD were not likely to be completed during the remaining period of 2006 -07.  In view 
of the huge variations being witnessed under this Head of Account, the Committee desire 
that Budg etary allocations, as far as possible should be done with utmost care and 
seriousness to make them more realistic. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation/observation of the Committee for taking utmost care has 
been noted for future compliance. 
 
   
Planning Commission O.M. No. 38/10/2007-OM&C   dated  8th August, 2007. 
 

 33   
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

 34   
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

 35   
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       ANANTH KUMAR, 
28 November, 2007                         Chairman, 
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)                                 Standing Committee on Finance. 

 36   
Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28 th November, 2007 from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs.  
in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Rupchand Pal 
5. Shri K.S. Rao 
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
8.  Shri Santosh Bagrodia 
9.  Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
10.  Shri S. Anbalagan  
11.  Shri Moinul Hassan 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin   -  Joint Secretary 
2.   Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu    - Deputy Secretary -II 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3.  The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for consideration :- 
  
(i)    Draft action Report on the recommendations/observations contained in 
the 51 st Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure and 
Disinvestment);  
 

 37   
(ii)   Draft action taken Repor t on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 54 th Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation;   
 
(iii)  Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 41 st Report on ‘Introduction of New Income Tax 
Return Form’;  
 
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 52 nd Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);  
 
(v)  Draft action t aken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 53 rd Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the 
Ministry of Planning;  
 
(vi)  Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 55 th Report on Demands for Gran ts (2007-08) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and;  
 
(vii)  Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of Reform Process in Capital 
Market – Recent IPO Scam’. 
 
4.  The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above without any 
amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii) above with modifications as shown 
in the annexure. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the reports in the 
light of the modifications made and present the same to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 38   
Annexure  
 
(a)  Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 52 nd Report on Demands 
for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
 
   XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
(b)  Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 53 rd Report on Demands 
for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Planning 
 
 
Para Line Modification 
13 6 & 7 For the words 
             
                         ‘….within a reasonable time’ 
 
Substitute the words 
              
                         ‘…..at the earliest.’ 
 
 
 
(c)  Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 55 th Report on Demands 
for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
(d)  Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of 
Reform Process in Capital Market – Recent IPO Scam” 
 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
 

 39   
APPENDIX 
 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-THIRD REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
  
              Total  % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations   6   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which   6  100% 
have been accepted by the Government     
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5 & 6)  
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   NIL  00.00% 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view      
of the Government’s replies 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. Nil)  
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect   Nil  00.00% 
of which replies of the Government have     
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. Nil) 
 
 
(v) (Recommendation/observation in respect  NIL  00.00% 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. Nil) 
 