CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fifty-second Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on
3.5.2007.
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the
Government in respect of all the 10 recommendations contained in the
Report. These have been analysed and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1 (paras 22-27), 3 (paras 66-70),
4 (paras 78-80), 5 (para 91), 6 (paras 107-108), 8 (paras
121-122), 9 (para 128) & 10 (para 135)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Recommendation Sl. No. 2 (paras 52-55) & 7 (paras 116-117)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4 (para 81), 5 (para 92) &
6 (para 110)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
Reply by the Government is still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. NIL
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously.

2
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Need for sunset clause for tax exemptions for units in SEZs
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 81)
5. In view of the expected revenue loss on account of tax
exemptions extended to Special Economic Zones (SEZ), the Committee
recommended that tax exemptions applicable to these SEZs should
have definite sunset clauses.
6. The Government in their action taken reply have, inter alia stated
as follows:—
“Central Board of Excise & Customs
SEZs have been accorded a special status in terms of the provisions
of the SEZ Act, 2005, and have been extended exemptions amongst
others from indirect taxes namely Central Excise & Customs duties
and Service Tax inasmuch as these zones are deemed as territories
outside the customs boundaries of India, Exemption from indirect
taxes namely Customs and Excise duties would need to be
provided without and sunset clause. Insofar as enforcement of
export obligations are concerned the SEZ Rules, 2006 provide for
fulfillment of export obligations in terms of achieving positive Net
Foreign Exchange Earning. A proposal for imposing a condition of
minimum 51% physical exports on the units in the SEZs is under
consideration of the Government.”
7. The reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on their
recommendation regarding sunset clause on the tax exemptions
applicable to the units in SEZs. The Committee would await the
Government’s response in this regard.
B. Shortfall in Achievement of Targets
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para 92)
8. Not convinced by the reasons adduced by CBEC, the committee
pointed out that there had been a continuous shortfall in meeting the
collection targets of excise and a downward revision of the targets at
the stage of revision of estimates of duty collections.

3
9. The Ministry of Finance in their action taken reply have stated
inter alia  as under:—
Central Board of Excise & Customs
Budget Estimates and Revised Estimate of Central Excise have been
fixed by taking all the material factors.
Although PLA revenue has grown at an annual compounded
growth rate of 10% in the last 5 years, the combined PLA+Cenvat
revenue has grown by an annual compounded growth rate of 15%
during the same period. During this period the manufacturing sector
has grown by annual compounded growth rate of 9%. If an average
inflation of 5% is added, the growth rate comes to 14%, which compares
well with the combined revenue growth of 15%.
Cenvat availability has grown faster than PLA payments in last
few years.
The Government is taking several measures to ensure that the
availment of Cenvat Credit is carefully monitored and audited. The
steps taken include addressing it through audit both in the matter of
selection of units of audit as well as in carrying out audit verification/
checks.
Apart from the mandatory units that are audited every year, the
non-mandatory units are selected on the basis of risk assessment. For
such units, the growth in duty payments through CENVAT Credit (as
a proportion of value) from one year to the next is a key parameter
in assessing risk, at the national level. Units that exhibit a higher
growth in utilization of CENVAT credit are selected for audit on priority
over others. In addition to this factor, a number of local risk parameters
have been prescribed which have to be taken into consideration while
selecting units for audit. Among these, the following parameters related
to CENVAT credit issues are covered:
(a) Units availing high percentage of CENVAT credit or showing
fall in revenue but increase in CENVAT credit.
(b) Units undertaking expansion or diversification entailing one
time excessive availability of CENVAT credit in respect of
capital goods.
Moreover, the Annual Work Plan drawn by the Directorate of Audit
includes a strategy for selection of units for High Impact Audits in
both Central Excise and Service Tax. These are audits conducted under
the direct supervision of an Assistant/Deputy Commissioner. In this

4
selection strategy also, CENVAT credit based criteria plays an important
role. They are as follows:
(1) Units with the ratio of credit received on the basis of
invoices issued by registered dealers to total CENVAT credit
of more than 10%.
(2) Units that have availed more than Rs. 20 lakhs of credit on
input services in the full year.
(3) Units manufacturing commodities/goods showing an
adverse CENVAT credit to total duty payment behaviour at
the all India level.
High impact audits based on such selection have yielded good
results in terms of detections and recoveries.
The methodology for conducting audits is prescribed in the Central
Excise Audit Manual wherein systematic analysis and detailed checks
for CENVAT credit verification are prescribed.
There has been a consistent growth in the volume of detections
and recoveries made by internal audit as is evident from the table
below:
Year No of audits Total Growth Total Growth
conducted detections over recoveries Over
(In. Rs. Cr) previous (in Rs. Cr.) previous
year (%) year (%)
2004-05 21313 1661 — 196 —
2005-06 25938 2094 26 280 43
2006-07 28596 3846 84 581 107
10. The Reply by the Government has not addressed the point
raised by the Committee but has gone on to explain the growth of
revenue over the years. What the Committee were interested in
knowing was the factor-wise analysis of the specific reasons for
shortfall in achievement of excise duty collection targets. The
Committee would await this information.
C. Amendment of Direct Tax Laws
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para Nos. 107-110)
11. In view of the mounting arrears of direct and indirect tax
revenues year after year, and in view of the submission made by the

5
Ministry of Finance that there are lot of demands under litigation
with courts, tribunals and special courts, the committee recommended,
inter-alia , further simplification of the laws to reduce the future
litigations and desired that the Government to bring out the proposed
Bill amending the Direct Tax laws as early as possible.
12. The Government in their action taken reply stated, inter alia , as
under:—
“With the objective of simplifying laws relating to Direct taxes, the
Government constituted an Expert Group. The Expert Group
submitted its report on 8th of September 2006. The same is
presently under examination.”
13. The Government’s reply is silent on bringing out a Bill
amending the Direct tax Laws as recommended by the Committee.
The Committee in this connection note that the Expert Group which
examined the question of simplifying laws relating to Direct taxes
submitted its report more than a year ago. The Committee would
like a copy of the report of the Expert Group and the action taken
thereon be furnished to them.  The Committee would also wish to be
informed as to how soon the Bill amending the Direct Tax laws will
be introduced in Parliament.

6
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 22-27)
The Committee note that there are many tax exemptions extended
both under the Direct Tax Laws and Indirect Tax Laws, prominent of
which are the area based exemptions. The Government have been,
under their policy of doing away with the tax exemptions that are not
considered essential, periodically reviewing and discontinuing certain
exemptions. Several of the area-based exemptions available under the
tax laws have been reviewed and extended periodically by the
Government, with the main consideration of being enabling and
promoting balanced regional development in the country. With specific
reference to area-based exemptions under the Direct Taxes, the
Committee note that the Government have inter alia proposed to extend
the applicability of the exemptions under section 80-IC of Income-Tax
Act for industrial undertakings in the North-eastern States and
Uttaranchal and Himachal Pradesh beyond March, 2007 upto March,
2012. The Committee note in this regard that the revenue loss on
account of area based exemptions available under the Direct Taxes
have increased phenomenally over the period from a sum of Rs. 362
crores 2004-05 to Rs. 2,215 crores in 2006-07, which is a cause for
concern.
In the case of area-based exemptions under the Indirect Tax Laws,
the Committee note that while the tax exemptions available have been
extended upto March, 2010 in so far as the State of Uttaranchal is
concerned, the extension is without any specified time limit for the
State of Jammu and Kashmir and the North-Eastern States. The
Committee, in this regard, note that the revenue foregone on account
of the exemptions extended to these States too has risen phenomenally
over the years from Rs. 1405 crores in the year 2003-04 to a sum of
Rs. 5848 crores in the year 2005-06. The Committee further observes
that as per the Government’s submission, such exemptions, if prolonged
beyond a stipulated or pre-set period can have the negative effect of
migration of established industries from other areas/States to such
‘exempted’ areas/States. In view of the adverse implications of the
exemptions on the revenues of the Government, the Committee
recommend for a re-look and thorough analysis of the available

7
exemptions and undertake policy measures inter alia aimed at limiting
the applicability of such exemptions to a specified period. The
Committee, however feel that till such time the exemptions are
applicable, the long pending demands for such exemptions from some
of the State Governments on geographic basis need to be considered
and decided upon objectively and prudently.
The Committee take note of the fact that a specific recommendation
made by them in one of their earlier Government has entrusted the
related study to two independent bodies viz., Indian Council for
Research on International Economic Research (ICRIER) and the National
Institute of Public Finance & Policy (NIPFP). The Committee desire
that the Government report the related findings to them as and when
the reports are presented.
The Committee also note from the information furnished by the
Government that a number of suggestions have been received from
the public, which mainly emphasise on the need for continuance of
the tax exemptions under Direct Taxes. The Committee expect the
Government to decide on the need for continuance of the tax
exemptions after taking into consideration, the reports/findings on the
cost-benefit anaylsis of the exemptions currently being undertaken.
The Committee in this regard also take note of the observations as
made by the NIPFP in their Working Paper, and as quoted in the
Government’s ‘Note on Tax Expenditures’ that ‘better infrastructure
and transport and interest subsidies rather than direct tax breaks merit
consideration in those areas’. Further, they also take note of the
observation of the Draft Approach Paper to the 11th Five Year Plan
titled ‘Towards Faster and More inclusive Growth’ which states that
‘extension of exemption to Himachal Pradesh & Uttaranchal has had
an adverse impact on industrial investments elsewhere, including North
East, and consideration needs to be given to restrict such incentives
only to hilly areas or to replace these incentives by a special programme
for roadways and railways in these states”.
The Committee, therefore, feel that it is perhaps, high time that
exemptions are reviewed and limited and that too quickly, as
opportunities for raising additional sources through new taxes or higher
tax rates are not unlimited and enhanced tax collections are the major
contributors towards meeting the target set by FRBM Act for
elimination of Revenue deficit. The Government should therefore
expedite the move towards a regime wherein tax exemptions are
minimal and confined to exceptional cases. The Committee also endorse

8
the view that in the long run, exemptions may be limited to life saving
goods, goods of security and strategic interest, goods for relief and
charitable purposes and exemption for small scale industries.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
Area-based tax concession, apart from leading to huge revenue
losses, distort the tax system, adversely affect the allocative function
of the market and result in sub-optimal growth. Therefore, Government
continuously reviews all the exemptions and withdraws those that
have outlived their utility.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
Government is aware of the adverse effects of area-based
exemptions on industry in non-exempt areas.
Keeping that in view, area-based exemptions have been reviewed
and sunset clauses have been introduced in area-based exemptions for
Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh, North East Region and Sikkim.
However, keeping in view the peculiar circumstances prevailing in
J&K no such clause has been put in the exemptions scheme for the
State.
Requests for area-based exemptions from some of the State
Governments on geographical basis have already been examined and
not agreed to, as the Government is not in favour of proliferation of
area-based exemptions.
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The reports on the cost benefit analysis of certain exemptions
assigned to Indian Council for Research on International Economic
Relations and the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy are
awaited.
Central Board of Excise & Customs  (in respect of para 25)
ICRIER has submitted a draft report, on exemptions/exemption
schemes related to exports. When the report is finalized, the findings
will be presented to the Committee.
NIPFP is yet to submit any report on cost-benefit studies assigned
to it. NIPFP has been reminded to expedite the same.

9
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The views of NIPFP and those of the Planning Commission are in
consonance with the Government’s thinking that area based tax
concessions should be reviewed. Comments on para 22 are reiterated.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
The argument that better infrastructure and transport and interest
subsidies rather than tax breaks merit consideration, holds good both
for direct and indirect tax concessions.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
Review of exemptions, in fact, is an on going exercise, and in line
with this, during the last two Budgets, Government has withdrawn a
number of customs, excise and service tax exemptions.
Recommendations of the Committee will be kept in view during future
review of exemptions.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 66-70)
Goods and Services Tax (GST) is an integrated, single form of
indirect taxation of goods and services throughout the country by both
the Union and the States. According to Government, once introduced,
the GST would pave way for a simple, transparent and efficient form
of indirect taxation throughout the country , doing away with the
demerits of the present system. Such a system is expected to minimize
costs and disputes apart from facilitating a common market for the
whole country thus making the country more attractive for foreign
investment.
Introduction of such a system requires integration of Central and
State Taxes both on Goods and Services. Thus, the process involves
integration of taxes on goods and taxes on services on the one hand
and of the Central and State Taxes on the other. The Committee observe
that the process has already been initiated at both the levels. The
States have started moving towards the goal of having an integrated
GST by switching over to the system of Value Added Tax (VAT).
However, the Committee note in this regard that the State of Uttar
Pradesh is yet to join the process and implement VAT. The Committee
expect the Government to take up the matter of switching over to
VAT System by the State Government vigorously, which would facilitate
in introduction of GST as per schedule i.e. April, 2010.

10
For facilitating introduction of GST, the Centre has to move towards
a single rate of taxation both for the goods and the services. While
some initiatives are stated to have been taken in this direction so far,
the Committee trust that the Government will spare no efforts to
achieve it in time. The other direct effort to be taken by the Centre,
the Committee note, is abolition of Central Sales Tax (CST). The
Committee note that efforts have already been taken by reducing the
rate of CST from 4% to 3% with effect from 01.04.2007 and then
reducing the rate by one percent in each successive year so as to do
away with CST by the year 2010, when the GST is planned to be
introduced.
The efforts that are needed to be taken by the States to proceed
in this direction include, moving towards the Harmonised System of
Nomenclature (HSN) based system of taxation and modernization and
synchronization of administrative and Information Technology systems
with the Centre. In this regard, the Committee note that the Central
Government proposes to implement a Mission Mode Project under the
National e-Governance Plan for modernization of VAT administration
by the States. Also under this project, it is proposed to link assistance
to the States harmonizing their VAT systems and procedures. The
Committee wish to be apprised of the developments in this regard on
a continued basis.
The Committee further note that certain legal/constitutional changes
need to be made before the introduction of GST. In this regard, they
note that drawing up and passing the legal and Constitutional changes
demand considerable amount of time, particularly when the process
involves extensive consultations and involvement of the States. Hence,
the Committee desire the Government to formulate early the plan of
action for bringing in the amendments required, keeping in view the
stipulated time frame for introducing the GST by 2010.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Reply by the Government
Observations of the Committee have been noted.
The recommendations/observations of the Standing Committee are
acceptable to the Government. The Central Government has been
making efforts to persuade the Government of Uttar Pradesh, through
the Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers (EC), to join
VAT. These efforts shall be continued.

11
Central Board of Excise & Customs
It is the stated goal of the Government to move towards a Goods
& Services Tax (GST) by 2010. All possible efforts are being made to
meet the target date for introduction of GST.
State Taxes Section
The recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in
this paragraph have been noted down for taking appropriate action in
the matter.
State Taxes Section
The recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in
this paragraph have been noted for taking appropriate action in the
matter. In fact, the initial steps for implementation of the Mission
Mode Project on Commercial Taxes (MMP-CT) have been taken. A
comprehensive Study has been got conducted through the National
Institute of Smart Government (NISG), Hyderabad, to finalise the
Vision, Objectives, Strategy and the Roadmap for implementation of
the Project. The Study Report was circulated to all the States and the
EC and was deliberated upon in a Workshop with the States held on
03.05.2007. Guidelines have been made available to the States for
preparation of the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) with the overall
broad Project framework. Their DPRs shall be appraised as and when
received and thereafter, funds will be released to start the project
implementation.
State Taxes Section
The recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in
this paragraph have been noted for taking appropriate action. To start
the process, the matter has already been taken up with the Empowered
Committee of State Finance Ministers (EC). The Terms of Reference of
the EC have been amended to enable the EC “To work with the Central
Government to prepare a roadmap for introducing Goods and Services
Tax (GST) in the country with effect from April 1, 2010 and to deal
with all the related matters.” EC has now set up a Joint Working
Group on 10th May, 2007 comprising officials of the Central Govt. and
State Governments. The Working Group will study the various models
of GST existing globally and any other relevant material available on
the subject. The Group would also identify the possible alternative
models for introduction of GST in India and examine their various
characteristics and assess their suitability in India’s fiscal federal context.

12
The Working Group will present its report to the EC within a period
of four months for decision on the most appropriate model for
introduction of GST in India.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para Nos. 78-80)
The Committee observe that issues relating to Special Economic
Zones (SEZs) have given rise to certain problems, which, inter-alia,
include problems relating to land acquisition, displacement and
rehabilitation, etc. There have also been concerns expressed among
various trade bodies about the status and benefits that accrue to SEZs
and also been concerns expressed among various trade bodies about
consequential disadvantages to the domestic units.
The Committee, in this regard, feel it important to take note of the
observation made in the Approach Paper to the Eleventh Five Year
Plan which states that there ‘is a lack of level-playing field between
manufacturing units within SEZs and those in the domestic tariff area,
and that there can be large loss of revenue on account of tax
concessions for exports of goods and services that are already been
exported without such concessions’. Also, from the Government’s own
admission, and the illustrative examples of comparative advantages of
SEZ units over DTA units (Domestic Industries), as furnished, it is
very much evident that the DTA units are in very disadvantageous
position.
From the figures provided on the expected revenue loss on account
of tax exemptions extended to SEZs, the Committee observe that the
likely loss of tax revenue is expected to rise from year to year, and
would stand at a whopping one lakh six thousand four hundred and
twelve crore rupees by the year 2009-10.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
This recommendations will be examined during the next Budget
exercise and decision reflected in the Finance Bill, 2008.
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The recommendations will be examined during the next Budget
exercise and decision reflected in the Finance Bill, 2008.

13
Central Board of Excise & Customs
It was a conscious decision by the Government to allow tax
concessions to SEZ units for the purpose of (i) generation of additional
economic activity, (ii) promotion of exports of goods and services, (iii)
promotion of investment, (iv) creation of employment opportunities,
(v) development of infrastructure facilities. These tax concessions have
been allowed through the SEZ Act, 2005., duly enacted by the
Parliament. However, this is an observation made by the committee
which has been taken note of.
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The recommendations will be examined during the next Budget
exercise and decision reflected in the Finance Bill, 2008.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
These figures are based on estimates made by Department of
Revenue and are thus accepted.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 91)
The Committee take note of the fact that performance of revenue
collections in so far as Central Excise Duty is concerned, has not been
very encouraging. They also observe in this regard, that Central Excise
Duty collections is the only revenue source from which, irrespective of
continued lowering of Revised Estimates vis-a-vis the Budget Estimates,
the collections have always been on the lower side.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Excise & Customs
Budget Estimate and Revised Estimate for Central Excise have been
fixed after taking all the material factors into account.
The Central Excise Revenue collection has grown from Rs. 72,306/- crore
in the year 2001-02 to Rs. 1,17,088/- (Provisional) crore in the year
2006-07 with the annual compounded growth rate of 10% for the last
five years. In the year 2006-07, actual revenue realization was higher
than the revised Budget estimates of Rs. 1,16,231/- crore.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]

14
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para Nos. 107-109)
The Committee note that the arrears of revenue, both in respect of
direct as well as indirect taxes, have been increasing year after year
and huge portion of such arrears are locked up and treated
un-realizable due to reasons of pendency with various adjudicating
authorities and settlement mechanisms like Settlement Commission,
BIFR etc. The Committee further note that though the respective
departments have been making various efforts to realize the arrears,
these efforts have not yielded the desired results.
Under the Direct Taxes, although the targets fixed for recovery
arrears during 2006-07 are expected to be achieved to a large extent,
the Committee are concerned to note that the recoverable portion of
such arrears as on 1.3.2007 was just Rs. 5,838 crores which forms a
very small part of the total arreras of Rs. 90,069 crores as on date.
Under the Indirect Taxes, the Committee note that there has been
shortfall in actual realization of Central Excise Duty arrears vis-a-vis
the targets fixed during the preceding three financial years despite the
various measures stated to have been taken by the Department to
overcome the pendency of cases at various levels.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Excise & Customs
It is true that arrears of revenue have been increasing year after
year and substantial portion of such arrears is locked up with various
Courts/Tribunals etc. The total arrears of revenue (Indirect Taxes) have
thus gone up from Rs. 21,593.43 crore pending as on 1.4.2006 to
Rs. 26,375.02 crore as on 31.3.2007. However, the Government is taking
all possible steps to realize all recoverable arrears and as a result, the
arrears realization has exceeded the target fixed by Rs. 1016.90 crore.
During the year 2006-07, all the Commissioners were directed to
expeditiously dispose off pending cases of adjudication and as a result
a large number of cases of pending adjudication were disposed off by
31.3.2007.
As regards cases pending in BIFR/DRT/OL/COD etc., the
Commissioners have been directed to closely monitor and properly
defend these cases.

15
Central Board of Direct Taxes
Due to commitment of field formation in targeting arrear reduction/
collection as a core function and by dealing with the appeal matter
expeditiously, the arrear demand carried forward at the end of year,
March, 2007, (Rs. 1,16,453 crore) is less than the arrear brought forward
at the beginning of the year, April 2006, (Rs. 1,20,202 crore).
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The department has collected Rs. 12,285 crore against an internal
target of Rs. 11,741 crore. Out of the arrear demand carried forward
(Rs. 1,16,453) as on 1.04.07, the total demand difficult to recover is
Rs. 1,03,914 crore and the balance Rs. 12,539 crore is collectible.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
It is true that there has been shortfall in actual realization of arrears
in Central Excise vis-a-vis target fixed during the year 2004-05. Though
the Government has overwhelmingly exceeded the overall target of
Indirect Tax arrears collection (Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax),
there was a marginal shortfall in Central Excise arrears collection
(Rs. 1657.94 Crore realized against the target of Rs. 1682.40 Crore)
during 2005-06. However, during the financial year 2006-07 the actual
realization of Central Excise arrears has exceeded the target by
Rs. 79.03 Crore. The overall target of indirect tax arrears collection has
also been exceeded by Rs. 1016.90 Crore.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para Nos. 121-122)
The Committee feel that advertising and publicity have an
important impact on the public by way of creating awareness about
the periodicity and time within which the tax returns are to be filed,
punishments that are meted out to tax evaders and as a whole, help
in widening the tax base and prevention of tax evasion. The failure to
spend the budgeted amount on such an important activity directly
impacts the benefits that are derived from such efforts by the
Government. The Committee, therefore, regret to note that the Actuals
on this account were just half of the Budget Estimates for the years
2004-05 and 2005-06. Moreover, the Revised Estimates is less than half
of the Budget Estimates for the year 2006-07 and the Actuals upto
February, 2007 is just one-fourth of the Budget Estimates. This the
Committee feel, is indicative of failure on the part of the Government

16
to assess the expenditure pattern and fix the Budget Estimates
accordingly. The Committee further note that the Government have
stated that the Revised Estimates of 2006-07 has been reduced in line
with the trend of expenditure i.e. the actuals of the preceding years.
The reason given by the Government for the variations between
BE, RE and Actuals during the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 is on account
of less expenditure incurred by the field formations. The Committee
observe that the Government have not done their home work well in
assessing the ability and requirements of the field formations, which
has resulted in such drastic variations in the Actuals vis-a-vis the Budget
Estimates. In view of the above, they advise the Government to set
pragmatic targets of such expenditure after proper consultation with
the field formations and assessment, in future.
Reply by the Government
Major part of ‘Advertising and Publicity’ is done by Director of
Income Tax (Public Relation, Printing and Publication) of Income Tax
Department for which funds are provided under a separate sub-head
00.001.02-‘Research, Statistics and Publication’. In addition to this, field
formations are allocated funds for isolated advertising under the sub-
head 00.101.01. In view of the observations of the Committee, all field
formations have been advised to make full utilisation of the funds
allocated to them. Meanwhile, some financial powers have also been
delegated to Heads of the Department in field formations which is
expected to expedite utilisation of funds.
Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 128)
The Committee note that the expenditure under the Head is to
implement the Comprehensive Computerization Programme
(perspective plan) of the Income Tax Department which envisages
setting up of All India Income Tax Network. The actual expenditure
for the year 2006-07 upto February, 2007 amounts to Rs. 35.59 crores
which is less than half of the Revised Estimates (Rs. 5.74 crores) for
the particular year and just one fourth of the Budget Estimates
(Rs. 138.5 crores). The Committee further note that the reasons given
by the Government for the much lower Revised Estimates is the delay
in finalisation of award of the tender for System Integrator (Sl), for
which substantial provision was made at BE stage; and on account of

17
delays in acceptance of network sites. However, the Committee are of
the opinion that the actual expenditure indicates the failure of the
Government to implement such an important programme of
computerization, timely implementation of which has been repeatedly
emphasized upon by the Government. The Committee have been
advising so, considering the advantages that would accrue in the
process of Widening of Tax Base, detection and prevention of Evasion
of Tax and increasing the tax revenue. Hence, they desire the
Government to furnish a status report on the implementation of the
computerization programme, explaining the reasons for the delay,
within a month.
Reply by the Government
(a) Status report on the implementation of computerization
programme is as under:
1. Setting up of All-India Tax Network:  The project is
almost complete barring a few problems which shall
be resolved soon.
2. Setting up of All India Data Centre:  The Project
timeline indicated in the Outcome Budget 2006-07 was
December 2006. However, in view of the re-tendering
of the tender for appointment of system integrator, the
same has now been revised to 31.8.2007. The work for
the above tender has since been awarded to M/s IBM
and the project is expected to be rolled out as per
revised schedule.
3. Consolidation of Regional Data Centres:  Consolidation
of 36 Regional Data Bases into Single National Database
shall be undertaken after the roll out of System
Integrator. Target date for consolidation is 31.12.2007.
(b) Until the System Integrator is in place and the hardware is
installed, all India Network (TAXNET) cannot be utilized
fully and also the consolidation of Regional Data bases into
Single Database cannot be achieved. The delay occurred in
the appointment of System Integrator due to problems in
tender finalisation.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 135)
The Committee observe that the expenses under the Head are
incurred towards acquisition of ready built residential plots for Customs

18
and Central Officers. In this regard, they note that the Revised Estimates
(Rs. 12 crores) for the year 2006-07 was raised by 20 percent vis-a-vis
the Budget Estimates (Rs. 10 crores) of the said year. However, from
the replies furnished by the Government, the Committee note that
upto February, 2007 only a little more than one-sixth of the Revised
Expenditure (Rs. 2,20,91,000) has been actually spent. Further, the
Government have stated that the final requirement for the year 2007-08
is estimated at Rs. 8.50 crores which works out to be little more than
three fourths of the Revised Estimates for the particular year. This, the
Committee feel, breaches the financial discipline required in spending
the allocated resources and spread the expenditure evenly throughout
the year. The Committee desire that a departmental inquiry be
conducted into the trend of expenditure under this Head of account
and the report of the inquiry furnished to the Committee within one
month.
Reply by the Government
The expenditure under the head under reference is incurred for
acquisition of ready build residential buildings for Customs and Central
Excise officials and for up gradation of facilities in such acquired
buildings.
An inquiry into the trend of expenditure under this head has been
made and the facts and action taken are given in succeeding paras:
1. In BE 2006-07, provision of Rs. 10.00 crores was made for
following purposes—
(Rs. in crores)
Purpose Amount
Payment in respect of flats being 3.86
constructed by Allahabad
Development Authority
Payment for residential premises 5.00
at Shillong
Other Payments 1.14
Total 10.00
2. During the year, an amount of Rs. 9.04 crores was released
against sanctions in respect of various Budgetary Authorities issued

19
by the time RE was finalized. Item-wise details of such releases are as
under—
(Rs. In crores)
Items Amount
Payment of 2nd instalment for flats being 2.21
constructed by Allahabad Development Authority
Outstanding payment in respect of Quarters 0.01
purchased from Lucknow Development
Authority
Upgradation/Civil & Electrical Works in various 6.82
residential quarters/colonies at Ghaziabad,
Mumbai and Bhopal done through CPWD
Total 9.04
3. The expenditure booked upto February, 2007 was Rs. 2.21 crores
towards cheque payment made to Allahabad Development Authority
mentioned above. For other works amounting to Rs. 6.82 crores done
through CPWD, the sanctions were issued and funds placed with
CPWD through authorization. However, the expenditure incurred by
CPWD is first booked in their accounts and after close of the financial
year, the amount is reflected in the Grant of Indirect Taxes by transfer
through book adjustment. Final expenditure incurred under this head
is known only after finalization of II stage of Head wise Appropriation
Accounts of the Grant much after the close of financial year. This is
the reason why expenditure booked during the year lag the released
fund.
4. Keeping in view funds released amounting to Rs. 0.04 crores
before finalization of RE, due payment for Allahabad Development
Authority of Rs. 2.21 crores for 3rd installment as per Memorandum
of Understanding and other incidental emergent payments, RE was
raised to Rs. 12 crores from the BE of Rs. 10 crores. However, by the
end of the financial year, payment of 3rd installment was not demanded
by the Allahabad Development Authority. Further, utilization of a part
of sanctioned/released amount (Rs. 67.08 lakh) in respect of civil works
and installation of lifts at Shipra and Kaveri Towers at Vaishali,
Ghaziabad was not made by the CPWD for the year 2006-2007. Hence,
final requirement at the end of the financial year was estimated at
Rs. 8.50 crores.

20
5. The above explanation shows that estimates were fixed keeping
in view allocated fund against sanctions issued and scheduled payment
for ongoing projects. However, actual/final requirement was less
because of no demand raised by Allahabad Development Authority
and inability of CPWD to undertake sanctioned works during the year.
In view of above, on the part of Department of Revenue, there was
no branch of financial discipline.
6. It is stated that in BE, provision is made before the beginning
of a financial year, on the basis of stage of implementation of approved
projects and the projects/proposals likely to be approved during the
financial year. The position of provision is reviewed at RE stage in the
third quarter of the financial year keeping in view the progress of
approval of the anticipated projects and actual payment vis-a-vis
scheduled payment in respect of ongoing projects. Fund is released to
the concerned Budgetary Authority during the year after the required
expenditure sanction is issued with the approval of competent authority.
The released fund is placed by the Budgetary Authority at the disposal
of CPWD who execute the sanctioned works. It has been observed
that approval of projects involve consultation/clearance of various
authorities. This leads to non-clearance of all anticipated proposal
during the year. Sometimes, sanctioned payment in respect of previous
year which could not be made due to non-completion of formalities,
is made in following year. These factors lead to variation between BE,
RE and actual. It has also been observed that funds released against
sanctions are not fully utilized mainly because all sanctioned works
are not undertaken by CPWD during the same year due to non-
completion of tender process, requirement of clearances from local and
other authorities etc. Such unattended works are revalidated for
succeeding year.
7. To overcome this problem, Budget Authorities have been advised
to project only those proposals in BE and RE which are in advanced
stage of consideration and ensure that funds provided are utilized.
Ministry of Urban Development have also been requested to provide
monthly figure of expenditure incurred by CPWD in respect of works
done for Customs and Central Excise Department. Further, Review
Committees have been established both at apex and regional levels to
monitor progress of infrastructure projects. This is expected to identify
and remove the bottlenecks and facilitate better linkages between
provision of funds and their utilisation.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]

21
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 52-55)
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements are entered into with
foreign countries for avoidance of double taxation of income, for
exchanging information, help in recovery of income tax and for granting
of relief in respect of income on which income tax has been paid
under the Income Tax Laws of both the contracting States. Further,
such agreements attract foreign investment and help in removing cross-
border tax obstacles in order to avoid distortions in trade and
investment between countries.
The Committee note that India-Mauritius Double Taxation
Avoidance convention (DTAC) has been a cause of concern for India
as the treaty has been used by third country entities to avoid taxation
in India. The methods reportedly used to avoid taxes are by means of
(i) ‘Treaty Shopping’—a situation where the residents of a country
instead of making their investments directly in another country, route
such investments through a third country which has a favourable treaty
with the country in which the investments are made in order to avail
the tax benefits under the favourable tax treaty and (ii) ‘Round
Tripping’—routing of investments by a resident of one country through
another country back to his own country to avail tax benefits of DTAA.
The Committee note that the contentious issue India has with the
Mauritian DTAC relates to misuse of Article 13 on Capital Gains of
the DTAC through which third country entities use Mauritius as a
platform for investing in India thereby resulting in ‘Treaty Shopping’
and ‘Round Tripping’ by Indian entities moving money out of the
country and then getting it back into India through the Mauritian
GBC-1 companies. They observe that the misuse of the India-Mauritius
DTAC happens because of the fact that capital gains arising to
‘residents’ of Mauritius from sale of shares of Indian companies are
neither taxable in India nor in Mauritius. The worrying factor is that
the GBC-1 Companies, which exist only on the files maintained by the
management companies that serve as a conduit for routing investments
from third countries to India with the objective of taking advantage of
the India-Mauritius DTAC, are, treated as ‘resident’ under the Mauritian
Income Tax Laws.

22
The Committee further observe that there are countries such as
Cyprus, Tanzania, Thailand, Indonesia, UAE, Zambia and Syria, with
whom India has similar agreements where capital gains tax on
alienation of shares is not levied on residents under their domestic
law. Of these countries Cyprus and UAE have already reportedly
agreed to change to the ‘source based’ method of taxation. In this
regard, the Committee note that at the time of signing the India-
Mauritius DTAC, Mauritius was taxing Capital Gains and it was only
much later in the 90’s that Capital Gains tax was abolished in the
Country. They further note that Mauritius has not expressed willingness
to consider changing over to ‘source based’ taxation as it feels the
change would affect their offshore financial sector and also hurt their
genuine companies. Further, issues relating to bilateral/international
relations too reportedly restrict India from pressurizing Mauritius to
accept the change over from ‘residence based taxation’ to ‘source based
taxation’. Considering this experience, the Committee recommend that
the Government should consider incorporating mandatory clauses in
such treaties/agreements to the effect that any consequential, which
have an adverse effect—directly or indirectly—leading to
disadvantageous position, particularly with regard to taxation, would
give the contracting States the liberty to, at first pursue the matter
with the other contracting State, and in case of non-agreement, enable
for withdrawal of such agreements.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The Paras 52 to 54 is factual. The recommendation is contained in
paragraph 55. In this regard, it is stated as follows.
The option of taking up the matter of review of an existing Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) with a Contracting State is
always available as per international norms and laws and the process
of such a review is initiated by mutual agreement. India has already
revised its existing DTACs with Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Norway, Singapore,
Sir Lanka and United Kingdom. The process of review of existing
DTAAs has also been initiated in many other countries, including
Cyprus, UAE, Korea, Kenya, Thailand, Zambia, Tanzania and Malaysia.
Thus, it may not be necessary to provide a provision in the DTAA for
pursuing the matter of review of the agreement with a Contracting
State in case of any consequential changes in the domestic laws carried
out by that State after entering into such agreements.

23
Regarding the incorporation of mandatory clauses in treaties/
agreements enabling for withdrawal of such agreements in case of
non-agreement by a Contracting State to the request for review of the
existing DTAC by the other Contracting State, it may be mentioned
that all DTAAs contain an article providing for termination of the
Agreement by any of the contracting States by giving a written notice
of termination. Such Article is contained in the OECD as well as UN
Model Draft DTAAs and is also included in the all the DTAAs of
India. For instance, Article 29 of the India-Mauritius DTAA also
provides for termination of the treaty which reads as follows:—
“ARTICLE 29—Termination—This Convention shall remain in force
indefinitely but either of the Contracting States may, no or before
the thirtieth day of June in any calendar year beginning after the
expiration of a period of five years from the date of its entry into
force, give the other Contracting State through diplomatic channels,
written notice of termination and, in such event, this Convention
shall cease to have effect.
(a) in India, in respect of income and capital gains assessable
for the assessment year commencing on 1st day of April in
the second calendar year next following the calendar year
in which the notice is given, and subsequent years;
(b) in Mauritius, in respect of income and capital gains
assessable for the assessment year commencing on 1st day
of July in the second calendar year next following the
calendar year in which the notice is given, and subsequent
years.”
It may thus be seen that the Article on ‘Termination’ in the India-
Mauritius DTAA provides the option to both India and Mauritius to
terminate the Agreement through diplomatic channels by giving a
notice of termination, after the expiry of 5 years from the date of
entry into force of the Agreement. The above-mentioned Article on
‘Termination’ is quite broad and does not mention the grounds or
reasons on which either contracting State may give a notice of
termination. Thus, in case there are any consequential changes in the
domestic laws carried out after entering into a DTAA which would
have an adverse effect directly or indirectly leading to disadvantageous
position, particularly with regard to taxation, then India can pursue
the matter with Mauritius and in case of non-agreement give a notice
of termination of the DTAA under the provisions of the Article on
“Termination” included in the India-Mauritius DTAC. However, due
to geo-political and strategic national interests, it may not be possible
to terminate or withdraw from the India-Mauritius DTAC unilaterally.

24
A safeguard which has now been adopted by India in her recently
negotiated DTAAs to prevent misuse of the Agreement is the inclusion
of a “Limitation of Benefits” article in the DTAA. Incorporation of this
Article will prevent abuse of the treaty, including any unintended
benefits which may be conferred on the residents on account of
subsequent changes in the domestic law of that country.
In view of these facts, it may not be necessary to specifically include
a mandatory clause in the DTAAs as recommended. It may be-
appreciated that any delay or lack of success in getting the desired
review of any existing treaty is not on account of absence of any
mandatory provision in the DTAA We have to persist with our
negotiations for review of treaties which are no longer favorable to us,
and take steps within the existing framework depending upon our
economic scenario and geo-political considerations in respect of the
other Contracting State.
We have not succeeded in our efforts for the review of the existing
DTAC with Mauritius not for want of an enabling provision in the
Agreement but on account of our friendly bilateral relations with
Mauritius.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para Nos. 116-117)
The Committee observe that the reasons for revising the RE for
the year 2006-07 is due to enhanced liabilities under rent, rates and
taxes incurred by the Office of Director-General (Systems). However,
the Committee do not understand as to why the expenses which can
very well be calculated in advance owing to the ‘certainty’ of their
nature have surpassed the BE (2006-07) of Rs. 33 lakhs by almost
70 per cent. Further, they observe that the actual expenditure for the
year 2006-07 upto February, 2007 has actually exceeded even the
enhanced Revised Estimates. The Committee note that the Government
have stated that prevailing market rent of a locality is difficult to be
assessed beforehand. However, they do not approve of the very high
fluctuation in the expenses. Also, the Government have stated that the
increase in expenditure is met out by re-appropriation within the overall
RE provision. The Committee do not approve of this kind of adjustment
and advise the Government to refrain from such transfer of funds. It
is also noted that the BE for the year 2007-08 has been doubled
vis-a-vis the RE of 2006-07. The reasons adduced for the increase is the
anticipated liability on account of Aykar Bhawan, Vaishali which is

25
proposed to be developed as a modern technology hub of the Income
Tax Department. In this regard, considering the importance of the
expenditure, the Committee expect the Government to fulfil the planned
expenditure within the allotted resources and in time. They also desire
to apprised about the developments in this regard on quarterly basis.
Reply by the Government
Office of the Director-General (Systems) has been advised to work
out in advance all items of expenditure which are being booked by
them under ‘Rent, Rates & Taxes’ keeping in view the ‘certainty’ of
the nature in expenditure so that BE is not exceeded.
Committee’s advice to refrain from transfer of funds has been
noted. However, re-appropriation of funds for meeting the liabilities
under a particular head of Account is admissible under extant rules
with the approval of competent authority as per Delegation of Financial
Power Rules which will be exercised judiciously.
‘Modernization of Aykar Bhavan, Vaishali, into a secure IT Hub’
has been included in the ‘Outcome Budget ‘2007-08’. Review of physical
as well as financial progress of the work shall be done on quarterly
basis and the Committee will be apprised accordingly.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]

26
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 81)
In view of the above, the Committee strongly express the necessity
to fix strict compliance requirements in such a way that the domestic
industries do not stand to loose. Therefore, while noting that the
Government have recently revised the guidelines relating to SEZs in
respect of size and acquisition of land, etc., the Committee are of the
opinion that the tax exemptions applicable for SEZs should have
definite ‘sunset clauses’ and strict export obligations.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The recommendation in Para 81 will be examined during the next
Budget exercise and decision reflected in the Finance Bill, 2008.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
SEZs have been accorded a special status in terms of the provisions
of the SEZ Act, 2005, and have been extended exemptions amongst
others from indirect taxes namely Central Excise & Customs duties
and Service Tax inasmuch as these zones are deemed as territories
outside the customs boundaries of India, Exemption from indirect taxes
namely Customs and Excise duties would need to be provided without
and sunset clause. Insofar as enforcement of export obligations are
concerned the SEZ Rules, 2006 provide for fulfillment of export
obligations in terms of achieving positive Net Foreign Exchange
Earning. A proposal for imposing a condition of minimum 51% physical
exports on the units in the SEZs is under consideration of the
Government.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para 92)
The reasons adduced by the Central Board of Excise and Cutoms
(CBEC) for the shortfall in excise duty collection include, industrial

27
growth, inflation rate and fluctuation in the prices of commodities,
which the Committee do not find to be convincing. The Committee
are of the view that high industrial growth and the rise in prices of
commodities should have had the effect of favouring higher duty
collections. What the Committee find to be surprising is that despite
the many special efforts informed to have been taken by the
Department, there has been a continuous shortfall in meeting the
collection targets and a downward revision of the targets at the stage
of revision of estimates of duty collections. While the Committee
acknowledge the submission of the Government on the deemed revenue
loss due to the various exemptions provided they also believe that
these factors could have been adequately taken into consideration while
estimating the particular tax income for various years. The Committee,
therefore, expect that valid and demonstrably factual reasons are given
for the failure on the part of the Department on this count.
Reply by the Government
Cental Board of Excise & Customs
Budget Estimate and Revised Estimate of Central Excise have been
fixed by taking all the material factors.
Although PLA revenue has grown at an annual compounded
growth rate of 10% in the last 5 years, the combined PLA+Cenvat
revenue has grown by an annual compounded growth rate of 15%
during the same period. During this period the manufacturing sector
has grown by annual compounded growth rate of 9%. If an average
inflation of 5% is added, the growth rate comes to 14%, which compares
well with the combined revenue growth of 15%.
Cenvat availability has grown faster than PLA payments in last
few years.
The Government is taking several measures to ensure that the
availment of Cenvant Credit is carefully monitored and audited. The
steps taken include addressing it through audit both in the matter of
selection of units of audit as well as in carrying out audit verification/
checks.
Apart from the mandatory units that are audited every year, the
non-mandatory units are selected on the basis of risk assessment. For
such units, the growth in duty payments through CENVAT Credit
(as a proportion of value) from one year to the next is a key parameter
in assessing risk, at the national level. Units that exhibit a higher
growth in utilization of CENVAT credit are selected for audit on priority
over others. In addition to this factor, a number of local risk parameters
have been prescribed which have to be taken into consideration while

28
selecting units for audit. Among these, the following parameters related
to CENVAT credit issues are covered:
(a) Units availing high percentage of CENVAT credit or showing
fall in revenue but increase in CENVAT credit.
(b) Units undertaking expansion or diversification entailing one
time excessive availability of CENVAT credit in respect of
capital goods.
Moreover, the Annual Work Plan drawn by the Directorate of Audit
includes a strategy for selection of units for High Impact Audits in
both Central Excise and Service Tax. These are audits conducted under
the direct supervision of an Assistant/Deputy Commissioner. In this
selection strategy also, CENVAT credit based criteria plays an important
role. They are as follows:
(1) Units with the ratio of credit received on the basis of
invoices issued by registered dealers to total CENVAT credit
of more than 10%.
(2) Units that have availed more than Rs. 20 lakhs of credit on
input services in the full year.
(3) Units manufacturing commodities/goods showing an
adverse CENVAT credit to total duty payment behaviour at
the all India level.
High impact audits based on such selection have yielded good
results in terms of detections and recoveries.
The methodology for conducting audits is prescribed in the Central
Excise Audit Manual wherein systematic analysis and detailed checks
for CENVAT credit verification are prescribed.
There has been a consistent growth in the volume of detections
and recoveries made by internal audit as is evident from the table
below:
Year No of audits Total Growth Total Growth
conducted detections over recoveries Over
(In. Rs. Cr) previous (in Rs. Cr.) previous
year (%) year (%)
2004-05 21313 1661 — 196 —
2005-06 25938 2094 26 280 43
2006-07 28596 3846 84 581 107
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]

29
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 110)
In view of the above, the Committee are of the opinion that much
more needs to be done and concerted and serious efforts taken to
realise the revenue arrears by expeditious realisation of the recoverable
arrears; making sincere efforts to have the stays at various appellate
bodies vacated; and impressing upon the higher adjudicating authorities
to quickly dispose off the cases. Also, the complexity of the tax laws,
the Committee feel, lead to such huge amount of litigations and thus
such large amounts of tax revenue locked up in various bodies. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to further simplify the
laws and reduce the complexities found in the tax laws in order to
reduce the future litigations. In this regard, the Committee desire that
the Government bring out the proposed Bill amending the Direct Tax
Laws as early as possible, which in their opinion would greatly
enhanced the effective administration of the Direct Tax Laws and thus
reduce the disputes to a great extent.
Reply by the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The department is making all out effort to liquidate the arrear. In
fact a task force under the chairmanship of each CCIT has been
constituted to look into the arrear position especially the items under
“the demands difficult to recover” assessee-wise so that effective action
can be taken. The CCITs also have been directed to closely monitor
the disposal of CITs appeals.
With a view to expeditiously dispose of cases pending in appeal
before the Appellate Tribunal, the Finance Act, 2007 has put a cap on
the period for which stay can be granted by the Tribunal. The law has
been amended so as to provide that the total period of stay shall not
exceed 365 days in a case.
With the objective of simplifying laws relating to Direct taxes, the
Government constituted an Expert Group. The Expert Group submitted
its report on 8th of September 2006. The same is presently under
examination.
Central Board of Excise & Customs
The department is in agreement with the Committee that much
more need to be done and concerted and serious efforts should be
made to realize the revenue of arrears.

30
During the financial year 2006-07 an Action Plan was evolved and
circulated amongst all the zonal Chief Commissioners for
implementation. This year i.e. 2007-08, as well, an Action Plan has
been circulated to all the Zonal Chief Commissioners for
implementation. The salient features of the action plan are:
(A) Immediate realization of unfettered arrears.
(B) Filling of applications for stay vacation/early hearing in
Courts/CESTAT.
An arrear of Rs. 10,039.07 Crore (approx) is locked up in
various Courts/CESTAT as stayed arrears. The field
formations have been sensitized to file applications for
vacation of stay/early hearing in such cases, particularly in
the deserving cases. The Chief Departmental Representative,
CESTAT has also been requested to have these cases taken
up on priority basis.
(C) Follow up of cases pending in BIFR/DRT/OL/COD.
The arrears from units ending up in BIFR/DRT/OL/COD
proceedings is another area requiring attention. These cases
are being closely monitored and properly defended as
substantial amount of revenue is locked up.
(D) Write off of irrecoverable cases of arrears:
As regards irrecoverable arrears which are being carried
forward from year to year without any realization of arrears,
all the Chief Commissioners have been directed to initiate
action towards write off in such cases where they are of
the considered view that the arrears are not recoverable
even after taking all possible steps.
(E) Faster disposal of all adjudication cases pending at the level
of Commissioners and below:
Considering the significant amount of revenue locked up in
adjudication cases at the level of Commissioners,
Commissioners have been directed to expedite disposal of
pending cases on priority basis.
(F) Quick implementation of favourable orders of CESTAT/
Courts.
The Tax Arrears Recovery, Cell is closely monitoring the
cases of favourable orders from CESTAT, High Courts and
the Supreme Court. A list of cases collectively decided in

31
favour of Revenue, by CESTAT are forwarded from time to
time to all the Nodal Officers for effective monitoring and
realization of arrears in each case.
(G) Defaulters on CBEC Website:- The list of defaulters against
whom Section 142 notices have been issued and which have
not been stayed by the court, are being displayed on CBEC
website. All Commissionerates are required to take steps
for updation of the site and also browse the website in
connection with recovery action at their end.
(H) Legislative amendments have been brought out in 2002
under Section 129B of the Customs Act, 1962 and Section
35C of the Central Excise Act, 1944 providing that where
an order of stay is made in any proceeding relating to an
appeal filed, the Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of the
appeal within a period of 180 days from the date of such
order and that if such appeal is not disposed of within the
period specified therein, the stay order shall, on the expiry
of that period, stand vacated. Though the Supreme Court
has held that the amendment did not curtail powers of the
Tribunal to grant stay exceeding six months but at the same
time it was held that the Tribunal cannot be given any
latitude to extend period of stay except on good cause and
only on satisfaction that the matter could not be heard and
disposed of by reasons of fault of the Tribunal and not for
reasons attributable to assessee. Suitable directions have been
issued by the Board to the jurisdictional Chief
Commissioners and Commissioners in the periodically to
follow up the cases on regular basis pending before various
appellate authorities, particularly in High Court. Their
attention was also drawn towards the Order XXIX, 391 Rule
3(A) of C.P .C. which stipulates that it was incumbent upon
the Court to dispose of the stay petition within 30 days of
its filing. It was also emphasized that the jurisidctional
Commissioners should get in touch with the standing
counsels and actively follow up the matters involving
substantial revenue or pending for a long time before the
appellate forums.
Simplification of law and procedure
Continuous efforts are made to simplify the indirect tax law and
procedure. The Central Excise Rules, 1944 have since been replaced by
Central Excise Rules, 2002 and the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004. The

32
total number of rules under Central Excise has come down substantially
thereby making the compliance of the rules more assessee-friendly.
Similarly, a number of steps have been taken in Customs to simplify
the law and procedure and reduce the transaction cost. Peak rate of
Customs duty has also been brought down over the years.
Information technology is being increasingly used to enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of the department and to deliver improved
services to the clients. Use of automation is contributing significantly
towards faster decision, simplification of procedure and reduction of
compliance cost.
It is, however, stated that simplification of law and procedure of
indirect tax is an ongoing process and is receiving the utmost attention
of the Government.
[F. No. H-11013/07/2007-Parl. (Rev.) dated 7.9.2007]

33
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

34
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for
consideration:—
(i) Draft action Report on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 51st Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic
Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

35
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 54th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 41st Report on ‘Introduction
of New Income Tax Return Form’;
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 52nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue);
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 53rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning;
(vi) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 55th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and
(vii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of
Reform Process in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above
without any amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)
above with modifications as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

36
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT ACTION
TAKEN REPORT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-
SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)]
(a) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 52nd Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
08) of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
Para Line Modification
13 5 For
“The Committee would like to know the
recommendation made by the Expert Group
and the action taken thereon.”
Substitute
“The Committee would like a copy of the
report of the Expert Group and the action taken
thereon be furnished to them.”
(b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 53rd Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of Ministry of Planning.
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
(c) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 55th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 43rd Report on “Efficacy of Reform Process
of Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam”
** ** ** **
** ** ** **

37
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-SECOND
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 10
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have 7 70%
been accepted by the Government
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1 (paras
22-27), 3 (paras 66-70), 4 (paras 78 & 80),
6 (paras 107-109), 8 (paras 121-122),
9 (para 128) & 10 (para 135)]
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 2 20%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2 (paras
52-55) & 7 (paras 116-117)]
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 1 10%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4 (para 81),
5 (para 92) & 6 (para 110)]
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 00.00%
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. No. Nil]

SIXTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Finance]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

COF No. 60
Price : Rs. 44.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies ...................................... 21
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 26
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 33
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
28th November, 2007............................................................. 34
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Archana Srivastava — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixtieth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-second Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Fifty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28th
April, 2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2007. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 11th September, 2007.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 28 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-second Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

60
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Demand for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Finance]
SIXTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
