19 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND  
    PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2005-2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 April, 2005/  Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 
 1 
 

 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND  
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2005-2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April, 2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 April, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April, 2005/Chaitra, 1927(Saka) 
 2 
 

CONTENTS 
 
           
           P AGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………                (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………                 (iv) 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.   Demand No. 90 - Improvement of National Accounts Statistics  
2. Demand No. 90 - Programme Implementation  
3. Demand No. 90 – Institutional Development and Capacity Building  
 - Machinery and Equipment 
4. Central Statistical Organisation – Central Training Facility 
5. Online Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS) 
6. Central Statistical Organisation – Updating the indices 
7. Central Statistical Organisation – Quality and realibility of Statistical Data 
8. National Sample Survey Organisation 
9. India Statistical Strengthening Project (Modernisation of Statistical System in India 
10. Project Monitoring Division – Time and Cost Over-run 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the committee held on 29 march,  
7 april and 12 april,  2005 ………………………………… 
Annexures …………………………………………………. 
Statement of Conclusions/Recommendations………….. 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri P.D.T. Achary      - Secretary 
2.  Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
(iii)
 4 
 

  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committ ee on Financ e having been authorised by  
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ni neteenth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Mi nistry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
 
2.   The Demands  for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation were laid on t he Table of the House on 23 March, 2005. Under Rule 331E 
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the Standing Committee 
on Finance are required to consider the Demands  for Grants of the Mi nistries/Departments 
under their jurisdiction and make Reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
3.   The Committee took oral evidenc e of the representatives of the Ministry of  
Statistics and Progr amme Impl ementation at their sitting held on 29 March, 2005 in 
connection with examination of the Demands for Grants. 
 
 4. The Committee at their sitting held on 07 April, 2005 expressed their views on the 
subjects/topics that could be c overed in the Report.  The Committee considered and 
adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 12 April, 2005. 
 
5.   The Committee wish to express their t hanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Progr amme Implementation for the co-operation exte nded by them in 
furnishing written replies and for placing their considered views and perceptions before the 
Committee. 
 
6. For facility  of reference, t he ob servations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type. 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                                              (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI) 
 19  April, 2005                                                                                  Chairman, 
 29 Chaitra, 1927 (SAKA)                      STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
 
(iv) 
 5 
 

Report 
Introductory 
 
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation came into existence as 
an independent Ministry on 15.10.1999 after the merger of t he Department of Statistics 
and the Department of Programme Implementation. The Ministry has two wings, one  
relating to Statistics and the other regarding Programme Im plementation. The Statistics 
Wing cons ists of the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO), the Nation al Sample 
Survey Organisation (NSSO) and the Computer Centre. The Programme 
Implementation Wing has four  Divisions, namely, (i) Twent y Point Programme Division, 
(ii) Infrastructure Monitoring Division, (iii) Project Monitoring Division and (iv) Member of 
Parliament Local Ar ea Deve lopment Scheme Division. Detailed Demands of the 
Ministry have been included in Demand No. 90.  
 2.  The detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statisti cs & Programme 
Implementation were laid in Parliament on 23 March, 2005. 
 
 3.   In the present Report, the Committee have examined following issues:- 
 
(i) Demand No. 90 - Improvement of National Accounts Statistics  
(ii) Demand No. 90 - Programme Implementation  
(iii) Demand No. 90 – Inst itutional Deve lopment and  Capac ity Building - 
Machinery and Equipment 
(iv) Central Statistical Organisation – Central Training Facility 
(v) Online Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS) 
(vi) Central Statistical Organisation – Updating the indices 
(vii) Central Statistical Organisation – Quality and realibility of Statistical Data 
(viii) National Sample Survey Organisation 
(ix) India Statistical Strengthening Project (Modernisation of Statistical System 
in India 
(x) Project Monitoring Division – Time and Cost Over-run 
 
 
 
 
  
 6 
 

Demand No. 90 
Major Head : Census, Surveys and Statistics 3454 
Sub Major Head : Surveys and Statistics - 02 
Minor Head : Central Statistical Organisation – 02.204 
 
20  - Improvement of National Accounts Statistics 
       
  
      Plan                                                                   
                      (Rs. In thousands) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2002-03 39,00 39,00 28,51 
2003-04 86,00 60,00 37,99 
2004-05 84,00 65,50 - 
2005-06 95,00 - - 
 
 
4.  This Head stands for incurring expenditure on “Improvement of National/State 
Accounts Statistics” - a Plan Scheme, whic h envisages (a) implementation of 1993 
System of National Accounts  (SNA), (b ) compilation of Quarterly and Adv ance 
estimates of GDP expenditures  (consumpti on expenditure, capital formation and net 
exports), (c) providing regular training to St ate Government officials on compilation of 
estimates of State income and other aggr egates, and (d) conducting stud ies with the 
help of State Directorates of Economics and Statistics for updating rates and ratios used 
in the compilation of national/state accounts. 
5.  Questi oned about the reasons for the actual expenditure under the Head 
being muc h lesser than the Budgeted estimate s and revised estimates for the year 
2003-04, and the actual expendit ure incurred under the Head dur ing the year 2004-05, 
the Ministry, in a written reply informed as follows :- 
“The lower  expenditure in 2003-04 as compared to BE and RE is  
primarily due to the f act that no feasible pr oposals for conducting type studies  
by the States were receiv ed.  F or this pur pose, allo cation of Rs .33 lakh and 
Rs.10 lakh were made in BE and RE re spectively.  Because of austerity  
measures and economy in expenditure, study  tours also could not take place.   
An alloc ation of Rs.10 lakh was made for the purpose in BE and RE. The 
expected expenditure during 2004-05 is Rs. 62.40  lakh”. 
 6.  On the reasons for increasing the pr ovisions under the Head to an amount of 
Rs.95 lakhs for the year 2005-06, the Ministry stated : 
 7 
 

 
“The increased provision is mainly on the items, (a) salary, to ac count for 
normal increase in the staff wages, l oans and medical bills, (b) other 
administrative expens es (OAE), whic h is  to meet the expen diture towards 
conduct of Regional level Workshops on State income compilation for the benefit 
of State Government officials, (c) TA (foreign), to depute officers to advanced 
statistical systems fo r training on the compilation of various accounts in the 
context of implement ation of 1993 SNA, an d (d) Professional studies, to fund 
State Governments for conducting  studies to fill the data gaps and update rates  
and ratios used in the compilation of national/state accounts.” 
 8 
 

7.  The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a sub stantial 
under-utilisation of the budgetted amount s under the Head, `Improvement of 
National Accounts Statistics’. While the budgetted amount under the Head, at the 
stage of BE for the y ear 2003-04 w as Rs .86 lakhs, the amount w as revised to 
Rs.60 lakhs at the stage of RE during the y ear and the actual utilisation has onl y 
been to the extent of Rs.37.99 lakhs. The reasons adduced by the Ministry for the 
under-utilisation of the budget ted amount, which include, non-receipt of feasible 
proposals from the  states for conducting type studies, do not appear to be 
convincing. Moreover, the allocation under the Head for the y ear, 2005-06, has 
once again been en hanced to Rs.95 lakhs, ostensibl y due to factors such as the 
increase i n staff w ages, cond ucting Regi onal level w orkshops on  St ate incom e 
compilations and undertaking professional studies. Given the trend w itnessed in 
budgeting and the actual expenditure incu rred in the last three y ears, the 
Committee have gr ave doubt s on the objectiv ity w ith which the bu dgetting is 
being done b y the Ministry . Hence, they  recommend that ever y effort should be 
made to provide realistic budget estimates. 
 
 9 
 

Demand No. : 90 
 
Major Head : 02 
Minor Head : 04 
 
Programme Implementation 
 
 
 
Year Budget Estimates 
Plan             Non-plan 
Revised Estimates 
Plan           Non-plan 
Actuals 
Plan        Non-Plan 
2002-03 2,35,00 1,32,05  20,60 
2003-04 2,00,00 1,67,00  23,64 
2004-05 2,40,00 1,30,00   
2005-06 4,40,00   
 
 
8.  As inf ormed by the Minis try, the head represents t he Plan Scheme of 
Programme Implementation Wing on Institutional Development and Capacity Building in 
Programme/Projects Plannin g, Implementation, Monitoring and  Performance 
Management of Infrastructure in Public and Pr ivate Sector.  The provisions   reflected 
under the head cater to the expenditure rela ted to the Scheme under various revenue 
heads such as Salary, Domestic Travel, Fore ign Travel, Office Ex penses, Publications, 
Other Administrative Expenses, Professional Services, etc. 
9.    Asked to furnish the reasons for making huge provisions year after year, when 
the actual expenditur e under the Head was much lower than the estimates, and the 
actual expenditure incurred during 2004-05, the Ministry informed as follows :- 
 10 
 
“The revenue expenditure planned at Rs.2 crore in BE 2003-04 was revised 
to Rs.1.67 crore in RE 2003-04.  Th e allocation inc luded Rs.25 lak h for 
salaries and wages, 20 lakh for foreign travel, 10 lakh for domestic travel, 15 
lakh for office expenses, 20 lakhs for publication,  10 lakh for other 
administrative expens es and 100 lakh for professional services. The 
expenditure on s alary and wages could not be utiliz ed as the proposal to 
strengthen the Project Monitoring Divis ion could not be approv ed.  Due to 
instructions on economy in expenditure the foreign travel was restricted and 
hence the budget co uld not be  fully ut ilized.  The expe nditure under the 
Professional Services was less  as  selection of consul tants took a longer  
time.  The alloc ation of Rs. 2.4 crore for 2004-05  revised to Rs. 1.30 crore 
in RE included allocation of Rs. 20 lakh for domestic travel, 20 lakh for office 

expenses, 5 lakh for publication,  5 lakh  for other expenses and 70 lakh for  
professional services . It is expected that the full am ount would be utilized 
during the current financial year taking overall expenditure to Rs. 1.39 crore. 
During 2005-06, an allocation of Rs .2.30 crore has been made under the 
head ‘Prof essional Services’ as  the st udies instituted during the current 
financial year are expected to be comple ted in the next financ ial year an d 
the balance payments are to be released to  the Consultants.  In addition to 
this, some new studies are expect ed to be made duri ng 2005-06.  An 
allocation of Rs.60 lakh has been made under the budget head 
‘Publications’ for publishing the studi es c oncluded by the Consultants, 
printing of manual under OCMS scheme and printi ng of up to date manual 
on project implementation.  The above factors have resulted  in hig her 
allocations under the head in BE 2005-06. 
The expec ted expenditure for 2004-05 is  Rs.138.42 lakh whic h 
exceeds the RE alloc ation of Rs .130.00 lak h.  The additional am ount has 
been re-appropriated from the lump-sum  provision under Major Head 25 52 
for North Eastern States for incurring expenditure for organizing workshops  
for providing training in project m anagement to officials of North Eastern 
Region including Sikkim.” 
 
 11 
 

10.  The Committee take strong exceptio n to the fact that y ear after y ear, 
the budgetary provisions under the Head `Programme Implementation’ earmarked 
for meeting expenditure on salaries, domestic and foreign travel, office expenses, 
professional services etc., are being revised to a m uch lower level at the stage o f 
Revised Estimates and the actual expendi ture under the Head has been even 
much lesser. For instance, w hile an amount of Rs.2.35 crore was allocated at the 
stage of BE for 2002-03, the a mount was revised to Rs.1.32 crore at the stage of  
RE and the actual expenditure was only to the tune of Rs.20.60 lakh. Similarly, for 
the year 2003-04, an amount of Rs.2 crore was allocated at the stage of BE, w hich 
was revised to Rs.1.67 crore at the stag e of RE and the actual expenditure has 
only been to the extent of Rs. 23.64 l akhs. The Committee understand that during 
2003-04, the utilisation w as much lo wer than the estimates as the proposal to 
strengthen the Project Moni toring Division w as not appr oved and the process of 
engaging consultants for professional ser vices took much  longer time than 
anticipated. Given the extremel y wide variation in the figures of BE, R E and the  
actuals for he y ears, 2002-03 and 2003- 04, the Co mmittee cannot hel p observing 
that the outcome in regard to utilisati on of the amounts earmarked has not at all 
been in conformity  w ith the Budget Esti mates, w hich they  feel, needs to be 
avoided at all costs. They , therefore,  re commend that the Government should 
take utmost care w hile finalizing the B udget estimates so that large scal e 
variations between BE, RE and Actuals do not recur. 
 12 
 

Demand No. : 90 
Major Head :  5475 
Minor Head : 00.112 
Detailed Head : 27.00.52 
Institutional Development and Capacity Building 
 Machinery and Equipment 
 
Year Budget Estimates 
Plan           Non-plan
Revised Estimates
Plan        Non-plan 
Actuals 
Plan          Non-Plan 
2002-03 1,72,00 80,00 62,54 
2003-04 4,44,50 77,50 26,60 
2004-05 47,50 1,23,50  
2005-06 13,73,50  
 
 
11.  The Ministry have stated that t he head ‘Machinery and Equipment’ is meant  
for booking all expenditure related to purc hase of machinery and equipments etc. for 
implementation of the Plan Sc heme ‘Institu tional Development and Capacity Build ing’ 
which includes the components : (a) Modern isation of Cadre M anagement of Indian 
Statistical Service and S ubordinate Statis tical Servic e (b) Conducting /  Sponsoring 
training courses and building training inf rastructure (c ) payment for professional 
services in research studies (d) awards and fellowships for outstanding and m eritorious 
research work in Statistics and (e) stream lining data processing  capacity of Annual 
Survey of Industries (CSO IS Wing, Kolkata). 
 12.  When asked to f urnish the reas ons for making huge provis ions und er the 
Head at the BE stage in 2003-04, revising the pr ovisions to a much higher level at the 
RE stage in 2004-05,  the actual expenditure incurred under the Head for 2004-05, an d 
the reasons for once again making huge pr ovisions for 2005-06, the Ministry informed 
as under :- 
“The possibilities were being explored to find out a suitable site for acquiring a 
plot of land for construction of CTF.  Finally, a plot of land measuring 8.02 
acres was located and purchased duri ng March, 2003 at a cost of Rs.3.82 
crores.  Discuss ions and deliberations  continued to initiate a plan f or 
construction of the buildi ng as also necess ary machinery and equipments to 
furnish the entire CT F project especia lly the Training Halls, Conference 
Rooms, Auditorium, Seminar Rooms, Facu lty Blocks etc. in a state of the art  
way.  In anticipation of the project to  come through during 2003-04 and need 
 13 
 

for its immediate furnishing to make it  functional, a huge provis ion was made 
in BE 2003-04. 
 
In RE 2004-05, an addition al provision was made for providing computers to 
States for strengthening IT infrastructure. 
The expected expenditure for 2004-05 is Rs.89.88 lakh. 
The BE allocation for 2005-06 is Rs.46. 50 lakh and not Rs.13,73,50,000/-.  
Hence the provision is slightly less than that in BE 2004-05.” 
 
 14 
 

13.  The Committee regret to observe t hat there has been a wide variation 
in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and the Actual expenditure under the 
Head, `Institutional Developm ent and Cap acity Building’. While allocations of 
Rs.1.72 crore and Rs.4.44 crore w ere ma de at the stage of BE for 2002-03 and  
2003-04 respectively, the amounts w ere reduced to Rs.80.00 lakhs and  Rs.77.50 
lakhs respectively at the RE stage and the actuals for the years 2002-03 and 2003-
04, totalled to Rs.62.54 lakhs and 26.60 lakhs. As informed by the Ministry, a huge 
provision of Rs.4.44 crore w as made fo r the year  2003-04 mainl y for procuring 
machinery and equipment to furnish the proposed Central Training Facility (CTF), 
work on w hich could not takeoff. This resulted in reducing t he budgeted amount 
to Rs.77.50 lakhs at the RE stage duri ng the y ear and the actual expenditure 
incurred in the y ear totalled to Rs. 26.60 lakhs. Though the Committee are i n 
agreement w ith the fact that certain projects may  not materialise as planned,  
given the w ide variations w itnessed in BE, RE an d Actuals under the Head each  
year, they express the view that every care should be taken to make realistic and 
objective projections at the B E stage so that the funds available are  judiciously 
distributed and made use of by the various Ministries / Departments. 
 
 15 
 

Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) 
Central Training Facility 
 
14. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation had tak en 
possession of a plot of land on 04.07.03 from the Greater Noida Authority, for –  
constructing the Central Training Facility (National Academy of Statistical Administration 
– NASA) for Statistical personnel. 
15.  An allocation of  Rs.7.15 cror e was made in the B.E. for 2003-04 for 
constructing the CTF. However, the project which was entrusted to the CPWD could not 
take off during the y ear 2003-04 and the allocation was reduced to Rs.50 lakh at the 
stage of RE, 2003-04. 
16.  The Committee in their 4 th Report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of the previous year, 2004-05 looked into the matter viz., Detailed Demand No. 53 on 
‘Major Works’ and observed that as the l and for constructing the Central Training 
Facility had been ac quired, the allocation of Rs.8.86 crore made for the year in t he 
budgetary provisions should b e fully utiliz ed for constructing the buildin g and als o 
desired that the expenditure might be watc hed carefully, and if needed, revised at the 
stage of RE so as to minimize the gap between RE and Actuals. 
17. The Government, in their repl y had stated that the Committee’s 
recommendation was  noted for complianc e and th at, at the stage of RE, the Budget  
requirement for constructing the Central Tr aining Facility would be realistically  
assessed. 
18.  When the Committee desired to k now whet her the entire allocation of 
Rs.8.86 crore made f or the year, 2003-04 was utilised and detai ls of the present status  
of constructing the building, the Ministry, in a written reply, informed :- 
“The allocation of BE for 2004-05 under “Major Works” for construction 
of Central Training F acility (CTF) was Rs.8.86 crore. The c onstruction could 
not make the desired progress due to ch ange in the dimensio ns of the plot 
and cons equential re-registration. Mor eover, the building plan, whic h was 
earlier prepared by CPWD and submi tted to Greater Noida  Industrial 
Development Authority for approval, did not get their approval. Greater Noida 
Industrial Development Authority ra ised a number of objections mostly 
relating to technical c hanges in the procedure and rules. The CPWD had to 
redesign t he Plan. In order to make  the complex “Energy  Efficient”, 
 16 
 

technology adopted by the Bio-T ech Building of IIT, Kanpur was  studied for 
adoption. The revised plan is being resubmitted. As a result, construction of  
the CTF except the c onstruction of the boundary walls  was delay ed. In view 
of this large amount was surrendered at RE stage and reduced to RS. 25.00 
Lakhs only . Subsequently, on demand fr om CPWD, authorization has been 
issued for an additional amount  of Rs. 45.00 Lakh for ca rrying out land filling 
and other associated activities  during the year 2004-05. It has been assured 
by the CPWD that the entire amount of Rs. 70.00 Lakh (Rs. 25.00 Lakh + Rs. 
45.00 Lakh) would be spent during 2004-05”. 
 
19.  Informing the Committee of the details of the progress made in the 
constructing of the building, the Secretary, stated during oral evidence :- 
“…………there is also an investment in  the construction of a Central 
Training Facility at Noida. That has also run into certain problems. Howev er, I 
am glad to say that we are well on our way to resolve it. In Noida  authorities 
have changed their building regulations and now they  require us to set back 
60 metres on each s ide of the parcel. So, roughly, about 30 to 40 per cent of 
the land will go merely in green belt. I am  sure, that is very good for the 
environs and for the citiz ens of Delhi. It is, perhaps, a very useful and good 
step in that direction, but certainly, it does cause some awkwardness for us in 
the sense that it requires us to redes ign the various plans whic h we had in 
mind.” 
For the year, 2005-06, an allocation of  Rs.13.73 c rore has been made  for  
construction of the CTF. 
 17 
 

 
20.  The Committee had, in their Fourth  Report on the Demands for Grants 
(2004-05) of the Ministry emphasized on the need for ensuring judicious usage of  
the allocation of Rs.8.86 crore earmarked  for constructing the Central Training 
Facility for the benefit of s tatistical personnel by ensuring that the related w ork 
was taken up and executed as per the stipul ated schedule. The Committee, are, 
however, compelled to take serious note of the fact no tangible progress could be 
made in constructing the building during the year 2004-05, due to the changes in 
the dimensions of the plot, consequential re-registration and failure to obtain the 
approvals of the authorities concerned fo r building plan prepared by  the CPWD. 
As a result, a very large portion of the budgetted amount of Rs.8.86 cr ore for the 
year 2004-05 had to be surrendered b y th e Ministr y, w ith the net expenditure 
likely to be incurred on the project during the year being restricted to an amo unt 
of Rs.25 lakhs w ith the possibilit y of an additional amount of Rs.45 lakhs being 
used tow ards land  filling and associated  activities. What the Com mittee find 
particularly disturbing to note is the fact  that w hile the Ministr y had, during the  
previous year viz., 2004-05, attributed the delay  i n executing the project to the 
failure of the CPWD adhering to the time schedule for preparing the building plan, 
this year, the reasons extended for the dela y relate to the b uilding plan prepared 
by the CPWD being not in conformity  w ith the stipulations of Greater Noida 
Authority. 
21.  The Committe e underst and that a r evised building plan is being re-
submitted for approval by the Greater Noida Authority and an amount of Rs.13.75 
crore has been ear marked at the B. E., 2005-06 for executing the project. As 
assured by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence, the Committee trust 
that necessary approvals would be obtained speedily and the amount of Rs.13.75 
crore allocated for the project during the year, 2005-06, w ould be u tilised with 
care and objectivity  so that the exerci se of revisi ng the budgetted amount to a 
much lesser level at  the stage of prep aration of the Revised Estimates and  th e 
differential betw een the Estim ates and th e Actual expenditure being of a ver y 
high order is avoided. 
 18 
 

Online Computerised Monitoring System 
 
 22.  As informed by the Ministry of  Statisti cs and Programme Implementation 
(2003-04), the Project Monitoring  Div ision of the Ministry had taken the initiative for 
introduction of On-line Computerised Moni toring Sy stem (OCMS) for monitoring of 
projects. 
 23. It was expected that procurement  of computer hardware and s oftware 
required for Online Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS) would materialise during 
2003-04. However, the procurement could not  be effected as t he processing followed 
under World Bank Pr ocurement System took  much longer time than anticipated. In 
2004-05 the budget allocation fo r the purpose was en hanced from Rs.30 lakh in BE to 
Rs.1.65 crore in RE.  The procurement of  computer hardware and software has taken 
place during 2004-05. 
24.  During oral evidence, the Co mmittee had em phasised on the need for 
modernising the IT infrastructure and the Ministry acquiring a IT-friendly image. 
25.  In res ponse to a question on wh ether the Online Comp uterised Monitoring 
System (OCMS) was made operat ional and the extent to wh ich it had contributed in 
improving t he quality of project monitoring, the Minist ry in a written reply, stated as  
follows :- 
“(i) The monitoring of the projects through OCMS is likely to take place by end 
of May, 2005. The system design has been completed, tested and hardware is 
under installation.  
(ii) The OCMS will cont ribute in improving the quality of project and 
infrastructure monitoring in the following ways: 
(a) On-Line Collection of information without time lag (saving in postal and 
other charges) and would help in taking remedial measures without delay. 
(b) On-Line communication between t he project enterprises and the MOSP I 
Officers 
(c) Facility to transfer project pr ofiles (in graphical form – photos, PERT-
Charts and related reports) which can be read at the MOSPI end. 
(d) Access to Reports of all the sectors prepared by the MOSPI. 
(e) Access to Sectoral Reports by the concerned project enterprises and 
authorities for reference at any moment of time. 
 19 
 

(f) Access to Guidelines/ Procedures/Circulars relating to projects in public 
and private sector. 
 
(g) The Projec t Managers/Engineers can now write their  experienc e in the 
field of engineering/project management for Electronic Magazine (Ezene) on-line 
on the website of the MOSPI . The articles would be classified into specific  
categories for ease of reference. 
(h) The OCMS would assist in the k nowledge management in the field of 
Project Management which can be referre d in future for better planning and 
implementation. 
(i) The System is expected to generate: 
 Automatic reminders at different situations to all participating agencies 
 Reports on red-alert situations for higher level intervention. 
 Forewarning reports for initiating re levant action or take remedial 
measures to put projects on proper track.  
 
 20 
 

 
26.  The Committee note that the major initiative of introducing the `On-line 
Computerised Monitoring Sy stem (OCMS)  for ena bling effe ctive monitoring of 
project implementation could not materi alise as scheduled in  2003-04 ow ing to 
the delay  in procuring the computer ha rdware and softw are. The procurements 
could materialise onl y in 2004-05, and as informed by  the Ministry , the OCMS  
would become operational by the end  of  May , 2005 an d w ould contribute in 
improving the quality  of project and infrastructure monitoring inter-alia by  
enabling on-line  collection of informa tion w ithout time lags; on-line 
communication between the pr oject enterprises and the Ministr y; and f acilitating 
transfer of project profiles and accruing of sectoral reports. The Committee feel 
that no effort should be spared in modernising and up-dating the IT infrastructure 
of the Ministry. When the system is put in place, the Committee feel that it will not 
only bring about revolutionary  change in quality of monitoring but w ill help in 
taking quick remedial measures. The Commi ttee, therefore w ish to be kep t 
apprised of the progress in implementing the OCMS as well as its effectiveness in 
strengthening the project monitoring measures. 
 21 
 

Central Statistical Organisation 
Updating the Indices 
 
Revision of current series of CPI (UNME) 
 
27.  The current series of CPI (UNME) on base 1984-85 is being compiled by the 
CSO in the Ministry of Stat istics & Program me Implementation. The weighting diagram 
for the current series of CPI (UNME) wa s prepared on the basis of the data collected 
through family living survey for urban non-manual employe es (FLS f or UNME)  
conducted during 1982-83. With the passage of time since the last FLS for UNME 
conducted during 1982-83,  the c onsumption pattern of the population in general and 
urban non-manual population in particular has been affected due to considerable 
changes in the economy and ra pid urbanization and globalis ation of various economic 
activities r esulting in emergence of new commodities/services on one hand a nd 
disappearance of some old items of c onsumption on the other. A s such, the 
consumption basket of the current series of CPI (UNME) needs to be revised. Thus, the 
conduct of a fresh FLS for UNME to represent  the current consumption pattern on a 
realistic basis has become necessary. A proposal for creation of 209 posts for 
conducting FLS for UNME, market survey and price collection for revision of the current 
series of CPI (UNME) in 66 urban cent ers spread through out the country, was  
submitted to the Minis try of Finance. The Mi nistry of Finance did agree in principle for 
revision of the current seri es of CPI (UNM E) and advised to get the work  done through 
a private agency. However, no suitable private agency appeared to exist which could be 
entrusted the field work of this size and volu me spread over the ent ire country. Further, 
since the CPI (UNME) is used for the variety of purposes having financial implications, 
entrusting sensitive work to any private agency may involve subjectivity and in turn, may 
create problems in it s wider acceptance. The proposal wa s therefore, again s ubmitted 
to the Ministry of Finance with financial implications in December, 2002. The Ministry of 
Finance once again advised to get the work  done through a private agency. As adv ised 
by the Ministry of Finance, the estimates for conduct of FLS for UNME, market survey  
and collection of price data in 66 urban centers and also basic information necessary for 
evaluation of the capability of the NGOs were obtained. As no suitable NGOs appeared 
to exist, the proposal for conduct of Family Living Survey was went to NSSO, which was 
considered in the 88 th meeting of the G overning C ouncil of NSSO held on 2 5-26 
 22 
 

February, 2004 at Kolkata. In the meeting the Governing Council agreed to the proposal 
for taking up the Family Living Survey during the survey period of t he NSS 62 nd round 
(July 2005-June 2006). 
28.  The Ministry, in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“(i) CPI(IW) is compiled by the Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour and not by 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. The present exercise 
of updating the bas e of CPI(IW) is thir d in the series. A det ailed scheme, 
submitted by the Labour Bu reau in this regard, was approved by  the Technical 
Advisory Group (TAC) on 26 Nov 1996.  FOD(NSSO) undertook the field work  
for collecting income and  expenditure data in respect of working class familie s 
from 78 centers on behalf of Labour Bu reau during 1999-2000.  All technical 
details pertaining to updation of existing series of CPI(IW)  were examined by a 
Sub group of TAC and its recommendations were approved by t he TAC in its 
43rd meeting in July, 2004. 
(ii) Users’ meeting is  proposed to be conven ed by  the Labour Bureau in 
May, 2005. Thereafter, the new series is likely to be released. 
(iii) Compilation of Whole sale Price Index (WPI) is the responsibility of the 
Office of Economic Advisor, Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Initially, the 
Group was  expected to submit its report by December, 2004. But in view of  
workload involved the Group has been gi ven extension up to J une, 2005. The 
Working Group for revision of c urrent series of WPI under the chairmans hip of 
Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member , Planning Commission, has initiated its workin g and 
is still on the job. The Working Group constituted four Sub groups on (i) Primary 
articles, (ii) Manufactured Items and related matters, (iii) Inclusion of items from 
unorganized manufacturing sector and (iv) Analytical and other related issu es. 
Tentatively, the bas e year of the new series is propos ed to be 2000-01. It is 
expected that after submi ssion of the report by t he Group the new series  of 
WPI would be released within a year. “ 
29.  During the oral ev idence, attention of the Ministry was drawn to the fact that 
in one part of the report of the Statisti cal Commission, Dr. Rang arajan was of the view 
that the measurement of the inflation was a very defective  one in our country. We are 
depending heavily on the WPI. A nd WPI does not include a situation where 52 per cent 
of our GDP whic h is  accounted with the s ervice sector. Ultimatel y, about six months 
 23 
 

back, there was a dis cussion about the wid e variation between t he CPI and the WPI. 
There was a media note that the Ministry was looking into this particular thing and it was 
indicated that a Task Force has been set up to look into this particular recommendation 
of the Statistical Commission that our inflation measurement is defective.  
30.  In response to the concerns  expressed by the Committee in the matter, the 
Secretary, stated during evidence:- 
“The WPI and the PPI, the Publishers Price Index, pertain to the 
Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Industry. They are processing the se 
recommendations and the Wor king Group  under the chairmans hip of Prof. 
Sen is already working on the revision of WPI. As far as PPI is concerned, 
definitely, to my knowledge no work has started”. 
On the issue of revision of the curr ent issue of whole sale pric e index 
(WPI) and the adequacy of the present WPI as a means of meas uring inflation, 
the Ministry, in their post evidence reply, informed as under:- 
“It is true, as also observed by th e National Statistical Commission ,the 
present WPI is an inadequate measure of inflation; there is a need for a 
separate index for measurement of inflation in the economy. The present WPI 
does not include Services Sector whos e contribution to GDP is now mor e 
than 50%. Recognising the inadequacy of present WPI series the terms of  
reference of Working Group inter alia include: 
• To examine the need for switchi ng over from wholesale price 
Index (WPI) to producer pric e based Index (PPI) and sugges t 
further improvements based on the IMF’s PPI Manual. 
• To explore of inclusion of selected services in a WPI basket. 
 
The current series of Wholesale Price Index number on base 1993-94 
was introduced in April, 2000. Since th en signific ant structural and other 
changes have taken place in the I ndian economy. It therefore became 
necessary to go into all aspects of revision of WPI series including commodity 
coverage, base year, weight ing diagrams and the rela ted issues keeping in 
view the r ecommendations of the Na tional Statistic al Commission. The  
Government of India constituted a Wo rking Group for the revision of the 
current series Wholes ale Price I ndex Num bers under the chairmanship o f 
 24 
 

Prof. Abhijit Sen, Jawaharlal Nehru University (now member, Planning 
Commission) in December, 2003. 
The Working Group h as already initiated its work. To fa cilitate focused 
discussion on different aspects related with the revision of the WPI series and 
to help the Working Group in the completi on of the work assigned to it, on the 
recommendation of the Working Group f our sub-Groups on (i) Analytical 
issues, (ii)  Agricultural commodities , (iii) Manufactured items and (iv ) 
Unorganisex/unregistered industries have been constituted. The present term 
of the Working Group expires on 30 th J une, 2005. After submission of the 
report by the Working Group normally it takes about a year to release the new 
series. 
It is expected that after submission of the report of the Working Group 
and releas e of new series of WPI, wo rk on producer pric e Index will be 
initiated in  the offic e of Eco nomic Adviser, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry.” 
 25 
 

31.  The National Statistic al Commissi on had felt tha t the current 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) with base 1993-94 w as deficient in many respects 
inter-alia ow ing to the fact that price ch anges in  the services sector  w ere not 
duly acco unted for. The Com mission had also concluded that, as at present,  
WPI was not an adequate measure of inflation and there was a need for separate 
index for measurem ent of inflation in  the econ omy. The Committee understand 
that a working group has been constituted to give focused attention on different 
aspects related w ith the revision of WPI series, whose terms of reference inter-
alia include, exploring the possibility  of inclusion of selected services in a WPI  
basket and examining the need for sw itching over from WPI to a Produ cer Price 
Base Index (PPI). C onsidering the fact that the price indices in the system of  
economic statistic s are closel y w atched indicators of macro economic 
performances an d are important tools in the formulation of the monitor y and  
fiscal policy , the Committe e strongl y emphasise on t he need for earl y 
completion of the work on the new series of WPI and Producer Price Index (PPI). 
The Com mittee also w ish to be kept a pprised of the progress made in this 
direction.  
31A. As r egards th e issue o f revision of current series of CPI, the 
Committee understand that the Labour Bureau had prepared a detailed scheme 
way back in 1996 and the NSSO undertook the related fie ld survey and the 
technical details worked out, which have since been examined by the Technical 
Advisory Committee. The Labour Bureau has reportedly convened a meeting in 
May, 2005 to consider the matter. The Committee expect the w ork on the 
revision of series to be completed and the new  series of CPI released 
expeditiously.  
 26 
 

Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) 
Quality and reliability of Statistical Data 
 
 32.  The CSO co- ordinates statistical ac tivities with Central Govern ment  
Ministries/Departments, State Governments and other Statistical Agenc ies.  The CSO  
participates in the inter- departmental meetings of t he Working Groups, Technical 
Advisory Committees, Standing Committ ees constituted by the Central 
Ministries/Departments with a view to ensuring statistical standards, to avoid duplication 
of efforts and for promoting quality and timeliness of data.  The CSO also participates in 
the Committees of the State Governments and assists in t he statistical data generation 
and dissemination activities. 
33.  With regard to the i ssue of quality, authenticity a nd reliabilit y of statistical 
data, the Committee in their 4th Report inter-alia observed as follows: 
“They are also concerned to find t hat different methodologies b eing 
adopted by various Ministries for colle ction of data do not conform to the 
standards laid down by the Minist ry of Statistics and  Programme 
Implementation. The Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) working under the 
Ministry has reportedly been unable to ma intain statistical standards due to 
ineffective statistical c o-ordination with other Central Mini stries/Departments, 
some of which even do not have statistical cells and professional statisticians. 
The result has been t hat the surveys are conducted one after another at their 
own level r esulting into collection of  sub-standard data which c an hardly be 
relied upon. As regards dat a collection in the States , the situation is  ev en 
more pathetic. Most of the statistical dat a in the Stat es is  generated at the 
level of Block Development Officers  and approved by the Agricultur e 
Production Commissioner in the State cap ital who is t he final authority. The 
Committee are of the view that the main problem  with regard to State 
statistical system relates to lack of infr astructural facilities which includes lack 
of qualified enumerators as well.” 
 
34.  During the cour se of oral eviden ce of the Ministry, the Members of the 
Committee desired to know about the reliability and dependability of the data at local-level 
database and at the states level.  The Secretary replied as under: 
 
 27 
 

“By and large the much larger porti on of the data as we call the 
administration or official statistics, these are the kinds of numbers which every 
Department churns out.  These may be De partments of Agriculture, etc.  For 
example, let us take Agricultur e.  It  would be crop yields and would be 
deciding that land ext ents which are multiplied the two and then you get the 
entire produce.  The samp ling behind the crop survey is very reliable.   
However, there is a great  doubt in the quality of data which is  maintained.  
For example, if you take the field of social statistics, enum eration, retention 
rates in schools, how much children ar e going to schools, how many go t o 
class 1 or V, how many drop outs, etc.  If we go to the health side, what is the 
infant mortality rate and what is the maternal mortality rate, what is the rate of 
incidence of HIV AIDS, etc. These kinds  of statisti c are numbers whos e 
quality leaves a lot to be desired.  There are problems in the quality  
parameters.  Firstly, these statistics ar e not a product of let us say scientifi c 
process of statistics.  T hese are statistics which o ccur in soc iety and we are 
going to see two accounts – how many of these and how many of that and 
largely these statistics are maintained in  the various district offices of the 
various Departments of the country.  In  several cases, these are maintained 
at district and probably even v illage lev el figures are agglomerated at the 
State level and then collected and given to each State.  Then the State 
Department may send it to t he concerned Departments and the 
corresponding Departments in  the Central Government.  In these kinds of  
data, a lot has to be done a bout quality of t his.  Certainly, a lot more can be 
done than what we are doing currently.  This data is c ertainly not very  
satisfactory.” 
 
35.  When asked about the suggestion ma de to the Government in regard t o 
improve the quality of the statistics being given, the Secretary stated : 
 
“Sir, what we do is that we have  council meeting across the States.  It  
meets once in two years.  It is sort of an agency where we have the opportunity 
to exchange and interact and so on.  But lately it had not met.”  
 
 28 
 

36.  The Rangaraj an Committee in their report of the Nati onal Statistical 
Commission has observed as under: 
“For reform of administration of the Indian Statisti cal System by 
upgrading its infrastructure and thereby enhancing the credibilit y of official 
statistics, the Commission is of the view that an independent statistical  
authority free from political  interference having power to set priorities wit h 
respect to Core Statis tics is needed to  ensure quality standards  of statistical 
processes.  Such an aut hority will also improve the co-ordination among 
different agencies  collecting dat a.  Tho ugh the National Advis ory Board on 
Statistics was constituted with this  objective, its impact has been minimal.  I n 
view of this , the Com mission has recommended the creation of a permane nt 
and statutory apex body – National Commission on Statistics (NCS) – through 
an Act of Parliament, independent of t he Government in respect of policy-
making co-ordination and maintaining quality standards of core Statistics. 
A lack of c o-ordination among the di fferent ministries and departments 
of the Central Government leads ul timately to poor and u nproductive 
statistical advice to the concerned admin istrative ministries and departments.  
To remedy this situation, the Co mmission recommends the appointment of 
statistical advisers in im portant ministries and departm ents in order to make 
available s ound statistical input s and advice for the purposes of policy  
formulation and decision-making under the technical guidance of t he National 
Statistician. 
Some of the State Directorates of Economics and Statistics do not play  a 
nodal role in the co-or dination of statistical activities  within the State and lack  
survey sampling and data processing capabilities.  To impr ove the c o-
ordination within the State statistica l systems, the  State Directorates of 
Economics and Statistics must be made  responsible for tec hnical co-
ordination with all state Departments in res pect of the content, methodology  
and dissemination of statistics.  Th e Conference of Central and State 
Statistical Organisations is another in strument, which would prov ide a forum 
for regular interaction among the Central and State statisticians.  In some of 
the States, as the statistical cadr es are generally fragmented, the constitution 
of an organised State Statistical C adre is urgently required.  For 
 29 
 

strengthening the statisti cal sy stem in the States, the Commission has 
recommended a Centrally-spons ored scheme with the specific objectives of 
developing survey and data-processing capabilities in the States.” 
 
37. When asked about the status of the setting up of the National statistic al 
Commission, the Secretary in his reply stated as under: 
“As regards setting up of the N ational Statistical Commission, we 
have finished the inter-Ministerial consultations and the draft Cabinet note 
along-with the comments of  all the Ministries inc luding the RBI, the 
Ministry of  Finance and t he Ministry of Law is ready.  The draft is ready 
and the minute the Cabi net Secretary clears it, it will be submitted for the 
consideration of the Cabinet and it will come up then. 
 30 
 

38.  The Committee are deepl y concerned to  note the deficiencies prevalent in 
methodology of coll ection of data at di fferent levels.  They  underst and that t he 
collection of data at local level is not free fr om faults.  The deficient data in turn is 
transmitted to district offices before being agglomerated at the state level.  The S tate 
department supplies the same to the con cerned departments and the corresponding 
departments in the Central Government.  They  take note of the Government’s ow n 
admission in this regard that lot has to be done about quality of data collections.  The 
Committee find tha t the high pow ered Co mmittee under the Chairmanship of Shri 
Rangarajan has submitted its report way back in 2001, which have given far reaching 
recommendation in this regard.  These include inter-alia the appointment of statistical 
advisors in important Ministries and depart ments, constitution of an organised Stat e 
Statistical Cadre, launching of a Cent rally-sponsored Scheme w ith the sp ecific 
objectives of developing survey  and data processing capabilities in the States,  
besides setting up of an independent stat istical authority – National Commission on 
Statistics through an Act of Parliament in respect of policy-making co-ordination and 
maintaining qualit y standards of core-sta tistics.  They recall that they had  
recommended for setting up of National Stat istical Commission through an Act of 
Parliament in their report in 2 004-05.  The Committee strongl y deplor e the undue 
delay on the part of the Gov ernment in, br inging the Bill, which, a s informe d is 
expected to be introduced shortly.  As the future of maintaining and supply of quality 
statistics hinges on  the fate of this Bill and the Committe e w ant that all form alities 
should be completed w ithout further de lay so that the National Statis tical 
Commission may be able to carry its programme for revamping the statistical system 
in India.   
39. The Committee are given to under stand that w ith a vie w to interact 
between s tates and Central Government, there is a Council w hich meets once i n 
every two years.  They find that the meeting of the Council has not been held so far.  
They depl ore such delay  in holding the  m eeting and w ant that the frequency  f or 
holding this meeting may  be r educed to one year instead of the tw o years so th at 
fruits of interaction can be realised. The  Committee also strongl y feel the need to 
enhance the quantum of funding to the St ates for strengthening the statistical  
system of the States. 
 31 
 

National Sample Survey Organisation – Delay  in publication of 
reports 
 
40.  The National Sample Survey Organi sation (NSSO) is mandated to conduct  
nation-wide surveys on various socio-econom ic aspects, Annual Survey of Industries 
(ASI), follow-up surveys of Economic Census and supervision of area enum eration and 
crop estimation surveys of state agencies under  the Improvement of Crop Statistics 
(ICS) scheme, Urban Frame Survey  with a view to prepare a frame of compact units of  
urban areas as the first stage sampling units (FSUs), organizing methodological studies 
and pilot surveys on important subjects and collection of price data from rural and urban 
sectors. The organization func tions under the overall direct ion of a Governing Counci l 
(GC) with requisite autonomy in the matter of NSS data collection, processing and 
publication. In addition to the non-official Professional Chairman, the GC is composed of 
five academicians, five data users from Central and State Governments and senio r 
officers of the Ministry. Director General  and Chief Executive Officer (DG&CEO) is 
responsible for coordi nation and supervision all activities of the organization. He is  
Member-Secretary of the GC and is assisted  by one Additional Director General and 4 
Deputy Director Generals. 
41.  The NSSO has four Divisions viz. (i) Survey Design and Research Division 
(SDRD); (ii) Field Operations Division (FOD); (iii) Data Processing  Division (DPD); an d 
(iv) Coordination and Publicat ion Division (CPD). (i) The SDRD is headed by a Deputy  
Director General and located at Kolkata is responsible for planning of the survey, 
formulation of sample design, designing of enquiry schedules and preparation of reports 
based on survey results. (ii) The FOD is headed by an Additional Director General, wit h 
headquarter at Delhi and a network of six Zonal Offices at Bangalore, Guwahati, Jaipur, 
Kolkata, Lucknow and Nag pur, 48 Regional Ofices and 117 Sub-Regional Offices 
spread throughout the country. The Divis ion is responsible for collection of primary data 
for the surveys undertaken. (iii) The DPD headed by a Deputy Dir ector General with its  
headquarter at Kolkata has six Data Pr ocessing Centres (Ahmedabad, Bangalore,  
Delhi, Girdih, Kolkata and Nahp ur) and is en trusted with the responsib ilities of sample  
selection, software development, processing  and tabulating the data collected through 
surveys. (iv) The CPD headed by a Deput y Director General, is the secretariat of the 
GC of the NSSO. Apart from co ordinating the activities of different Divis ions, it brings  
out a bi-annual technical journal entitled Sarvekshana. 
 32 
 

42.  The Governing Counc il of N SSO has been reconstituted under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar  by the G overnment with effect from 30 th 
November, 2004. The 89 th meeting of the Governing C ouncil was held during 12-13 
January, 2005 at New Delhi.  The Council inter-alia discuss ed and approved (i) 
tabulation plan and estimation pr ocedure in respect of NSS 60 th and 61 st Rounds (ii)  
tabulation plan and estimation procedure for pilot survey on  Non-Profit Institutions  
Serving Househo lds and (iii) sample de sign and schedules of enquiry of Baselin e 
Survey of UNICEF. 
Working Group (WG) 
The Working Group (WG) on 60 th Rou nd of NSS on Morbidity, He alth Care.  
Employment –Unemployment an d Consumer Expenditure fi nalized the tabulation plan 
and estimation procedure for this round in its meeting held on 17th June, 2004. 
The fifteenth meeting of the WG on NSS 61 st Round was held on 11 th January, 2005. 
The group finalized t he tabulation plan a nd estimation procedure for the NSS 61 st 
Round survey. 
The first meeting of the WG on NSS 62 nd Round was  held at Kolkata during 29 th –30th 
September, 2004. In this meet ing, the draft sample desi gn and schedules of enquiry for 
the NSS 62 nd Round was discussed. On the propos al to take up the Family Living 
Survey (FLS) for urban non-manual employees  during t his round,  the WG  
recommended that FLS might be taken up in a future round if adequate resources 
cannot be made available durin g the survey period of 62nd Round. The second meeting 
of this group was held on 3- 4 February, 2005 at Kolkata and the group finalized sample 
design and schedules. 
In the third meeting of the WG for Pilot Survey on Non-Pr ofit Institutions Serving  
Households (NPISH) held during 6 th – 7th February, 2004, the WG finalize d the sample 
design and schedules  of enquiry  for the pilot survey on NPISH. The fourth meeting of 
WG was held in New Delhi on 18th November, 2004. In this meeting, tabulation plan and 
estimation procedure were finalized by the group. 
Socio-Economic Surveys 
NSS 58th Round 
The 58th Round of NSS (July – De cember, 2002) was earmarked for collection of 
data on disability, housing c ondition, villa ge facilitie s and s lum particulars besides 
household consumer expenditure and employment-unemployment. Out of the remaining 
 33 
 

two reports on housing one report was already br ought out  and the last report is 
expected to be released shortly. A press note on Hou sing Condition in India based on 
this round survey was released on 14 May, 2004. 
NSS 59th Round 
The NSS 59 th Round (January – December, 2003) was devoted to collection of 
data on land and liv estock holdings; debt and investment and household consumer  
expenditure along with some key characte rstics of employment-unemployment. The 
Situation Assessment Survey (SAS) of farmers was also conducted during this round on 
behalf of Union Minist ry of Ag riculture and Cooperat ion. The final stage of v aluation of 
data is under progress. The following six r eports are expc ted to be releas ed by May, 
2005. 
(i) Consumer expenditure, Employment and Un-employment 
(ii) Livestock holdings in India 
(iii) Some aspects of farming  
(iv) Access to modern technology for farming  
(v) Household assets and liabilities 
(vi) Indebtness of farmer households 
 
NSS 60th Round 
The 60th Round of NSS (January – June 2004) was devoted to morbidity and 
health care, employment and unemployment  and household consum er expenditure. 
Data processing work is under progress. 
NSS 61st Round 
The seventh quinquennial survey on consumer expenditure, employment and 
unemployment (NSS 61 st round) is being conducted during July 2004 – June 2005. 
A total of 12784 s ample villages/blocks are covered in this s urvey. The Planning 
Commission uses consumer expenditur e data collected through quin quennial 
surveys for estimating incidence of poverty. 
NSS 62nd Round  
The 62nd Round of NSS (July 2005 – June 2 006) will be devoted to survey on 
“Un-organised Manufacturing”. Apart from  this, usual annual survey on Household 
consumer expenditure and employment unemployment shall also be carried out. 
 34 
 

43.  Questioned about the reasons for the significant delays in publis hing data 
and reports, particularly of the NSSO, the Secr etary, replied during oral evidence as  
under:- 
“The 58 th report which had taken place in  2002,  that report has been 
released. The publication of this has been lagging by two and  a half years t o 
three years. But it is much better than 10 years which used to take plac e 
before. The 59 th Report which was do ne in 2003 would be released 
sometimes starting from May to Oct ober this year. It has been compressed 
further. The 60 th Report on Health care surv ey done in 2004 would be 
published in June, 2005. So the time taken for publication of this report is very 
less. 
 35 
 

44. The Committee are w ell aw are of the fact that the Nat ional Sample 
Survey Organisation (NSSO) is inter-alia mandated to conduct nationw ide 
surveys on various socio-economic aspects,  annual survey s of industries (ASI), 
follow-up surveys of Economic Census and Supervision of area enumeration and 
crop estimation, surveys of State agen cies under the ‘Improvement of Crop 
Statistics’ (ICS) scheme and organising methodological studies and pilot surveys 
on important subjects and co llection of price data from rura l and urban sectors.  
While the 58 th roun d of NSS survey und ertaken in Jul y – December, 2002 w as 
inter-alia earmarked for collection of da ta on disability, housing condition, village 
facilities and slum p articulars, the 59th round undertaken in January – December, 
2003 was, among other things devoted to collection of data on land an d livestock 
holding, debt and in vestment and household consumer expenditure, and the 60 th 
round un dertaken in Januar y – Ju ne, 2004 w as devoted  to morbidit y an d 
healthcare, emplo yment and unemp loyment and household consumer  
expenditure. The 61 st round, which commenced in Jul y, 2004 and is to extend 
upto Jun e, 2005 is concern ed w ith consumer expenditure, emplo yment and  
unemployment and the 62 nd round, which is to be undertaken from Jul y, 2005 to  
June, 2006 would be on `Unorganised Manufacturing’. 
45.  While there is no doubt with regard  to the vital importance of the data 
generated and published by  the NSS surveys, w hat the Comm ittee feel 
particularly perturbed to not e is the fact that, quite o ften, significant delays have 
been noticed in publishing the NSS Survey  Data and Reports. As admitted by  the 
Secretary during evidence,  the report of the 58 th NSS Survey Round, w hich was 
completed in 2002 w as published tw o and half  to three y ears later; the report of 
the 59th Round und ertaken in 2003 is expected to  be released in the period, Ma y 
to October, 2005; and the report of the 60th Round executed in 2004 is expected to 
be published in June, 2005. The Committee cannot help observing that the lack of 
IT readiness on the part of the Ministry  has been a major contributory factor for 
the undue delay s, quite often noticed in publishing the reports of the NSS 
Surveys r ounds, w hich are of vital impor tance to the countr y. As emphasised 
time and again, the Committee expect th at the Government w ould make ever y 
possible effort in ensuring that field su rvey rep orts and  dat a are released in a 
timely manner so that their relevance is not minimised, if not totally lost. 
 36 
 

India Statistical Strengthening Project 
( Modernisation of Statistical System in India ) 
 
46.  The Ministry of St atistics and Programme Implementation had prepared and 
taken up a detailed project proposal  for “M odernisation of Statisti cal System of India 
with assistance from the World Bank. The pr oject was subsequently renamed as `India 
Statistical Strengthening Project’. 
 47.  Though initially conceived to be taken up as a comprehensive project, it was 
later decided to make it a two tier project. Ti er-I of the project consists of a number of  
studies for working out the me thodologies, cost and time estimates and other details for 
the preparation and implementat ion of T ier-II. The specif ic components included in the  
Tier-I of the project are the following :- 
(a) Study for the Creation and Maintenance of Business Register. 
(b) Study for Identifying s pecific Requirements of Strengthening of State 
Statistical Bureaus 
(c) Surveys for improvement of Service Sector Statistics 
(d) Study for Assessing Survey Capabilities of Private Sector 
(e) Study for the Establishment of an All India Statistical Network 
 
48. Tier-II of the project which will be  the  actual im plementation phas e of the 
project is to be formulated on the basis of the studies completed during Tier-I. 
 
49.  The Committee had, while examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
for the previous year viz. 2004-05, inter-alia taken note of the fact that Tier II, which was 
the actual implement ation phas e of the `I ndia Statis tical Str engthening Project’ was 
dependent on the outcome of Ti er I. The Committee had, therefore observed in their 4 th 
Report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry (2004-05), t hat the Government 
should `strictly adhere to the time schedule’ of the project in `right earnest’. 
50.  Asked to furnish details of the current status of implementation of the project, 
the Ministry, in a written reply, inter-alia informed as follows :- 
 
“The status in respect of each of the components  of the project 
“Modernisation of Statistical syst em in India” renamed as the “India 
Statistical Strengthening Project” is as follows:- 
 
 37 
 

Implementation status of 5 components of India 
Statistical Strengthening Project 
 
  The implementation status for each component is given below:- 
 
Component I:  Study on Creation and Maintenance of Business Register. 
 
Activity Date of 
Starting 
Date of 
Completion 
Current Status 
Identifying an agency 
and enlist it's 
services 
Jun-04 Sept-04 The agency has been enlisted 
on 10.12.2004 
Preparatory work Sept-04 Sept-04 Completed on Dec. 2004 
Formulation of 
exploratory enquiry 
and execution of field 
study including 
validation survey 
Oct-04 Mar-05 Field work in three districts of 
Andhra Pradesh is in progress.  
The work started in January 05 
and will be completed by April 
2005 
Processing of data 
and draft report 
Mar-05 Apr-05 Data processing for the district  
of Medak has been initiated 
Designing prototype Apr-05 May-05 To be taken up 
Software 
development and 
creation of prototype 
Jun-05 Jul-05 To be taken up 
Testing updation 
mechanism 
Jul-05 Aug-05 To be taken up 
Preparation of final 
blue print of Business 
Register 
Aug-05 Aug-05 The blue print will be r eady by 
September, 2005 
 
Component II Study for  identify ing Specific Requirements of State 
Statistical Bureaus (Phase – 1) 
The original date of completion  was February, 2005.  Now the 
expected date is  September, 2005.             
 
Component III: Study on Improvement of Service sector Statistics 
 
The original date of  completi on was  December, 2005.  Now the 
expected date is  July, 2006. 
 
 38 
 

Component IV: Stu dy for Assessment  of  Survey  Capabilities of Private 
Sector 
 The original date of completion was April, 2005.  Now the expected 
date is  December, 2005. 
Component V: Establishment of All India Statistical Network 
 The study can be taken up only w hen f irst report of the study on 
identifying specific require ments of State St atistical Bureaus is  available .  
Hence, it can be awarded only after September, 2005 and could be 
completed within 20 weeks after the study has been awarded.” 
 
51.  Informing the Committee of  the present status of t he project, the Secretary, 
stated during oral evidence :- 
“One of the important sc hemes which had come to the adverse notice 
of this Committee is geared to that. That is the statistical strengthening 
project which has been badly  del ayed which has  actually been 
financed by the Worl d Bank. This is one where we are studying all the 
five elements of the society in terms of statistics. We are studying as to 
what is the strength of the State. What exactly is their status? What are 
their needs  and capabilities and weak nesses? We should be able t o 
get the report on these aspects very soon.” 
 
 39 
 

 
52. The Committe e feel concerned to note that though significant 
budgetary allocations are b eing made  in successive y ears since 2002-03 f or 
implementing the World Bank aided project on modernising the statistical system 
in the countr y, w hich has now  been na med as `India Statisti cal Stre ngthening 
Project’, the ground realit y of the progress of the project is far from satisfactory . 
The Committee had, in their 4 th Report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry  
for the year, 2004-05 taken n ote of the f act that Tier-II, which w as the actual 
implementation phase of the project, w as dependent on the outcome of Tier-I of 
project. The Committee had, therefore, emphasised on the need to ensure that the 
project schedules w ere stric tly adher ed to. To their dismay , how ever, the 
Committee have now learnt that there have been slippages of the time schedul es 
prescribed in respect of all the componen ts of Tier-I of the project viz., `Stud y on 
Creation and Maintenance of Business Re gister’, Stud y for identify ing specific 
Requirements of State Statistical Bur eaus; Stud y on Impr ovement of Service 
Sector Statistics; Study for Assessment of Survey Capabilities of Pvt. Sector; and 
Establishment of A ll India St atistical Net work. They  take note of the fact that  
during examination of Demands for Grants  (2004-05), the Government had itself 
admitted the slippages of the time sched ule but assured to complete the w ork by 
the end of  2005. T hey are con cerned to note that even the revised schedule as 
proposed by the Government w ill not be a dhered to and the Tier -I of the project 
will be likely to be completed b y July, 2006. The Committee strongly feel that th e 
Government cannot afford to be lethargi c in implementing this project, w hich 
would, in the long run, prove to be of  a immense value addition to the countr y. 
The Committee, therefore, re-iterate that no effort should be spared to ensure that 
the Tier-I of the project is completed as per the revised planned sched ule so that 
Tier-II of the project takes off and the project is  impleme nted w ithout furthe r 
delay. They also w ish to be periodically  appraised of the progress m ade in this 
direction. 
 40 
 

 Project Monitoring Division 
Time and Cost Overruns  
 
53.  The Project Monitoring Division (PM D) of the Ministry is responsible for 
monitoring of all Centr al Sector Projects co sting Rs.20 crore and abov e.  In addition, it 
also monitors the progress of irrigation pr ojects which are financed centrally under the 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme  (AIBP).  T he Project Monitoring Divis ion, in 
coordination with the administrat ive Ministries concerned,  ta kes up initiatives to bring  
about systematic improvements in various areas of project implementation. The various 
activities of the division, as informed by the Ministry, are as follows :- 
 
Monthly Monitoring of Major and Mega Projects 
 
54.  A two tier system of monitoring has  been adopted. While all  projects are 
monitored on a quarterly basis, the Major projec ts  costing Rs.100 crore and above ar e 
monitored on a monthly basis through Flash Report System. 
55. Copies of Flas h Report, containing   an analysis  of  the status of 
implementation of  the major projects are sent to the Ministries/Departments concerned 
for appropriate action.  
56.  An Exception Report is  brought out once every two months in respect of the 
projects w hich are showing progressive slippage in achi eving the milestones.  The 
Exception Report concentrates on the exceptional  issues and problems responsible for   
further   delays.  The critical and chronic iss ues requiring  action at   higher levels are  
brought into the focus. The em phasis is on exceptions and problems that need  to be 
addressed without delay.  
 
Quarterly Monitoring of all Projects 
 
57. The Division prepares Quarterly Pr oject Implementation Status Reports 
(QPISR) in respect of all projects  cost ing Rs.20 crore and more. The QPI SR covers 
salient features of th e projects sector-wise, indicate s, among other things, the latest  
commissioning dates, cumulative expenditure incurred  on the projects  up to the end of 
 41 
 

the quarter reported on and t he time and co st over-runs likely to occur in the 
implementation of each of the projects. 
58.  As on 01.04.2004. there w ere 568 proj ects on the monitor of the Ministry. 
During the period, April, 2004 to Septem ber, 2004, 115 new projects were added and 
65 projects completed and one project was delet ed from the monitoring. Therefore, as 
on 30.09.2004, there were 617 projects on the monitor costing Rs. 2,67,067 crore. 
59.  Asked to furnish details of the pr ojects that may have been added after 
September, 2004, the time and cost overr uns that may have been experienced i n 
executing projects, the action ta ken by the Ministry in this regard, and the proposals, if  
any, prepared for overcoming the bottlenecks in executing projects, th e Ministry 
informed as follows :- 
 
(i) After September, 2004 and upto December, 2004, 55 new projects 
have been added on the monitoring system of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation . 
 
(ii) One hundred forty nine  projects   have reported cost overrun of 22.2% 
with respect to the latest approved co st estimates. Eighteen  proj ects 
have been completed upto December, 2004. It may be noted that  only 
8 projects have contributed to nearly  79.25% of the total cost ov errun 
in all projects together. The table below gives the pe rcentage cost 
overrun contribution of these 8 projects to the overall cost overrun in all 
projects together. 
 
 
Sl. 
NO. 
Name of the Project Percentage 
contribution of  
the total cost 
overrun for  
delayed projects 
Status 
1. Naptha Jhakri Power  
Corporation 
21.51 Project Completed in 
Early 2004. 
2. Delhi Metro Rapid Transit  
System 
18.02 Project is scheduled fo r 
completion by March, 
2006 
3. Dulhasti Hydro Electric  
Power Projects  
12.76 Project is in advanced 
stage of completion. 
4. Tehri Hydro Electric  
Power Project 
11.54 The project  is scheduled 
for completion by 
July,2005. 
5. Udhampur-Srinagar Baramulla 7.89 The project  is scheduled 
for completion by August, 
2007. 
 42 
 

6. Dhauliganga Hydro Electric  
Power Project 
3.08 The project  is scheduled 
to be co mpleted by 
March, 2005 
7. Panipat Refinery Expansion 2.74 The project  is scheduled 
for completion by June , 
2005. 
8. Koderma-Ranchi New Line 1.71 The project  is scheduled 
for completion by Marc h, 
2006 
 Total 79.25  
 
According to the pres ent indication, in addition to the 18 projects, 34 
projects are scheduled to be c ompleted by March, 2005. The completion 
schedule of balance 97 projects is given below : 
 
21 projects by March, 2006 
14 projects by March, 2007 
14 projects are scheduled to be completed in early 11th Plan 
48 projects do not have a definite date of commissi oning which include 46 
Railway projects. 
 
Among the 237 projects which have reported time overrun ranging 
from 2 to 156 months, there are 84 projects which hav e time as well as cos t 
overruns and they are part of 149 projects which have cos t overruns. 
According to the present indication,  127 projects including 84 delay ed 
projects are to be completed by March, 2005. 
The main reasons for time and cost overruns varies  from project to 
project. However, a summary of the reasons reported by project authorities in 
respect of delayed projects is given below:  
 
S.No Factors No. of  Projects 
  1. Fund Constraints 31 (28 Railways, 2 in Health & Family Welfare a nd 
1 in Coal sector)  
  2. Land Problems  (a) Non-forest land  31 ( 23 Railways, 5  Coal, 2 in 
Road Transport & Highways and 1 in Power) 
(b) Forest land  11 (4 Railways, 3 each in C oal  
and Power and 1 in Road Transport & Highways ) 
  3. Delay in Civil 12 (7 Railways, 2 in Road Transport & Highway 
 43 
 

Works and 1 each  in Atomic Energy, I&B, and Health & 
Family Welfare) 
  4. Delay in Award of 
Contract 
20 (8 Petroleum, 7 Rai lways, 2 in Civil Aviati on 
and 1 each in Atomic Energy, Coal and I & B) 
  5. Slow Progress in 
Works other 
than Civil Works 
158 (142 Railways 6 in Road  Transport  & 
Highways, 8 in Power and 1 each i n Fertiliser and 
Petroleum) 
  6. Delay in Su pply of 
Equipment  
17 (3 Atomi c Energy, 3 Railways, 5 Petroleum, 2  
Coal, 2 Road Transport & Highways and 1 each in 
Fertiliser and Steel sector.)  (17 indigenous) 
 
(iii) The meas ures taken  by the M inistry of Statistics and Progr amme 
Implementation  and administrative Ministries in this regard include: 
 
a. Ministries have been asked to  follow rigor ously the mechanism  
of the quarterly review of proj ects implemented through public  
sector enterprises and thr ough the Em powered Committee 
mechanism for projects implemented departmentally. 
 
b. The critical projec ts  reported to have time and cost overrun 
were reviewed by the Committ ee of Sec retaries (COS) and 
necessary directions were given to the concerned projects  
authorities for taking remedial measures. 
 
c. Standing Committee for fixation of responsibilities  in time and 
cost overrun of projects are l ooking into the various types of  
reasons and agencies are being asked to explain and pa y 
penalties for the delays. 
 
d. The Ministr y is setting up an On-line Computerised Monitoring 
System to improve t he quality of the monitoring and provide 
advance warning signals about likely  delay  in projects well in 
time for timely mitigation measures. 
 
 44 
 

e. The recommendations of the Govindarajan Committee relating 
to the Project Formulation, Ap praisal and Implementation for 
Central pr ojects have been inco rporated into the system of 
Public Investment Board and Expenditure Finance Committee 
which inter-alia increases existing powers for approval of the 
Central Sector projects by various  authorities. This was notified 
by the Ministry of Finance Vide  their O.M. No. 1 (2)/PF.II/03  
dated 7.5.2003 
 
f. The COS have recommended higher  limit for approval of the 
projects in power and coal se ctors. The recommendations ar e 
as follows: 
- To enable fast processing of the proposals in case of profit 
making public sector enterprises in the power sector where 
financial appraisal ha s been done by financ ial institutions  
and who have already committed loan amo unting  not less  
than 65% of the project cos t, projects upto the following 
ceiling approved by t he Department are n ot to be sent to 
PIB/CCEA. 
 
Sl. No. Ministry/Dept. Financial limits 
of Plan/Project 
Appraisal Forum Approval Autho
Dept. of Coal Upto Rs. 1000 
crore  
Empowered 
Committee of 
Secys. Headed by 
the Secy. Of the 
administrative 
Department 
Minister-in-
charge of th e 
Ministry. 
Ministry of Powe Upto Rs. 1500 
crore 
-do- -do- 
 
 45 
 
g. In order to ensure that only vi able projects are taken up in the 
Railway sector the Expanded Board for Railway Projects, which 
is also represented by Plann ing Commission, Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Impl ementation and Ministry of 
Finance critically examines  pr ojects costi ng Rs.50 crore and 
above.  

 
h. Standard Contract Management system has been introduced t o 
reduce dis putes in project cont racts and thus avoid time and 
cost overruns in projects. 
 
i. The projects are being reviewed at various levels at their sites to 
assess the ground realties and specif ic steps are being taken to 
resolve the constraints without delay. 
 
(iv) The Model Domestic Contract Documents provide for incentives/bonus for 
critical and large infr astructure projects ah ead of schedule. Such a 
practice has been adopted by  National  Highway Authority of India in 
execution of various  contracts thr ough t he contrac tors. The provisions  
made in the Model Domestic Contract  Documents on incentives/ bonus (in 
Clause 9 of the Contract clauses) which has been released by the Ministry 
as guidelines is as follows: 
 
9B For early completion of the contract before the stipulated date of 
completion of an incentiv e amount at the rate of  half per cent (½%) of 
the contract price per w eek of early completion,  subject to a maximum 
of five per cent (5%) of the c ontract price may  be paid to the 
contractor. 
9B (i) The incentive or bonus (opti onal clause) would be applicable in 
time-critical projects. 
 
9B (ii) The owner (Project En terprise/Ministry/Department) may 
determine accurately the quantum of incentive and the period of early  
completion as the eligibility criteria before the award of contract. 
9B (iii) Each Public Sector Underta king/Ministry will consider and take  
a considered view whether the clause regarding incentives are to be 
included in the contract along with justifications based on legal advice. 
 
(v) The problem of steep rise in the prices of  steel and cement in the 
recent years was brought out by t he National Highways Authority of 
India of Ministry of Road Tran sport and High ways and Minist ry of 
Power in t he review meetings hel d under  the Chair manship of the 
Minister of State (I ndependent Charge). The Model Domestic Contract 
Documents provide for escalation in pric es. Ministries have been 
advised to apply the formulae given in  the Model Contract Document 
and obtain approval of the concerned authorities. 
 
 46 
 

60. Excluding the railway projects the ti me and cost overruns were examined by  
the Standing Committees of the concerned Ministries/Departments and the findings are  
given below:- 
PROJECTS REVIEWED BY THE STANDING COMMITTEES 
 
Sl.No. Ministry/Department
s, Name of the 
Projects 
Finding of the 
Standing Committee 
Remarks 
 
 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Aviation : 
 
Construction of 
Boeing 747 - 400  
Hangar (No.4) at 
Mumbai by Air India. 
 
 
Construction of New 
International 
Passenger Terminal  
Phase III by the   
Airport Au thority of 
India. 
 
Coal : 
 
Dudichua Opencast 
Project, Northern 
Coalfields Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pootkee-Balihari 
underground project, 
(Bharat Coal 
Companies) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health & Family 
Welfare: 
 
 
Inadequate funds and 
delay in land acquisit ion 
led to occurrence o f 
time and cost overruns 
in the project. 
 
Change in the scope of 
the project  has been 
largely responsible f or 
time and cost overruns 
in the project. 
 
 
 
 
Funds con straints an d 
delay in supply and 
commissioning of 
draglines and Coal 
Handling Plant Phase-I 
led to occurrence o f 
time and cost overruns 
in the project. 
 
 
Time overrun  
experienced in the 
project is attributed t o 
delay in sinking of two 
additional shafts, and 
delay in erection of  
head frame and building 
up of underground 
production to targ et 
level (0.68MTY) due to 
funds constraints. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indian Air Lines which  
was occup ying the area 
was responsible for delay 
in handing over of  land. 
 
 
The change in scope was 
conceived at the ea rly 
stage by AAI, and was 
held responsible for 
inadequate project 
formulation. 
 
 
 
Committee held HEC a nd 
M/s Hyu ndai Heavy 
Industries Ltd. responsible 
for the occurrence of time 
and cost overruns, and 
recommended appropriate 
action against the sa id 
companies. 
 
 
Liquidated damages 
imposed on M/s TSL, M/s 
CEMENDIA and Ms HEC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47 
 

 
5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National In stitute of  
Biologicals, NOIDA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North Eastern Indira 
Gandhi Regional 
Institute of  Health &  
Medical Sciences,  
Shillong. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fertilizers: 
 
Revamping of 
Ammonia/Urea/ 
NPK Plants of Madras 
Fertilizers Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power : 
 
Vindhyachal 
Additional 
Transmission System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delays in the project are 
attributed to system 
deficiencies, lack of  
experience, lack o f 
institutional structur e 
(project t eam), an d 
absence of  monitoring  
mechanism. 
 
 
Occurrence of time an d 
cost overruns has b een 
largely on account of 
lapses on the part of the 
Ministry in respect  o f 
project formulation, 
planning and 
implementation.  
Frequent changes in 
scope of  the project  
have also contributed t o 
the delay in completion  
of the project. 
 
 
 
Time overrun  
experienced in the 
project was attributed to  
the delay in  supplies of  
major equipment, delay 
in piping fabrication an d 
erections w hereas cost  
overrun wa s associate d 
with increase in interest 
charges during 
construction period, 
foreign exc hange 
variations, and chang e 
in scope. 
 
 
Since  the project was 
completed within t he 
stipulated completion 
schedule after the 
funding tie- up with the 
world Bank, the  
Committee felt that 
there was no time 
overrun in the project. 
 
 
 
Committee held the 
Ministry of Health 
responsible for system 
deficiencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee fixed 
responsibility on  3 
previous CMDs of MFL, 
the present CMD,  and the 
present GM (Corporate  
Planning) f or ineptitud e, 
and infighting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 48 
 

9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nathpa Jh akri 
Transmission System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathalguri 
Transmission Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE of Mo ga-Bhiwani 
Transmission Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kishenpur-Moga 
Transmission System,  
POWERGRID. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commi ttee felt that  
since the transmission 
system is linked to the  
commissioning of the  
generation project at 
Nathpa Jhakri, the 
transmission project has 
been deliberately 
delayed. 
 
 
Occurrence of time an d 
cost ov errun was 
attributed to the law and  
over prevai ling in the  
North-eastern region,  
changes in scope 
arising out  of 
geographical conditions, 
general price escalation, 
and increase in interest  
during construction 
(IDC). 
 
 
Committee was of the 
view that the project 
was approved without 
financial tie- up resulting  
in 2 ye ars' delay.  
Adverse la w and orde r 
situation the n in Punjab  
also delayed the project. 
Increase i s cost was  
mostly on  account of 
change in scope of the 
project. 
 
 
The Committee  
conducted t hat delay in  
execution was mainly 
due to the delay in 
testing of to ward by the  
contractor, and partly 
due to  several 
contractual dispute s 
leading to termination of 
the contract etc. The  
cost overrun is mainly 
due to ge neral price  
escalation and due to 
increase in  the interest 
during construction. 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 49 
 

 
13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. 
 
 
 
 
RCE of Uri 
Transmission System,  
POWERGRID. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rangit HEP, NHPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tehri Hydro  Electricity  
Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nathpa Jhakri HEP,  
NJPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs : (Now DNEA) 
 
RCE of  Regional 
Institute of  Medical 
Sciences, Imphal. 
 
 
Time overrun  
experienced in the 
project was mostly du e 
to disturbe d law and 
order conditions in  the  
State, delay in land 
acquisition, and th e 
Court order regarding 
tree felling . The co st 
overrun was mainly due 
to gene ral price  
escalation, and ve ry 
high erection charge s 
quoted by the bidders. 
 
Lack of  monitoring and  
supervision by NHPC 
led to many contractual 
problems wh ich 
otherwise could have 
been avoided.  
Moreover, original 
project report was not 
based on  realisatic 
basis.  
 
The Commi ttee felt that  
the time overrun in the  
project was mainly du e 
to various agitations 
leading to  stoppage of  
work, R& R package, 
and e nvironmental 
aspects of the project.   
 
 
Time and c ost overrun s 
experienced in the 
project ha ve largely 
been on account of  
natural calamities an d 
geological surprises 
which beyond control o f 
NJPC. 
 
 
 
 
 
The committee held 
entire Managemen t 
Committee/NEC 
responsible for not 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee felt that the 
management of NHPC 
and contr actors ha ve 
substantially contribut ed 
to time and cost overrun. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee concluded 
that time and cost  
overruns experienced in  
the project  are due  to 
factors beyond the contr ol 
of the  project enterprise. 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No responsibility fixed. 
 
 
 50 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20. 
 
 
 
 
 
21. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ranganadi 
Transmission Project, 
NEEPCO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Doyang Transmission  
System NEEPCO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rokhia Gas - based  
Power Project. 
 
 
 
 
Doyang, HEP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ranganadi, HEP. 
 
following professional 
project approach. No 
prior approval was  
secured for releasing  
funds be yond the  
sanctioned cost.  
Inadequate survey and 
soul investigations also 
led to time  overrun in 
the project. 
 
 
Committee observe d 
that nothing  substant ial 
was achie ved during 
first five y ears of th e 
project time-cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee directed the  
Secretary NEC to  fix 
responsibility for th e 
slow progress on th e 
part of NEEPCO during  
the period of 7 initial 
years till the project was 
transferred t o 
POWERGRID. 
 
 
There has been no cost  
overrun th ough there 
has been a time overrun 
of 9 months. 
 
 
Committee observe d 
that the responsibility for 
not updatin g the cost  
and time schedu les 
(which were almost 2 
years old) befor e 
obtaining t he approva l 
of the Govern ment 
rested with NEEPCO 
and NEC.   
 
 
The respo nsibility for 
not u pdating th e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee has 
recommended to 
Secretary, NEC to fix the 
responsibility on the 
officers of NEEPCO for 
not making substant ial 
progress fo r the in itial 5  
years. 
Project since completed. 
 
 
The Committee felt th at 
there is an urgent need for 
simplification of too many 
procedural require- men ts 
often leadin g to delays in 
project sanction/  
implementation. 
 
 
 
 
NEEPCO was held 
responsible for p oor 
quality of DPR. 
 
 
 
The responsibility for the 
delay in award of major 
contracts fr om 6  mont hs 
to 2.5 years lie s with  
NEEPCO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed responsibility  on 
the Administrative Ministry 
 51 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
23. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Construction of New 
Port of Ennore near  
Chennai. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mechanised Coal 
handling Plant, 
Pardeep Port. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Road Tra nsport & 
Highways: 
 
4-Laning a nd 
Strengthening of 
Mathura-Agra Section  
of NH-2 (Km 148.33-
Km 199.66) 
schedule an d estimates 
for seeking Govt.  
approval rested with 
NEEPCO, NEC  a nd 
MHA.  
 
Occurrence of time an d 
cost overruns was 
attributed t o delays in 
appointment of 
consultants and 
finalization of port layout 
and in award of major 
contracts.  The 
Committee conclude d 
that time overrun of 1 0 
months was due t o 
elaborate ADB 
procedures for 
appointment of 
consultant. 
 
 
 
Project since  
completed. 
 
 
The Chairman of the 
Paradeep Port Trust 
was held responsible for 
failing to ap point a full-
time Project Director .  
The Committee  
recommended black 
listing of th e consultan t 
for not takin g  adequate 
steps for preparation of 
Railway Receival 
Design sy stem which 
significantly contribute d 
to time and cost overrun 
in the project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee felt that 
inexperience of 
domestic consulta nts 
and failure on the part of 
the U.P. PWD, sites not 
and Consultant. 
 
 
 
 
 
Consultant was held 
responsible for not taking 
adequate steps for  
Railway  Receival Design 
System. Ministry of 
Shipping & Ports was held 
responsible for delay in 
appointment of Proje ct 
Director. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD imposed on consulta nt 
for lack of supervision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
State PWD and Ministry 
for lack of monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
Railways and State PWD. 
 
 
 
 52 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4-Laning a nd 
strengthening of NH-3 
between km 573 and 
km 590.6 and 
construction of Bypass 
around Indore town in 
M.P. 
 
 
 
 
4- Laning and 
Strengthening of NH-1 
between km 132.675  
to 212.161 in 
Haryana. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4- Laning and 
Strengthening of NH-1 
between km 212.20  
and 252.25 from 
Haryana - Punjab 
Border to Sirhind in  
Punjab. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being fr ee from 
encumbrances led to 
occurrence in the 
project.  
 
 
Committee conclude d 
that the consultant for  
the project  should  b e 
debarred for future 
projects for  failure on 
his part  to ensure 
proper supervision of 
work and proper survey 
of the site. 
 
 
Time and c ost overrun s 
experienced in the 
project are attributed to 
delay by the consultan t 
to prepare detailed cost 
estimates, inadequate 
designs pre paration by 
the consulta nt for major 
structures, and failure 
on the part of the 
Ministry to carry out 
periodic re view of  the  
progress. 
 
 
Reasons for time and 
cost overruns were 
attributed to  inadequate 
survey by the 
contractor, delay in 
processing of RCE by  
the Ministry, delay in 
starting of  work by 
Railways for Railway 
Over Bridge (ROB), and  
failure of the Punjab 
PWD to ensure site s 
being fr ee from 
encumbrances. 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee observe d 
that the D PR for the 
project submitted by the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry an d Monitoring 
Committee held 
responsible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
RITES to prevent such 
events from recurring. 
 
Project since completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
inadequate funding and 
lack of monitoring. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 53 
 

 
 
29. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE for 4-laning with  
strengthening of the 
existing 2-la ne 
pavement from Barwa  
Adda (km 398.75) to 
Barakar (km 441.44) 
on NH-2 in Jharkhand.
 
 
 
 
Water Resources : 
 
Farakka Barra ge 
project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RCE in respect of  
Pagaldiya Dam 
Project, Assam. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steel: 
 
Kudremukh Iron & 
Steel Co mpany 
(KISCO) Ltd.,  
Karnataka. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RITES was  not as pe r 
the international 
standards, and w as 
required to  be revised 
as per ADB norms. This 
resulted in  avoidable 
time overrun. 
 
 
 
Time and c ost overrun s 
experienced in the 
project  were attributed 
to funds constraint s, 
inadequate and 
ineffective monitoring, 
general price escalation, 
labour unrest, and 
arbitration cases at 
Farakka Barrage 
Project. 
 
Problems in la nd 
acquisition for R&R 
works and security 
considerations 
contributed to delay in 
completion of the 
project. The design was 
inadequate from th e 
point of view of safety 
requirements. 
 
 
Time and cost overrun 
experienced in the 
project were attributed 
to delay in fi nalisation of 
specifications for 
equipment on the part of 
KISCO, and the  
subsequent delay in 
supply of drawings t o 
M/s DLF Industries. 
 
 
 
Committee conclude d 
that time and co st 
overruns in the project 
have resulted on  
account of factors 
beyond the reasonable  
control of NALCO.  As 
No agency held 
responsible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Responsibility fixed on 
M/s DLF t o whom t he 
contract fo r CPP was 
awarded. 
 
 
No responsibility fixed  
Unit sold out. 
 
 
Department of Justice had 
no monitoring mechanism. 
The contr act with the 
architect was revised with 
proper cap. 
 
 
 CPWD was fixed for 
delays along with the 
consultant architect.   
Project was not monitored 
properly. 
 54 
 

 
 
 
33. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. 
 
Mines 
 
Rolled Product Unit  
(erstwhile IAPL) of 
NALCO Project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Judicial 
Academy, Bhopal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhash Bha van, 
Department of 
Culture. 
the project was 
complete and rolled 
products sold  by 
NALCO since  
November 2002, time 
overrun of about 18 
months may be  
condoned. 
 
The project suffered due 
to open en ded contract 
award to the architect .  
The scope  of project 
kept chang ing without  
any control. 
 
The project got delayed 
in obtaining clearance of 
Kolkata Municipal 
Corporation, non-
availability of detailed  
design. 
 
 
 
 
36. Tehri Transmission 
System, Powergrid, 
Ministry of Power 
Delay in g eneration of 
project led  to 
rescheduling of 
transmission works. 
Permission to shut work 
in Rajaji N ational Par k 
was not given and thus 
delayed the works 
further. 
No responsibility fixed. 
37. Namrup Fertiliser 
Plant Revamp (BVFL), 
Department of 
Fertiliser 
The Committee have 
observed that project 
has been delayed du e 
to poor contract 
management and delay 
in supplies and erection. 
The report of the 
Committee is yet to be 
finalized. 
 
61.  In response to a specific query from  the Committee to furnish details  of the 
number of projects that may have been frozen on shelved off midway and the 
expenditure incurred on such projects, the Ministry in their post evidence reply informed 
as follows:- 
 55 
 

“As on 1.1.2005, there are 23 projec ts which were unfinished as  
they have been frozen / dropped afte r incurring an expenditure of Rs. 
344.46 crore. 13 of thes e projects have been deleted / dropped and will 
not be taken up for implementation.   These projects have been 
frozen/abandoned/ dropped / me rged with other projects due t o fund 
constraints, land acquisition pr oblems, change in st rategy and other 
reasons. The concerned Ministries / Departments monitor the unfinished 
/ frozen / abandoned /  merged projects. Frozen projects are taken up as 
and when the resource position  improves”. 
 56 
 

62. The Pr oject Monitoring Division (PMD) play s the all important role of  
monitoring implementation of all Central Sector Projects costing Rs.20 crore and 
above. While a tw o-tier system of monito ring is f ollowed in respect of all mega 
projects costing more than Rs.100 cror e, w hich include, bringing out monthl y 
Flash Rep orts and tw o monthl y Excepti on Report s in cases w here significant 
slippages are n oticed in achieving the ta rgetted milestones; Quarterl y Project 
Status Implementation Status Reports (Q PSISR) are brought out by  the Division 
in respect of all projects costing Rs.200 crore and above. 
63. The Committee are w ell aw are of th e fact that a number  of initiatives 
have been  taken tow ards ensuring timel y and co st-effective implementation of  
projects, w hich include, rigorous quarterl y review s of implementation of public 
sector projects by the Ministries concerned; review of projects experiencing cost 
and time slippages by  the Committee of Secretaries (COS); fixation of  
responsibility for slippages by  the Sta nding Committees; and incorporation of 
Govindarajan Committee’s rec ommendations on project formulation, appraisal  
and implementation of central projects in the system of Public Investment Board 
and Expenditure Finance Co mmission w hich, inter-alia, enhance the pow ers of 
the various authorities in granting approvals for central sector projects. 
64. The Committee also u nderstand that other measu res initiated in  
ensuing speed y and effect ive implementation of central projects include, 
introduction of ‘Sta ndard Contract Ma nagement’ aimed at minimising contract  
related disputes, ground level review s of project implementation ; and 
introduction of `Model Domestic Contract Documents’. 
65. Despite undertaking these w ell-thought of and reason ed measu res, 
what the Committee feel particularly  w orried to note  is the fact that of the 617 
projects on the monitoring list as on 30 September, 2004, w hich involve a 
whopping investment to the tune of Rs.2 ,67,067 crore, as man y as 149 projects  
have repo rted cost overruns of 22.2%  w ith respect to the latest approved cost  
estimates, of these, 8 projects have reportedly contributed to nearly 79.25% of the 
total cost overrun of all projects together  viz., Naptha Jhakri Pow er Corporation, 
DMRTC, Dulhasti Hydro El ectric Proj ects; THDC, Ud hampur – Srinag ar, 
Baramulla, Dhauliganga Hydro Electric Project and Panipat Refinery Examination 
Project. The Committee strongl y reco mmend that the specific contributor y 
 57 
 

factors to the cost overruns in respect  of these projects should be gone into in 
detail and appropriate remedial measures taken  so as t o ensure that such  
happenings, which do not augur well to the economy, do not recur. 
66. A ver y disturbing aspect t hat the Co mmittee wish to bring to the fore  
here is the fact that as on Januar y 1, 2005, there w ere as ma ny as 23 projects 
involving an expen diture of Rs. 344. 46 crore w hich w ere either frozen or 
abandoned mid-way due to factors such as fund constraints and land acquisition 
problems.  
67.  Another aspect that the Committee w ish to high light here is the fact 
that in the case of a majority  of the p rojects, particul arly of the Railw ays and 
Road Transport and Highw ays, a major c ontributory factor for delay s and cost  
escalations relate to problems faced in  acquiring land. The Committe e strongl y 
feel the need to give specific attenti on to evolving measures for overco ming this 
problem, possibl y b y ensuring that issues  relating to acquisition of proj ect 
related land are addressed b efore-hand or in advance to  the stage of project  
related approvals. 
 68.  The Committee also note that in a majority of 37 projects,  other than 
railway any projects, in w hose case the ti me overruns and cost escalations were 
reportedly examined b y the Standin g Committees of the Ministries and  
departments concerned, the action taken  against those held responsible for 
lapses as well as the remedial measures taken , if any, have not been informed by 
the Ministry. The Committee desire that the related details should be furnished to 
them at the earliest. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                              (MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI) 
19  April, 2005                                                                                  Chairman, 
29 Chaitra, 1927 (SAKA)                                STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 58 
 

 59 
 

Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 29 March, 2005 from 1100 hrs to 1315 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
5. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
7. Shri Rupchand Pal 
8. Shri K.S. Rao 
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
10. Shri Lakshman Seth 
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri R.P. Goenka 
13. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
14. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
15. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
16. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
17. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu     -   Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar    -   Under Secretary 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
1. Shri J. Hari Narayan, Secretary (S&PI) 
2. Dr. S.Ray, DG&CEO, NSSO 
3. Shri P.P. Mathur, AS&FA 
  

4. Dr. R.C. Panda, Addl. Secretary (S&PI) 
5. Prof. K.B. Sinha, Director, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 
6. Dr. S.K. Nath, ADG(Trg.) 
7. Dr. K.V. Rao, ADG (FOD) 
8. Shri A.K. Saxena, Joint Secretary 
9. Shri P. Chattopadhyaya, DDG (Trg.) 
10. Shri Vishnu Kumar, DDG (CC) 
11. Shri Ramesh Kohli, DDG (NAD) 
12. Shri V.K. Arora, DDG (ISD) 
13. Shri J. Dash, DDG (SSD) 
14. Shri P.C. Tangri, DDG (CPD) 
15. Shri N.R. Dash, Director (Finance) 
16. Shri A.K. Ganeriwala, Director (Admn.) 
17. Shri Deepak Rastogi, Director (Coord.) 
18. Dr. V.P. Goel, Director (MPLADS) 
19. Shri J.L. Narayan, Joint Adviser (IPMD) 
20. Shri P.H. Khopkar, Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welc omed t he representatives  of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implem entation to the sitting of the Committee and invited t heir 
attention to the provisions contained in direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker. 
3. The Committee then took or al evidenc e of  representatives of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation and other related matters. 
4.   Thereafter, the Chairm an requested the repres entatives of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation to  furnish notes on certain points  raised by the Members 
to which replies were not readily available with them during the discussion. 
5.  The evidence was concluded 
6.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
     The witnesses then withdrew 
 
(The Committee then adjourned at 1330 hours to meet again at 1500 hours) 
  

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, 07th April, 2005 from 1100 to 1230 hours      
  
 PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
7. Shri Rupchand Pal 
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
9. Shri Lakshman Seth 
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
14. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
15. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the out set, the Chairman welcomed t he members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3. The Chairman then requested the Members to give their suggestions on the 
issues proposed to be taken up for inclusion in the draft reports of the C ommittee on 
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministries/Departments under their purview. 
 
  

 
 
4. Thereafter, Members expressed their views on the subjects/topics that could 
be covered in the Reports of the Committ ee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the 
Ministries/Departments, which were to be tak en up for consideration and adoption at the 
sittings to be held on 11 and 12 April, 2005. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee than adjourned 
  

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 12 April, 2005 from 1100 to 1310 hours. 
 
         PRESENT 
         
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
               
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Rupchand Pal 
6. Shri K.S. Rao 
7. Shri Lakshman Seth 
8. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri R.P. Goenka 
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar 
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Under Secretary 
 
 2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting.  
 3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft reports:  
(i) XX   XX   XX   XX 
(ii)  
(iii) Draft report on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006)  of the Mi nistry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation      
(iv) XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
4. The Committee adopted the report with the modifications/amendments shown 
in Annexure. 
  

 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of 
modifications as als o to make verbal and ot her consequential c hanges arising out of the 
factual verification and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

ANNEXURE 
 
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN 
THEIR DRAFT RE PORT ON THE DE MANDS F OR GRANTS (200 5-06) OF THE  
MINISTRY OF ST ATISTICS & PROGRAMME  IMPLEMENT ATION AT THEIR SIT TING 
HELD ON 12 APRIL,  2005] 
 
Page No Para No. Line No. Modifications 
21 31 17 Add after the end of para:  
As regards t he issue of revision of current serie s of 
CPI, the Committee u nderstand t hat the La bour 
Bureau had prepared a  detailed scheme way back 
in 1996 and  the NSSO undertook t he related field  
survey and  the technica l details  were worked out, 
which have since bee n examined b y the Techn ical 
Advisory Committee. The Labour Bureau has 
reportedly convened a meeting in  May, 2005 to 
consider the matter. The Committee expect the work 
on the revision of serie s to be co mpleted and the  
new series of CPI released expeditiously. 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For :  
The Committee have been informed that significant 
progress has been mad e in regard  to setting up of 
statutory National Statistical Commission an d the 
Bill to this effect will be introduced very shortly. They 
are convinced that  
Substitute: 
The Committee strongly deplore the undue delay on 
the part of the Government in bringing the Bill, which 
as informed is expected to be introduced shortly.  As 
the  
 
Add after the end of para  
Add:  
The Committee also strongly feel the 
need to enhance the quantum of funding 
to the States for strengthening the 
statistical system of the States. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  

STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON FINANCE IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT (2005-06) 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para No. Ministry/Department 
Concerned 
Conclusions/Recommendations 
1 2 3 4 
1. 7 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Commit tee are conc erned to note that there has been a 
substantial under-utilisation of  the budgetted am ounts under the 
Head, `Improvement of National Accounts Statistics’. While t he 
budgetted amount under the Head, at the stage of BE for the y ear 
2003-04 was Rs.86 lakhs, the am ount was revised to Rs.60 lakhs 
at the stage of RE during the year and the actual utilisation has 
only been to  the extent of  Rs.37.99 lakhs. The reasons adduced  
by the Ministry for the under-utilisation of the budget ted amount, 
which include, non-receipt of feasible proposals from the states 
for conducti ng t ype stu dies, do not appear to be convincing . 
Moreover, th e allocation under the Head for the year, 2005- 06, 
has once again been enhanced to Rs.95 lakhs, ostensibl y due to  
factors such as the increase in staff wages, conducting Regional  
level workshops on State  incom e compilations and  undertaking  
professional studies. Given the trend witnessed in budgeting and 
the actual expenditure i ncurred in  the last thre e y ears, the 
Committee have grave doubts on the  objectivity with which t he 
budgetting i s being done b y the  Ministr y. Hence, they  
recommend that every  effort should be made to provide realistic 
budget estimates. 
2. 10 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee take strong exception to the fact that y ear 
after year, the budgetary  provisions under the Head `Programme 
Implementation’ ear marked for meeting expenditure on salari es, 
domestic an d foreign travel, office expenses, professional 
services etc., are being revised to a much lower level at the stage 
of Revised Estim ates and the actual expenditure un der the Head  
has been even m uch lesser. For instance, while an am ount of  
Rs.2.35 crore was allocated at the stag e of BE for 2002-03, the  
amount was revised to Rs.1.32 crore at the stage of RE and the 
actual expenditure was only t o the  tune of R s.20.60 lak h. 
Similarly, fo r the y ear 2003-0 4, an am ount of Rs.2 crore wa s 
allocated at the stage of BE, which was revised to Rs.1.67 crore at 
the stage of RE and the actual expenditure has only been to the  
extent of Rs. 23.64 lakhs. The Co mmittee understand that during 
2003-04, the utilisation was much lower than the esti mates as the 
proposal to strengthen the  Project Monitoring Divisi on was not 
approved and the process of engaging consultants for professional 
services too k m uch longer ti me than anticipated. Given the 
extremely wide variation in the figures of BE, RE and the actuals 
for he years, 2002- 03 an d 2003- 04, t he Co mmittee cannot help 
observing that the outcome in regard to utilisation of the amounts 
earmarked has not at all been in conform ity with the Budge t 
Estimates, which they feel, needs to be avoided at all costs. They, 
therefore, recommend that the Govern ment should take utm ost 
care while finalizing the Bud get esti mates so that lar ge sc ale 
  

variations between BE, RE and Actuals do not recur. 
 
3. 13 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Committee regret to observe that there has been a  
wide variation in the Budget Estimates , Revised Estimates and  
the Actual expenditur e under the Head, `Institutional 
Development and Capacity  Buil ding’. While allocations of  
Rs.1.72 crore and Rs.4.44 crore were made at the sta ge of BE for 
2002-03 and 2003-04 respectively, the amounts were reduced to 
Rs.80.00 lakhs and Rs.77.50 lakhs respectively  at the RE stage 
and the actu als for the y ears 2002-03  and 2003-0 4, totalled to  
Rs.62.54 lakhs and 26. 60 lakhs. As informed by  the Ministry , a 
huge provision of Rs.4.44 crore was made for the year 2003-04 
mainly for  p rocuring m achinery and e quipment to furnish the  
proposed Central Training Facility  (CTF), work on which could 
not takeoff. This resulted in reducing the bud geted am ount to  
Rs.77.50 lakhs at the RE stage during the year and the actual 
expenditure incurred in the y ear tot alled to Rs.26.60 lakhs. 
Though the Committee are in agreement with the fact that certain 
projects may not materialise as planned, given the wide variations 
witnessed in BE, RE and Actuals under the Head each y ear, they 
express the view that every care should be taken to make realistic 
and objectiv e projections at the BE stage so that the funds 
available are judiciousl y distributed and m ade use of b y the 
various Ministries / Departments. 
 
4. 20 & 21 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Co mmittee had, in their Fourt h Report on  the 
Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the M inistry emphasized on the 
need for ens uring judicious usag e of the allocation of Rs.8.86 
crore earmarked for constructing the C entral Training Facility for 
the benefit of statistical personnel b y ensuring that  the related  
work was ta ken up and e xecuted as p er the stipulated schedule.  
The Committee, are, however, compelled to take seri ous note of 
the fact no tangible progress could be made in constructing the 
building during t he year 2004-05, due  to t he chan ges in the 
dimensions of the plot, consequential re-registration and failure to 
obtain the approvals of the authorities concerned for building plan 
prepared by  the CPWD. A s a re sult, a very large portion of the  
budgetted amount of Rs.8.86 crore for the year 2004-05 had to be 
surrendered by the Ministr y, with the net expenditure likely to be 
incurred on the project during the year being restricted to an 
amount of Rs.25 lakhs with the possibilit y of  an additional 
amount of Rs.45 lakhs  being used towards land filli ng a nd 
associated activities. What the Committee fin d particularly 
disturbing to note is the fa ct that while the Ministry had, during 
the previous year viz., 2004-05, attributed the dela y in executing  
the project t o the failure  of the CP WD adhering to t he time 
schedule for preparing the building pla n, this y ear, the reasons 
extended for the delay relate to the buil ding plan prepared by the 
CPWD being not in conform ity w ith the stipulations of Greater 
Noida Authority. 
     The Committee understand that a revised building plan is 
being re-submitted for approval by  the Great er Noi da Authorit y 
and an amount of Rs.13.75 crore has b een earmarked at the B.E., 
2005-06 f or executing the  project. As assured b y the Secretar y 
  

during the course of oral evidence, t he Co mmittee trust that  
necessary approvals would be obtained speedily  and the am ount 
of Rs.13.75 crore allocated  for the proje ct during t he year, 2005-
06, would be utilised with care and objectivity so that the exercise 
of revising t he budgetted  am ount to a much lesser level at the 
stage of preparation of the Revised Esti mates and the differential 
between the Estimates and the Actual expenditure being of a very 
high order is avoided. 
5. 26 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Co mmittee note that the major initiative of introduc i
the `On-line Computerised Monitoring Sy stem (OCMS) for enab li
effective monitoring of project implementation could not material
as scheduled in 2003-04 owing to the delay in procuring the compu
hardware and software. The proc urements could m aterialise only
2004-05, and as informed by the Ministry, the OCMS would beco m
operational by the end  of May,  20 05 and wo uld contrib ute 
improving the quality  of project and infrastructure monitoring int
alia by enabli ng on-line collection of i nformation without t ime la
on-line comm unication between the project enterprises and t
Ministry; and facilitating transfer of project profiles and accruing 
sectoral reports. The Co mmittee feel that no effort should be spar
in m odernising and  u p-dating t he IT i nfrastructure of the Mi nist
When the system  is put in place,  the Co mmittee feel that it will n
only bring a bout rev olutionary change  in qualit y o f m onitoring b
will help in taking quick rem edial measures. The Commit t
therefore wis h to be kept apprised of the progress in im plementi
the OCMS as well as its  effectivenes s in strengthening the proj
monitoring measures. 
 
6. 31 & 31A Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The National Statistical Commission had felt that the current  
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) with base 1993-94 was deficient in 
many respects inter-alia owing to the fact that price changes in 
the services sector were not duly accounted for. The Commission 
had also concluded that, as at pre sent, WPI was not an adequat e 
measure of i nflation and there w as a need for sep arate index for  
measurement of inflation in the econom y. The  Co mmittee 
understand t hat a workin g gro up has been constit uted to give 
focused attention on different aspects r elated with the revision of 
WPI series, whose terms of reference inter-alia include, exploring 
the possibility of incl usion of selected  services in a WPI basket 
and exam ining the need for switching over fro m WPI to a 
Producer Price Ba se Inde x (PPI). Considering the fact that the  
price indices in the sy stem of economic statistics are closely  
watched indicators of macro econo mic perfor mances and ar e 
important tools in the for mulation of the monitory and fiscal 
policy, the Committee strongly emphasise on the n eed for early 
completion of the work on the new se ries of WPI and Producer 
Price Index (PPI). The Committee also  wish to be kept apprised 
of the progress made in this direction.  
As regards the issue of revision of current series of CPI, the  
Committee understand that the Labour Bureau had prepared a 
detailed scheme way back in 1996 and  the NSSO u ndertook the 
related field survey and the technical details worke d out, whic h 
have since been examined by the Technical Advisory Committee. 
The Labour Bureau has re portedly convened a m eeting in Ma y, 
  

2005 to consider the matter. The Committee expect the work on 
the revision of series to be co mpleted and the new series of CPI 
released expeditiously. 
7. 38 & 39 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Co mmittee ar e dee ply concerned to note the defi
prevalent in methodolog y of collection  of data at different level s
understand that the collection of data at local level is not free fro m
The deficient data in turn is transm itted to district offices befo r
agglomerated at the state level.  The Sta te department supplies the 
the concerned departments and the correspondin g department s
Central Government.  The y take note of the Government’s own ad
in this regard that lot has to be done about quality of data collection
Committee find that the hi gh powered Committee under the Chairm
of Shri Rangarajan has su bmitted its report way  back in 2001, w hi
given far reaching recommendation in this regard.  These include i n
the appoint ment of statistical advisors in im portant Ministr i
departments, constitution of an organised State Statistical Cadre, lau
of a Centrally -sponsored Scheme with the specific object i
developing surve y and data processing capabilities in the States, 
setting up of  an independ ent statistical authorit y – National Co m
on Statistics through an Act of Parliament in respect of policy-mak
ordination and maintaining quality standards of core-statistics.  The
that they  had reco mmended for setting u p of  National S t
Commission through an Act of Parliament in their report in 2 004-0
Committee strongl y deplore the undue dela y on the part 
Government in, bringi ng the Bill, which, as inform ed is expect e
introduced shortl y.  As the future of maintaining and suppl y o f
statistics hinges on t he fate of this Bil l and t he Committee wan t 
formalities should be completed without further delay so that the N
Statistical Commission may be able to carry  its programme for rev
the statistical system in India.   
The Committee are given to understand that with a view to  
interact between state s and Central Governm ent, there is  a 
Council which meets once in every two years.  They find that the 
meeting of the Council has not been held so far.  They  deplore 
such delay in holding the meeting and want that the frequency for 
holding this meeting may be reduced to one y ear instead of the 
two y ears s o that fruits of interacti on can be r ealised. The  
Committee also strongly feel the n eed to enhance the quantum  of 
funding t o th e States for strengthening  the statistical s ystem of  
the States. 
8. 44 & 45 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Commit tee are w ell aware of t he fact that the  
National Sam ple Survey Organisation (NSSO) is inter-alia 
mandated to conduct  na tionwide sur veys on var ious socio-
economic aspects, annual survey s of industries (ASI), follow-up  
surveys of  Econom ic Census and Supervis ion of area 
enumeration and crop estimation, survey s of State agencies under 
the ‘I mprovement of Crop Statistics’  (ICS) scheme an d 
organising methodological studies and pilot surve ys on important 
subjects and collection of price data from rural and urban sectors. 
While the 58 th round of  NSS survey  u ndertaken in July  – 
December, 2 002 was inter-alia earm arked for collection of data 
on disabilit y, housing conditi on, vil lage facilities and slu m 
particulars, t he 59 th rou nd undertaken  in January  – December, 
2003 was, am ong other thin gs devote d to collection of data on 
  

land and live stock holdin g, debt and in vestment and  household  
consumer expenditure, and the 60th round undertaken in January – 
June, 2004 was devoted to morbidity and healthcare, employment 
and unem ployment and h ousehold co nsumer expenditure. The 
61st round, which commenced in July, 2004 and is to extend upto  
June, 2005 is concerned with c onsumer expenditure, employment 
and unemployment and the 62 nd round, which is to be undertaken 
from July , 2005 t o Jun e, 2006 wo uld be on ` Unorganised 
Manufacturing’. 
While there is no doubt with regard to the vital 
importance of the data g enerated and  published b y t he NSS 
surveys, what the Committee feel particularly perturbed to note is 
the fact that, quite often, significant delay s have been noticed in 
publishing the NSS Survey Data a nd Reports. As admitted by  the 
Secretary during evidence, the report of the 58 th NSS Survey 
Round, which was completed in 2002 was published two and half 
to three y ears later;  the report of the 59 th Roun d u ndertaken in  
2003 is expected to be r eleased in  the period, May to October,  
2005; and t he report of the 60 th Ro und executed in 2004 is 
expected to be published  in June, 2005. The Committee cannot  
help observing that the lack of IT r eadiness on the part of the  
Ministry has been a major contribut ory factor for  the undue 
delays, qu ite often noticed  in publ ishing the reports of the NSS 
Surveys rounds, which are of vital im portance to the countr y. As 
emphasised time and again, the Co mmittee expect that the 
Government would m ake every p ossible effort in ensuring that  
field survey reports and data are r eleased in a timely manner so 
that their relevance is not minimised, if not totally lost. 
 
9. 52 Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Co mmittee feel concerned to note that tho ugh 
significant budgetar y allocations are being m ade i n successiv e 
years since 2002-03 for implementing the World Bank aided 
project on modernising the statistical sy stem in the countr y, 
which has n ow been named as `India Statistical Strengthening 
Project’, the ground reality  of the progress of the project is far  
from satisfactory. The Committee had, in t heir 4th Report on the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry  for the y ear, 2004-05 taken 
note of the fa ct that Tier-II, which was the actual i mplementation 
phase of the project, was dependent on the outcom e of Tier-I of 
project. The Committee had, therefore, emphasised on the need to 
ensure that the project schedules were strictly adhered to. To their 
dismay, however, the Committee have now learnt t hat there have 
been slippages of the time schedules prescribed in respect of all  
the components of Tier-I of the project viz., `Study  on Creation 
and Maintenance of Busi ness Regist er’, Study  for identify ing 
specific Req uirements of  State  Statis tical Bure aus; Study  on 
Improvement of Service Sector Statistics; Study  for Asse ssment 
of Surve y Capabilities of Pvt. Sector; and Establishment of Al l 
India Statistical Net work. They  take note of the fact that during 
examination of Dem ands for Grants (2 004-05), t he Government 
had itself admitted the slippages of the ti me schedule but assured 
to complete the work by  the end of 2005. The y are concerned to 
note that even the revised schedule as proposed by  the 
Government will not be adhered to and the Tie r-I of the project 
  

will be likely to be com pleted by  Jul y, 2006. T he Committee 
strongly feel that the Government cannot afford to be lethargic in  
implementing this project, which would, in the long run, prove to 
be of a immense value addition to the country. The Committee, 
therefore, re-iterate that no effort  should be spared to ensure that 
the Tier-I of the project is co mpleted as per the revi sed planned 
schedule so that Tier-II of the proj ect takes off and the project is 
implemented without further delay . They  also wish to b e 
periodically appraised of the progress made in this direction. 
 
10. 62,63,64, 
65,66,67 & 
68 
Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation 
The Project Monitoring Division (PMD) play s the all  
important role of monitoring implementation of all Central Sector 
Projects costing Rs.20  crore and above.  While a two -tier system 
of monitoring is followed in respect of all mega projects costing 
more than Rs.100 crore, which include, bringing o ut monthly 
Flash Reports and two monthly Exception Reports in cases where 
significant s lippages are  noticed in achieving the targetted  
milestones; Quarterly Project Status  I mplementation Status 
Reports (QPSISR) are brought o ut by the Division in respect of 
all projects costing Rs.200 crore and above. 
The Committee are well a ware of the fact that a num ber 
of initiatives have been taken towards ensuring tim ely and cost-
effective implem entation of pr ojects, which include, rigorou s 
quarterly reviews of i mplementation of public sector projects by 
the Ministries concerned; review of projects exper iencing cost 
and tim e slippages by  t he Committee of Secretaries (COS);  
fixation of  responsibility  f or slippages by  t he Standing 
Committees; and incor poration of  Govindarajan Committee’s 
recommendations on p roject formulation, ap praisal and  
implementation of central projects in the s ystem of Public 
Investment Board and E xpenditure Finance Co mmission which,  
inter-alia, enhance the p owers of the various authorities in  
granting approvals for central sector projects. 
The Co mmittee also un derstand that other measures 
initiated in ensuing speedy  and effective i mplementation of 
central projects include, introd uction of ‘Stand ard Contract 
Management’ aim ed at minimising contract related disputes, 
ground level reviews of project implementation ; and introduction 
of `Model Domestic Contract Documents’. 
Despite undertaking these well-thought  of and reasoned 
measures, what the Committee feel particularly worried to note  is 
the fact that of the 617 pr ojects on the monitoring l ist as on 30 
September, 2 004, which i nvolve a whoppin g inves tment to the 
tune of Rs.2,67,067 crore, as many as 149 projects have reported 
cost overruns of 22.2% with respect to the latest ap proved cost 
estimates, of  these, 8 projects have reportedly contributed to  
nearly 79 .25% of the total cost overrun of all pro jects together 
viz., Naptha Jhakri Power Corporation,  DMRTC, Dulhasti Hy dro 
Electric Proj ects; T HDC, Udha mpur – Srinagar, Bara mulla, 
Dhauliganga Hydro Ele ctric Pr oject and Pani pat Refinery 
Examination Project. The Co mmittee strongl y recommend that 
the specific contributory factors to the c ost overruns in respect of  
these projects should be  gone  into i n detail and appropriate 
remedial measures taken so as to ens ure that such ha ppenings, 
  

  
which do not augur well to the economy, do not recur. 
A very disturbing aspect that the Committee wish to 
bring to the fore here is the fact  that as on January 1, 2005, there 
were as many as 23 projects involving an expenditure of Rs. 
344.46 crore which were either frozen or abandoned mid-way due 
to factors such as fund constraints and land acquisition problems.  
Another aspect that the Committee wish to highlight here 
is the fact that in the case of a majority of the projects, 
particularly of the Railways and Road Transport and Highways, a 
major contributory factor for delays and cost escalations relate to 
problems faced in acquiring land. The Committee strongly feel 
the need to give specific attention to evolving measures for 
overcoming this problem, possibly by ensuring that issues 
relating to acquisition of proj ect related land are addressed 
before-hand or in advance to  the stage of project related 
approvals. 
 The Committee also note that in a majority of 37 projects,  
other than railway any projects, in whose case the time overruns 
and cost escalations were reportedly examined by the Standing 
Committees of the Ministries and departments concerned, the 
action taken against those held responsible for lapses as well as 
the remedial measures taken, if any, have not been informed by 
the Ministry. The Committee desire that the related details should 
be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
 
 