LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2004-05)
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
THIRTEENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
13

THIRTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2004-05)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25 February, 2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25 February, 2005
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)


COF No. 13
Price : Rs. 33.00
© 2005 By L OK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by S. Narayan & Sons,
B-88, Okhla Indl. Area, Phase-II, New Delhi-20, Ph. : 26384549, 26385266.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ........................................................................................ 1
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 6th October, 2004 ..... 20
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 16th November, 2004 22
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 17th November, 2004 24
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 5th January, 2005 ..... 27
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 17th January, 2005 ... 29
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 18th January, 2005 ... 30
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27th January, 2005 ... 32
APPENDIX
The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003 .................... 35

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE—2004-2005
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P. Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
Secretariat
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P. K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R. K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R. C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
this Thirteenth Report on the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003.
2. The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003 was introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2003 and was referred to the Committee
on 18th August, 2004 by the Hon'ble Speaker of Lok Sabha for examination
and report thereon.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions
contained in the Bill from the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Company Affairs
who also briefed them at their sitting held on 6th October, 2004.
4. The Committee sought memoranda from the Chambers of
Commerce and the Institute of Company Secretaries of India on the Bill.
They took oral evidence of the representatives of ASSOCHAM and ICSI
on 16th and 17th November, 2004 respectively. The Committee at their
sitting held on 5th January, 2005 took oral evidence of the representatives
of Ministry of Company Affairs on the provisions contained in the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003.
5. The Committee thereafter undertook consideration of the Draft
Report on the Bill at their sitting held on 17th, 18th and 27th January, 2005
which was adopted by the Committee on 27th January, 2005.
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of (i) Chambers of Commerce viz. CII and ASSOCHAM (ii) the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India and (iii) the officers of the Ministry of
Company Affairs for co-operation extended in placing before them their
considered views and perceptions on the subjects and for furnishing written
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection with
the examination of the Bill.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the
body of the Reoport.
NEW DELHI;
23 February, 2005
4 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)
MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on  Finance.
(v)

1
REPORT
Background
1. The Company Secretaries Act, 1980, which is in force for
more than twenty years requires updation because of the changes that
have taken place during this period and on the basis of experience by
the Institute of Company Secretaries of India and the Government
while administering and implementing the provisions of the Act. The
basic objective of the Act is regulation and development of the
profession of Company Secretaries. The role of Company Secretaries
in practice has undergone a considerable change since the enactment
of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980. In the present context, the role
of Company Secretary is not limited to a company but also extends to
other bodies corporate/co-operative societies, etc. He is considered
to be a principal officer of a Company and has immense
responsibilities towards investors, lenders, suppliers and employees
as well.
2. The changing scenario calls for constantly raising the
standards of education and training, accounting the auditing on the
one hand, and capacity building measures on the other. The
disciplinary mechanism, which was evolved at the relevant time,
keeping in view the then membership strength also needs to be
modified in line with the requirements of effective and expeditious
disposal of disciplinary cases in the present day context.
3. Issues pertaining to corporate governance have been in lime
light in the recent  past. After the Enron debacle of 2001, came other
scandals involving large US companies such as Worldcom, Qwest,
Global Crossing and the auditing lacunae that eventually led to the
collapse of Andersen. These scandals triggered another phase of
reforms in corporate governance, accounting practices and
disclosures this time more comprehensive than ever before. In July
2002, less than a year from the date when Enron filed for bankruptcy,
the  Sarbanes-Oxley Bill (popularly called SOX) was enacted. The Act
brought with it fundamental changes in virtually every area of
corporate governance.
4. A need was also felt in India that the Auditor-Company
relationship might be clearly defined. Hence, a High Level
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Naresh Chandra, former
Cabinet Secretary, was constituted to examine, inter alia  the Auditor-

2
Company relationship for the disciplinary mechanism for Auditors.
The Naresh Chandra Committee have recommended the
establishment of a Quality Review Board, a revision of Disciplinary
Mechanism and recommendations regarding Auditor-Company
Relationship.
5. In the light of the proposals from the Institute & report of the
Naresh Chandra Committee, a Bill viz. the Company Secretaries
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 incorporating the  amendment in the
provision of the Company Secretaries Act, 1959 was introduced in
Rajya Sabha on 23rd December, 2003 which was referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance on 18th August, 2004 by the Hon'ble
Speaker of the Lok Sabha for examination and report thereon.
6. The salient features of the Bill are as follows:—
(a) Strengthening of Disciplinary Committee and also
providing for constitution of more than one Disciplinary
Committee, as and when deemed fit, which will enable the
disposal of the increased number of disciplinary cases,
consequent upon the huge increase in the membership of the
Institute and in the number of practicing Company
Secretaries;
(b) Appointment of a Prosecution Directorate which will hasten
the disciplinary process and also impart an objectivity;
(c) Constitution of an Appellate Authority to be headed by a
person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be a judge of a
High Court to deal with the appeals against the orders of the
Council;
(d) Setting up a mechanism for review of the quality of audit,
enhancing the powers of the Council to fix fees, increase the
term of the Council from three to four years, streamlining
the election process and prescribing certain restrictions with
regards to eligibility of members for contesting elections for
the Council of the Institute.
7. With a view to have expert opinion on the various
provisions of the Bill, the Committee sought memoranda from
Chambers of Commerce and the Institute. In order to seek
clarification with regard to the provisions contained in the Bill, the
Committee also took evidence of ASSOCHAM, Institute of Company
Secretaries (ICSI) and the representatives of Ministry of Company
Affairs. Through the various memoranda received from

3
ASSOCHAM, CII and the ICSI, a view has been expressed against the
erosion of autonomy of the Institute because of the various provisions
contained in the Bill. The Institute has suggested that the power of the
Central Government to make rules and issue directions to the
Institute and dissolve the Council on persistent default in giving
effect to the direction should be withdrawn. The ICSI have voiced
their concern against the erosion of their autonomy and efforts of the
Government to interfere in the day to day administration of the
Institute. On the other hand the Government have stated that the
Institute has been established under an Act of Parliament and being a
Statutory Body, comes within the definition of "State". As a regulator,
the Institute discharges an important public function in the financial
sector of the economy. The functions discharged by the Institute/
members of the Institute impinge not only on the members of the
profession but also on other stakeholders like students, companies,
investors, financial institutions and Society — at large. Hence, it is
important to ensure that interest of all stakeholders is adequately
taken care of. Similarly it is important to ensure that the Institution
works within the parameter of the Act and does not cross the limit
prescribed by it. While the governing legislation provides for the
autonomy of the Institute, occasions may arise which may require the
State to assert its authority to enable the Institute to function properly
in the public interest. The ultimate responsibility of the State would
need to be discharged irrespective of the Institutional Autonomy,
since issues affecting the professionals involved would have the
capacity to de-stabilize the financial sector. In this context, it has been
pleaded by Government that power to issue directions and dissolve
the Council are already available in the existing Act. Such powers are
also available with the Government under the Cost and Works
Accountants Act, 1959 and some other Acts of the market regulators
such as Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI), Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Insurance Regulatory Development
Authority (IRDA) and Central Electric regulation Commission
(CERC) etc.
8. After having considered the views expressed by
representatives of the Chambers of Commerce, Institute and
Government for and against the various proposals of the Bill, the
Committee recommend the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Bill, 2003 for enactment subject to certain modifications/
Amendments as indicated in the subsequent paragraphs of this
report.

4
Clause 3—Entry of names in Register—Determination of Fees
9. Clause 3 reads as under:—
"In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words
"prescribed entrance fee, which shall not exceed four hundred
rupees", the words "such fee, as may be determined, by notification,
by the Council with the prior approval of the Central Government,
which shall not exceed rupees three thousand" shall be substituted."
10. The Committee take note of the views expressed by ICSI in
this regard wherein they have submitted that the requirement for
seeking prior permission of the Central Government may be
dispensed with as the Institute is a self funded body and also to
avoid frequent amendments, ceiling on various fees should not be
specified in the Act. The Committee are of the opinion that the
provision for prior provision of Central Government for
determination of fees in not required as it amounts to interference
in the working of the Institute and affect its autonomy. Hence, they
recommend that the Council may be empowered to determine the
fee without prior approval of the Central Government.
11. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 3000 then they should
seek prior permission from the Central Government.
Clause 4 — Fellows and Associates — Determination of Fees
12. Clause 4 reads as under:—
"In section 5 of the principal Act, in Sub-section (3), for the words
"the prescribed entrance fee, which shall not exceed four
hundred rupees", the words "such fee, as may be determined, by
notifications, by the Council with the prior approval of the
Central Government, which shall not exceed rupees five
thousand" shall be substituted."
13. The Committee are inclined to accept the views expressed
by ICSI in this regard wherein they have submitted that the
requirement for seeking prior permission of the Central
Government may be deleted as the Institute is a self funded body
and also to avoid frequent amendments, ceiling on various fees
should not be specified in the Act. The Committee are of the
opinion that the provision for prior provision of Central
Government for determination of fees is not required as it amounts

5
to interference in the working of the Institute and affect its
autonomy. Hence, they recommend that the Council may be
empowered to determine the fee without prior approval of the
Central Government.
14. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 5000 then they should
seek prior permission from the Central Government.
Clause 5 — Certificate of practice — Determination of Fees
15. Clause 5 reads as under:—
"In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(i) In sub-section (2), for the words "prescribed which shall not
exceed two hundred rupees", the words "Determined by notification,
by the Council with the prior approval of the Central Government,
which shall not exceed rupees three thousand" shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(3) The certificate of practice obtained under sub-section (1)
may be cancelled by the Council under such circumstances as may be
prescribed.".
16. The Committee take note of the views expressed by ICSI in
this regard wherein they have submitted that the provision for
seeking prior permission of the Central Government may be
withdrawn as the Institute is a self funded body and also to avoid
frequent amendments, ceiling on various fees should not be
specified in the Act. The Committee are of the opinion that the
provision for prior provision of Central Government for
determination of fees is not required as it amounts to interference
in the working of the Institute and affect its autonomy. Hence, they
recommend that the Council may be empowered to determine the
fee without prior approval of the Central Government.
17. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 3000 then they should
seek permission from the Central Government.

6
Clause 6 — Composition of the Council
18. Clause 6 reads as under:
"In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the
following  sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
(2) The council shall be composed of the following persons, namely:—
(a) not more than fifteen persons elected in the specified
manner by members of the Institute, from amongst the fellows of the
Institute, and
(b) not more than five persons nominated in the specified
manner by the Central Government.
(3) No person holding an office of profit under the Central
Government or a State Government shall be eligible for election to the
Council under clause (a) of sub-section (2)".
19. The committee are of the opinion that some qualification
should be prescribed in the Act for Government nominees. This
will bring expertise in the Council. They therefore, recommend that
the nominees of the Government should be experts in the field of
Corporate law, Finance, Accountancy and other related fields. They
further take note that the existing Act provides for a reference to the
regional constituency through which each region currently elects
specified number of members to make the total of elected
component in the composition of the Council but the present Bill
does not contain such a provision. They find that Government have
themselves agreed to the proposal of retention of this reference.
Hence, the Committee recommend that original provision having
reference to the regional constituencies should be retained.
Clause 7 — Mode of Election to the Council
20. Clause 7 reads as under:
For section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘‘10. (1) A member of the Council elected under clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 9 shall be eligible for re-election but not for more
than three consecutive terms.
(2) A member of the Council, who is or has been elected, as
President under sub-section (1) of section 12, shall not be eligible for
re-election as a member of the Council.

7
10A. In case of any dispute regarding any election under clause
(a) of sub-section (2) of section 9, the aggrieved person may make an
application within thirty days from the date of the declaration of the
result of the election to the Council which shall forward the same
forthwith to the Central Government.
10B. (1) On receipt of any application under section 10A, the
Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal
consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other Members to decide
such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment—
(a) as a Presiding officer of the Tribunal unless he has been a
member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade-1 of
the service for at least three years;
(b) as a Member unless he has been a member of the Council for
at least one full term; and
(c) as a Member holding the post of a Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or any other post under the Central Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint Secretary
to the Government of India.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer
and members of the Tribunal, their place of meetings, remuneration
and allowances shall be such as may be specified.
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council."
21. The Committee are of the opinion that the proposed
amendment would entitle a member for being elected for a period
of twelve years which they feel is too long. They feel that the tenure
of two consecutive terms i.e. for 8 years would be sufficient. Hence,
they recommend that instead of three consecutive terms a member
should be eligible for re-election for two consecutive terms. At the
same time they feel that this restriction should be made applicable
to the nominated members also.
22. The Committee note that under the provisions of present
Bill it is not clear as to whether the Council is simply required to
forward/refer the election petition/dispute to the Central
Government or to do the same after application of mind. The
committee note that Government have themselves suggested that
instead of Council the Secretary of the Institute, who is non-

8
elected, could be authorised to forward such petition direct to the
Central Government. They, therefore, recommend that Secretary of
the Institute should be authorized to forward such petition direct to
the Central Government.
23. The Committee feel that the provision contained in
proposed sub-clause (2)(b) of the proposed new section 10B in the
Bill could be interpreted to appoint even sitting members of the
Council in the Election Tribunal. They take note of the Government
reply in this regard wherein they have stated that it was not the
intention of the Government to appoint a sitting member on the
election Tribunal. They, therefore, recommend that it should be
specifically provided in the Bill that no sitting member would be
appointed in the Election Tribunal.
Clause 12 — Committees of the Council
24. Clause 12 reads as under:
In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), clause (iii) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(3) Each of the Standing Committees shall consist of the
President and the Vice-President ex officio , and minimum of three and
maximum of five members of the Council elected by the Council, out
of which one shall be the member nominated under clause (b) of sub-
section (2) of section 9.
(c) sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) shall be omitted."
25. The committee are of the opinion that this provision
contains a drafting lacuna. The reference of nominated member to
be appointed to the Standing Committees out of elected members
does not appear to be the correct position under the scheme of the
present Bill. It should have been provided for clearly. However
they find that the Government have themselves stated that in the
context of the proposed rule based regime envisaged along with
powers of the Central Government to issue directions/dissolve the
Council, constitution of these two Committees could be left to the
Council. In view of the Government's reply, the Committee,
therefore, recommend that this clause should be amended
accordingly.

9
Clause 13 — Register of Members
26. Clause 13 reads as under:
"In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (3), the words "on payment of such amount as
may be prescribed" shall be inserted at the end;
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the word "prescribed, which shall not
exceed three hundred rupees", the words "determined, by
notification, by the Council with the prior approval of the Central
Government, which shall not exceed rupees five thousand" shall be
substituted."
27. The Committee take note of the views expressed by ICSI in
this regard wherein they have submitted that the provision for
seeking prior permission of the Central Government is not required
as the Institute is a self funded body and also to avoid frequent
amendments, ceiling on various fees should not be specified in the
Act. The Committee are of the opinion that the provision for prior
provision of Central Government for determination of fees is not
required as it amounts to interference in the working of the
Institute and affect its autonomy. Hence, they recommend that the
Council may be empowered to determine the fee without prior
approval of the Central Government.
28. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 5000 then they should
seek permission from the Central Government.
Clause 14 — Removal from the Register
29. Clause 14 reads as under:
"In section 20 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(3) If the name of any member has been removed from the
register under clause (c) of sub-section (1), on receipt of an
application, his name may be entered again in the register on payment
of the arrears of determined annual fee and entrance fee along with
such additional fee, as may be determined, by notification, by the
Council with the prior approval of the Central Government, which
shall not exceed rupees Two Thousand in any case."

10
30. The Committee take note of the views expressed by ICSI in
this regard wherein they have submitted that the provision for
seeking prior permission of the Central Government is not required
as the Institute is a self funded body and also to avoid frequent
amendments, ceiling on various fees should not be specified in the
Act. The Committee are of the opinion that the provision for prior
provision of Central Government for determination of fees is not
required as it amounts to interference in the working of the
Institute and affect its autonomy. Hence, they recommend that the
Council may be empowered to determine the fee without prior
approval of the Central Government.
31. They further recommend that the upper limit of the fee
should remain unchanged. However, if the Council seeks to raise
the fee beyond the maximum ceiling i.e. Rs. 2000 then they should
seek permission from the Central Government.
Clause 15 — Disciplinary Committee
32. Clause 15 reads as under:—
"For section 21 of the principal Act, the following sections shall
be substituted, namely:—
'21. (1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee
consisting of he President or the Vice-President of the Council as the
Presiding Officer and two members of the Council elected by the
Council and two members to be nominated by the Central
Government from amongst the persons of eminence having
experience in the field of law, education, economics, business,
finance, accountancy or public administration:
Provided that the Council may constitute more regional
Disciplinary Committees as and when it deems fit.
(2) The Disciplinary Committee in making the inquiry under the
provisions of this Act shall follow such procedure and submit the
report to the Council within such time as may be specified.
21A. (1) The Council shall, by notification, appoint a Prosecution
Director and such other employees for making inquiries in respect of
any information or complaint received by it under the provisions of
this Act.
(2) In order to make inquiries under the provisions of this Act,
the Prosecution Director shall follow such procedures as may be
specified.

11
21B. For the purposes of an inquiry under the provision of this
Act, the authority, the Council, the Disciplinary Committee and the
Prosecution Director shall have the same powers as are vested in a
Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and
(c) Receiving evidence on affidavit.
21C. (1) On receipt of a report from the Disciplinary Committee,
if the Council is satisfied that the member of the Institute is guilty of
any professional or other misconduct, it shall record its findings
accordingly and shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of
section 21D.
(2) In case the Council is not satisfied with the report of the
Disciplinary Committee and is of the opinion that it requires further
inquiry, it may refer the report again to the Disciplinary Committee
for such further inquiry as may be directed through an order of the
Council.
(3) If the Council disagrees with the findings of the Disciplinary
Committee, it may direct the Prosecution Director to make an appeal
to the Authority.
21D. Where the Council is of the opinion that a member is guilty
of a professional or other misconduct mentioned in the Schedule, it
shall afford to the member a reasonable opportunity of being heard
before making any order against him and may thereafter take any one
or more of the following actions, namely:—
(a) reprimand the member; or
(b) remove the name of the member from the register
permanently or for such period, as it thinks fit.
Explanation:— For the purposes of this section "member of the
Institute" includes a person who was a member of the Institute on the
date of the alleged misconduct although he has ceased to be a member
of the Institute at the time of the inquiry'."
33. The Committee take note that this clause seeks to insert
new disciplinary mechanism by way of constituting disciplinary
committees and appointment of  Prosecution Director. The

12
Committee find that though a new machanism has been provided to
deal with the disciplinary cases in the present Bill but the same is
also a very lengthy one since under this, the enquiry will be made
first by the Disciplinary Committee and the report will be placed
before the Council. It further provides that if the Council is not
satisfied with the report of the Disciplinary committee and is of  the
opinion that this requires further inquiry, it may refer the report
again to the Disciplinary Committee for such further enquiry as it
may direct through an order. The Institute of Company Secretaries
of India have submitted that since the Institute has low pendency
of disciplinary cases and the existing mechanism for the disposal of
these cases have been functioning adequately, there is no need to
change the existing mechanism.
34. However, the Committee find that  the Naresh Chandra
Committee have also recommended an entirely new disciplinary
procedure, which will bring about greater speed while ensuring
independence and fair play. They also note that the Government
have also during the course of evidence accepted the suggestion
and have agreed to dispense with the lengthy process which has
been provided in the existing Bill and have stated that the
Disciplinary Committee could be empowered to award
punishments in disciplinary cases. The appeal against the decision
of the disciplinary committee could then lie to the Appellate
Authority. This would reduce one time consuming tier of the
disciplinary cases. The Committee are in agreement with such a
proposal. They also feel that the existing provisions with regard to
two nominated members from the field of  law, education,
business, finance, accountancy and public administration provided
in proposed section 21(1) is too wide which will not serve any
useful purpose. They are of the opinion that representation should
be restricted to only the areas of law, finance and accountancy.
Hence they recommend that only relevant fields such as law,
finance and accountancy could be retained and the fields of
business, education and public administration  may be excluded.
35. The Committee take note that a Prosecution Director has
been proposed for appointment by way of proposed new section
21A who shall have powers of a Civil Court. The function of
Prosecution Director is envisaged for making prima-facie  inquiries
in respect of information/complaints received and submission of
cases to Disciplinary Committee for their consideration and to
ensure that the proceedings are conducted as per rules and statute.

13
Disciplinary Committee is to deliberate on the subject matter,
along with inquiry reports, if any, of the Prosecution Directorate. In
the Bill, the Disciplinary Committee is to submit its report to the
Council for decision. However, they find that Government have in
their written submissions submitted to the Committee agreed that
there will be a Prosecution Directorate instead of Prosecution
Director who will handle minor offences under summary Disposal
Mechanism apart from scrutinizing the complaints to be submitted
before the Disciplinary Committee. It has also been noted by the
Committee that the Government have themselves suggested the
change of name of Prosecution Director which could be termed as
Disciplinary Board who should be delegated the powers to dispose
of minor cases in respect of defined acts of misconduct classified as
Minor Offence through the summary disposal mechanism, with
powers to impose punishment up to pre-determined threshold
limit. They also find that the Government have stated that
summary Disposal Mechanism will be available in the event of
admission of guilt. In the light of Government's proposal, the
Committee feel that it will not be possible for a single person to
handle such an enormous task. Hence, they recommend that
Government should amend this clause suitably to make it multi-
member body providing for  a mechanism to deal with the minor
offences expeditiously. The Government should also clearly state
the composition of such a body in  the Bill itself. The Committee
recommend that such a body should be headed by a person not
below the rank of a Joint  Secretary belonging to the legislative
service. Two members should be the Council and two should be
outside experts from the field of law and accountancy.
36. In view of their recommendation for authorizing the
Disciplinary Committee to award punishment, the Committee
recommend that proposed section 21 C in the Bill should be deleted
and in proposed section 21D, the word 'Disciplinary Committee'
should be substituted in place of 'Council'. The Committee also
recommend that the Council should be authorized to give direction
both to the Disciplinary Committee as well as the Appellate
Authority to decide a case on priority in the event of its being of
paramount public importance.
37. The Committee find that the existing provision provided
in proposed section 21(D) for reprimanding or removing the name
of the member from the register permanently, when found guilty of
a professional or other  misconduct mentioned in the schedule, is

14
inadequate as it does not provide for any monetary penalty as also
was recommended by Naresh Chandra Committee. The Committee
are inclined to accept the suggestion of ICSI that the Disciplinary
Committee should also be authorized to impose a penalty in
addition to the existing proposed powers of reprimand and removal
of the name of the member permanently or for such period as it
thinks fit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Disciplinary Committee should be authorized to impose a penalty
upto Rs. 5,00,000. Besides the Disciplinary Committee should be
authorized to club any two penalties and therefore instead of the
word "or" the same should be amended to read "or/ and".
Clause 16 — Professional Misconduct defined
38.  Clause 16 - reads as under :—
"In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(i) for the words "specified in any of the Schedules", the words
"mentioned in the Schedule or as may be specified" shall be
substituted;
(ii) the word "under sub-section (1) of section 21" shall be omitted."
39. The Committee find that the two schedules mentioned in
the present Act deal with minor and major cases of professional
misconduct respectively. They also find that the Government have
already agreed to the proposal regarding Summary Disposal
Mechanism for minor offences. Hence, they are of the opinion that
merger of the two schedules will not be necessary. They therefore,
recommend the deletion of the above clause
Clause 17—Constitution of the Appellate Authority
40. Clause 17 reads as under:—
"After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
'22A. The Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section
(1) of section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 shall be
deemed be to be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act
subject to the modification that for clause (b) of said sub-section
(1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
(b) the Central Government shall, by notification appoint two part-
time members from amongst the persons who have been members of the
Council of the Institute of Company Secretaries for at least one full term.

15
22B. (1) A person appointed as Chairperson shall hold office for
a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office
or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.
(2) A person appointed as a member shall hold office for a term
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until
he attains the age of sixty seven years, whichever is earlier.
22C. (1) The allowances payable to, and other terms and
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and members shall be such
as may be specified.
(2) The allowances to the Chairperson and members shall be paid
by the  Council in such manner as may be specified.
22D. (1) The Authority shall meet at such time and place and
follow in its meetings and in discharging its functions such procedure
as may be specified.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be
authenticated by an officer duly authorised by the Chairperson in this
behalf.
22E. (1)  The Council shall make available to the Authority such
officers and other staff members as may be necessary for the efficient
performance of the functions of the Authority.
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the
officers and other staff members made available to the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
22F. (1) The Chairperson or a member may, by notice in writing
under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his
office: Provided that the Chairperson or a member shall, unless he is
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date
of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of term of office
whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson or a member shall not be removed from his
office except by an order of the Central Government on the ground of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by such
person as the President may appoint for this purpose in which the
Chairperson or a member concerned has been informed of the charges
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of such charges.

16
22G. (1) Any member of the institute aggrieved by any order of
the Council imposing on him any of the penalties referred to in
section 21D, may within thirty days of the date on which the order is
communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Authority:
Provided that the Authority may entertain any such appeal after
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the
member was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in
time .
(2) The Authority may, after calling for the records of any case
revise any order made by the Council under section 21D and may—
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, or enhance the
penalty imposed by the order;
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary Committee for such further
inquiry as the Authority considers proper in the circumstances of the
case; or
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit: Provided
that no order of the Council shall be modified or set aside unless the
Council has been given an opportunity of being heard and no order
imposing or enhancing a penalty shall be passed unless the person
concerned has also been given an opportunity of being heard.".
41. The provisions of the amendment seeks to provide for the
nomination of two members by the Central Government from
amongst persons having knowledge and practical experience in the
field of law, business, economics, education, public
administration, finance and accountancy. The Committee find that
the fields are too wide which will not serve any useful purpose.
Hence they recommend that only relevant fields such as law,
finance and accountancy could be retained and the fields of
business, education and public administration may be excluded.
42. New section 22(B) provides for the term of office of
Chairperson and members of Appellate Authority. The Committee
are of the opinion that the term provided in the Bill for Chairperson
and members for five age of retirement as 70 and 65 years
respectively is too long which could be lowered. They, therefore,
recommend that the term of office of Chairperson and members
should be reduced to three years instead of the five years proposed

17
in the Bill and the age of retirements should be 66 and 62 years
respectively.
Clause18—Establishment of Quality Review Board
43. Clause 18 reads as under:
After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the following Chapter
shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER VIIA
QUALITY REVIEW BOARD
29A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute a Quality Review Board consisting of a Chairman and four
other members.
(2) The Chairman and members of the Board shall be appointed
from amongst the persons having eminence and experience in the
field of law, education, economics, business, finance, accountancy or
public administration.
(3) Two members of the Board shall be nominated by the Council
and other two members shall be nominated by the Central
Government.
29B. The Board shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to fix standards for the services provided by the members of
the Institute:
(b) to review the quality of services provided by the members of
the institute including secretarial audit services; and
(c) to guide the members of the Institute to improve the quality
of services and adherence to the various statutory and other
regulatory requirements.
29C. The Board shall follow in its meeting and in discharging its
functions such procedure as may be specified.
29D. The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and
the members of the Board, their place of meetings, remuneration and
allowances shall be such as may be specified .
29E. The expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the
Council.".
44. New Section 28(A) seeks to provide for the appointment of
the Chairman and members by the Central Government from

18
amongst persons having knowledge and practical experience in the
field of law, business, economics, education, public
administration, finance and accountancy. The Committee find that
the fields are too wide which will not serve any useful purpose.
Hence, they recommend that only relevant fields such as law,
finance and accountancy could be retained and the fields of
business, education and public administration may be excluded.
Clause 20— Power of Central Government to issue directions
45. Clause 20 inter alia  reads as under:—
“For section 35 of  the principal Act, the following section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“35.(1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government
may, from time to time, give to the Council such general or special
directions as it thinks fit, and the Council shall, in the discharge of its
functions under this Act, comply with any such directions.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council has
persistently made default in giving effect to the directions issued
under sub-section (1), it may, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the Council, by notification, dissolve the Council, whereafter
a new Council shall be constituted in accordance with the provisions
of this Act with effect from such date as may be decided by the
Central Government.
(3) Where the Central Government has issued a notification
under sub-section (2) dissolving the Council, it may, pending the
constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, authorised any person or body of persons to take over the
management of the affairs of the Council and to exercise such
functions as may be mentioned in the notification”.
The Committee had expressed the apprehensions that the
provisions of the Bill, particularly the powers to issue directions and
dissolve the Council are steps towards eroding the autonomy of the
institutes, during the course of evidence. The Ministry of Company
Affairs in their post-evidence reply stated as follows:
“As we move from a system of controls to regulation, the
concerned agencies and bodies are to be provided  necessary
administrative, financial and functional freedom to carry out their
functions effectively. The Government is not required to intervene in
their day-to-day functions. In such cases, the ultimate and reserve

19
power of the State is limited to intervention in cases where system
improvement is required or to address situations arising out of
system breakdown. This framework is also envisaged for the
functioning of the Institutes. Thus, the nature of the autonomy itself
requires that residual powers of direction/dissolution lie with the
Government to bring about changes and improvements as merited in
the framework governing the system and also to meet extreme
contingent situations.”
The Ministry further stated as:
“It is not the intention that the exercise of power to dissolve the
Council would  be done in a manner that would create a vacuum or
provide scope for arbitrary exercise of power. Should an occasion
arise to dissolve any Council, procedures would be laid down for:—
(a) Time bound re-election and reconstruction of the new
council.
(b) Providing for conduct of business of the institute in the
interim period through a transparent arrangement.”
46. The Committee find that similar provision exists in the
parent Act also. While taking note of the justification advanced by
the Government in respect of the empowerment to the Government
to issue directions and dissolution of the Council the Committee
opine that the present provision seems to be an open ended one.
They are of the opinion that such blanket powers would rather
impinge upon the autonomy of the Institute.
They, therefore, recommend that the power of the Central
Government to issue directions/dissolution of the Council should
be in consonance with the objectives mentioned in the Bill and the
same should be restricted to the following :—
- to uphold and maintain the highest level of Secretaries
audit;
- to maintain highest standards of the quality of audit; and
- to take appropriate action against the defaulters in the
shortest possible time.
N
EW D ELHI; Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C.Khanduri,
23 February, 2005  Chairman,
4 Phalguna, 1926(Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

20
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 6th  October, 2004 from 1100 to 1300 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri  A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahto
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri Lakshaman Seth
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri R.P Goenka
16. Shri Jairam Ramesh
17. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
18. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
19. Shri C. Ramchandraiah
20. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Dr.(Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary

21
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Secretary, Ministry of Company Affairs
2. Dr. (Mrs.) Sheela Bhide, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Paul Joseph, Economic Adviser
5. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Adviser, Cost
6. Shri V.S. Rao, Director, Inspection & Investigation
7. Shri R. Vasudevan, Director, Inspection & Investigation
8. Shri Neerabh Kumar Prasad, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Company Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee was then briefed by the representatives of the
Ministry of Company Affairs on (i) the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 (ii) the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) bill, 2003, and (iii) the Company Secretaries
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 with the aid of an audio-visual presentation.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the representatives of
Ministry of Company Affairs to furnish notes on certain points raised
by the Members to which replies were not readily available with them
during the discussion.
5. The briefing was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
(The Committee then adjourned.)

22
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 16th November, 2004 from 1430 to 1610 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.P Goenka
12. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
13. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
14. Shri Amar Singh
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
ASSOCHAM
1. Shri Vishesh Chandeok, Partner, Grant Thornton India
Pvt. Ltd.
2. Shri Nesar Ahmed, Senior Committee Member
3. Shri Ashish Kochhar, Asstt. Director

23
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the ASSOCHAM to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the ASSOCHAM on the provisions of the (i) the Chartered
Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 (ii) the Cost & Works
Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003, and (iii) the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003.
4. The members asked clarificatory questions which were
replied by the representatives. However, it was noticed by the
Committee that the representatives were expressing their personal
opinion on the Bills rather than presenting a considered and
consolidated view of ASSOCHAM. The Committee took very serious
view to the fact that junior functionaries have been deputed by
ASSOCHAM to depose before a Parliamentary Committee who were
not able to express properly.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceeding has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part B
At 1600 hours
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
The Committee expressed their serious concern over the absence
of senior executives of Cll when they were informed that only two
junior officers of the Cll have come to tender evidence on the three
Bills viz. (i) the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003,
(ii) the Cost & Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and
(iii) the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003, and decided
not to take oral evidence of the representatives. The decision of the
Committee was conveyed to them.
The Committee then adjourned.

24
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 17 th November, 2004
from 1030 to 1200 hours, 1200 to 1300 hours and 1515 to 1545 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
7. Shri Roopchand Pal
8. Shri  K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
12. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
13. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
14. Shri Amar Singh
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K.Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
Part I
WITNESSES
THE INSTITUTE OF CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS OF INDIA
1. Shri Sunil Goyal, President
2. Shri Kamlesh K. Vikamsey, Vice President
3. Dr. Ashok Haldia, Secretary
4. Shri T.N.Manoharan, Council Member
5. Shri S.C. Vasudeva, Council Member & Chairman,
Accounting Standards Board of ICAI

25
Part II
At 1200 hours
THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA
1. Shri Mahesh Anant Athavale, President, the ICSI
2. Shri N.K. Jain, Secretary , the ICSI
3. Shri Nesar Ahmed, Council Member, the ICSI
4. Ms. Preeti Malhotra, Council Member, the ICSI
5. Shri P.K.Mittal, Council Member, the ICSI
6. Shri V.K. Aggarwal, Senior Director, the ICSI
7. Shri S. Kumar, Director, the ICSI
Part III
At 1515 hours
THE INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS OF  INDIA
1. Dr. H.R. Subramanya, President, ICWAI
2. Dr. D. Jagannathan, Central Council Member, Government
Nominee
3. Shri Rakesh Singh, Central Council Member
Part I
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
2. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India on the provisions of
the Chartered Accountant (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The President of
ICAI gave an audio-visual presentation after seeking the permission
of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India to the sitting of the

26
Committee and invited thier attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker , Lok Sabha.
2. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India on the provisions of
the Company Secretary (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The President of
ICSI gave an audio-visual presentation after seeking the permission
of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to
by witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part III
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Institute of Cost and  Works Accountants of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
2. The Committee, then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India on the
provisions of the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill,
2003. The President of ICWAI gave an audio-visual presentation after
seeking the permission of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Members raised queries which were replied to
by the witnesses.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

27
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 5th January, 2005 from 1100 to 1230 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Jairam  Ramesh
13. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
14. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
15. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
16. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Company Affairs
1. Smt. Komal Anand, Secretary
2. Shri Jitesh Khosla, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Y.S. Malik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Paul Joseph, Economic Advisor

28
5. Shri V.S. Rao, DII
6. Shri R. Vasudevan, DII
7. Shri A.K. Kapoor, Advisor, Cost
8. Shri O.P. Arya, Director, SFIO
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Company Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of
the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Company Affairs on (i) the Chartered  Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, (ii) the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, and (iii) the Company Secretaries
(Amendment) Bill, 2003.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5.  A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
(The Committee then adjourned.)

29
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 17 January 2005 from 1615 hrs. to 1645 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Gurudas Kamat
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri Ajit Singh
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
12. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri R.P. Goenka
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
17. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
18. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P.K.Sandhu — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
(from 1615 to 1645 hours)
2. The Chairman and Members decided to have a preliminary
discussion on the draft reports on (i) the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, (ii) the Cost & Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 and (iii) the Company Secretaries
(Amendment) Bill, 2003.
3. Thereafter, the Committee decided to consider and adopt the
aforesaid reports on 18.01.2005.

30
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 18 January, 2005 from 1645 hrs. to 1710 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri M.A.Kharabela Swain
12. Shri Vijoy Krishna
13. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
17. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
18. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C Kakkar — Under Secretary
2. The Committee took further consideration of the draft reports
on (i) the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003, (ii) the Cost
& Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003, and (iii) the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The Chairman requested the

31
Members of the Committee to furnish their suggestions on the
recommendations contained in the aforementioned reports. The
Members suggested some modifications in the Reports. The
Chairman directed that these modifications be incorporated in the
draft reports. Then, the Chairman also directed that the revised drafts
should be circulated to the Members of the Committee for their
perusal. The Committee decided to take up further consideration and
adoption of the aforesaid reports on 27.01.2005
3. The meeting was concluded.
The Committee then adjourned.

32
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 27 January, 2005 from 1400 hrs. to 1430 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Syama Charan Gupt
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri M. Venkaiya Naidu
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
2. The Committee took up for consideration the revised draft
reports on (i) the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003,
(ii) the Cost & Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2003 and (iii)
the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2003. The Committee
after deliberation adopted the same with modifications/amendments
as shown in Annexures I, and II.
3.The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the draft
Reports in the light of the modifications as also to make verbal and
consequential changes and present the same to the Speaker.
The Committee then adjourned.

33
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2003 OF
THE MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS AT THEIR SITTING
HELD ON 27 JANUARY,2005]
Page No. 15
After Para No.44
Insert New Para Nos. 45 & 46:
45. Clause 20 inter alia  reads as under:
For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“35. (1) For  the purposes of  this Act, the Central Government
may, from time to time, give to the Council such general or special
directions as it thinks fit and the Council shall, in the discharge of its
functions under this Act, comply with any such directions.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council has
persistently made default in giving effect to the directions issued
under sub-section (1), it may, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the Council, by  notification, dissolve the Council,
whereafter a new Council shall be constituted in accordance with the
provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be decided by
the Central Government.
(3) Where the Central Government has issued a notification
under sub-section (2) dissolving the Council, it may, pending the
constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of
this Act, authorise any persons or body of persons to take over the
management of the affairs of the Council and to exercise such
functions as may be mentioned in the notification.”
The Committee had expressed the apprehensions that the
provisions of the Bill, particularly the powers to issue directions and
dissolve the Council are steps towards eroding the autonomy of the
Institute. The Ministry of Company Affairs in their post evidence
reply stated as follows:
“As we move from a system of controls to regulation, the
concerned agencies and bodies are to be provided necessary

34
administrative, financial and functional freedom to carry out their
functions effectively. The Government is not required to intervene in
their day to day functions. In such cases, the ultimate and reserve
power of the State is limited to intervention in cases where system
improvement is required or to address situations arising out of
system breakdown. This framework is also envisaged for the
functioning of the institutes. Thus the nature of the autonomy itself
requires that residual powers of direction/dissolution lie with the
government to bring about changes and improvements as merited in
the framework governing the system and also to meet extreme
contingent situations.”
The Ministry futher stated as:
“It is not the intention that the exercise of power to dissolve the
Council would be done in a manner that would create a vacuum or
provide scope for arbitary exercise of power. Should an occasion arise
to dissolve any Council, procedures would be laid down for:—
(a) Time bound re-election and reconstruction of the new
council.
(b) Providing for conduct of business of the institute in the
interim period through a transparent arrangement.”
46. The Committee find  that similar provision exists in the
parent Act also. While taking note of the justification by the
Government in respect of the empowerment to the Government to
issue directions and dissolution of the Council, the Committee
opine that the present provision seems to be an open ended one.
They are of the opinion that such blanket powers would rather
impinge upon the autonomy of the Institute .
They, therefore, recommend that the power of the Central
Government to issue directions/dissolution of the Council should
be inconsonance with the objectives mentioned in the Bill and the
same should be restricted to the following:—
- to uphold and maintain the highest level of secretarial
audit;
-  to maintain highest standards of the quality of audit; and,
- to take appropriate action against the defaulters in the
shortest possible time.”

35
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year
of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Act, 2003.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (hereafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) of
section (2),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:—
REPRINT
As Introduced in The Rajya Sabha
on the 23rd December, 2003.
Bill No. LXXVIII of 2003.
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES (AMENDMENT) BILL,
2003
A
BILL
further to amend the Company Secretaries Act, 1980.
56 of 1980.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.

36
‘(aa) “Authority” means the Appellate
Authority referred to in section 22A;
(aaa) “Board” means the Quality Review
Board constituted under section 29A;’;
(ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(ga) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette;’; (iii) after
clause j), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:-
‘(ja) “specified” means specified by rules
made by the Central Government under this
Act;
(jb) “Tribunal” means a Tribunal established
under sub-section (1) of section 10B;’.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),
for the words “prescribed entrance fee, which shall not
exceed four hundred rupees”, the words “such fee, as
may be determined, by notification, by the Council with
the prior approval of the Central Government, which
shall not exceed rupees three thousand” shall be
substituted.
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),
for the words “the prescribed entrance fee, which shall
not exceed four hundred rupees”, the words “such fee, as
may be determined, by notification, by the Council with
the prior approval of the Central Government, which
shall not exceed rupees five thousand” shall be
substituted.
5. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “prescribed
which shall not exceed two hundred rupees”, the
words “determined by notification, by the Council
with the prior approval of the Central Government,
which shall not exceed rupees three thousand“ shall
be substituted;
Amendment of
section 4.
Amendment of
section 5.
Amendment of
section 6.

37
(ii) after sub-section ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) The certificate of practice obtained under
sub-section ( 1) may be cancelled by the Council
under such circumstances as may be prescribed.”.
6. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section
(2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) The Council shall be composed of the
following persons, namely:—
(a) not more than fifteen persons elected in the
specified manner by members of the Institute, from
amongst the fellows of the Institute, and
(b) not more than five persons nominated in the
specified manner by the’ Central Government.
(3) No person holding an office of profit under
the Central Government or a State Government
shall be eligible for election to the Council under
clause (a) of sub-section (2).”.
7. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“10. ( 1) A member of the Council elected under
clause (a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 9 shall be
eligible for re-election but not for more than three
consecutive terms.
(2) A member of the Council, who is or has been
elected, as President under sub-section ( 1) of section
12, shall not be eligible for re-election as a member
of the Council.
10A. In case of any dispute regarding any
election under clause (a) of sub- section ( 2) of
section 9, the aggrieved person may make an
application within thirty days from the date of the
declaration of the result of the election to the
Council which shall forward the same forthwith to
the Central Government.
Amendment of
section 9.
Substitution of
new sections
for section 10.
Re-election to
Council.
Settlement of
dispute
regarding
election.

38
10B. ( 1) On receipt of any application under
section 10A, the Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a
Presiding Officer and two other Members to decide
such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall
be final.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment,—
(a) as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal
unless he has been a member of the Indian Legal
Service and has held a post in Grade I of the
service for at least three years;
(b) as a Member unless he has been a
member of the Council for at least one full term;
and
(c) as a Member holding the post of a Joint
Secretary to the Government of India or any
other post under the Central Government
carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that
of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the
Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal,
their place of meetings, remuneration and
allowances shall be such as may be specified.
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne
by the Council.”.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section
(4), for the word “President” wherever it occurs, the
words “President and the Vice-President” shall be
substituted.
9. In section 13 of the principal Act, in the proviso to
sub-section ( 3), for the words “six months”, the words
“one year” shall be substituted.
10. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section
(1), for the words “three years”, the words “four years”
shall be substituted.
Establishment
of Tributnal.
Amendment of
section 12.
Amendment of
section 13.
Amendment of
section 14.

39
11. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),
for clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(c) with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, fix the allowances of the President,
Vice-President and other members of the Council
and members of its Committees;
(d) approve the foreign travel tours of the
President, the Vice-President and members of the
Council and member of its Committees, and officers
and employees of the Institute in such manner as
may be specified.”.
12. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), clause (b) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Each of the Standing Committees shall
consist of the President and the Vice-President
ex-officio, and minimum of three and maximum
of five members of the Council elected by the
Council, out of which one shall be the member
nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 9.”;
(c) sub-sections ( 4), (5) and ( 6) shall be omitted.
13. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 3), the words “on payment of
such amount as may be prescribed” shall be
inserted at the end;
(ii) in sub-section ( 4), for the word “prescribed,
which shall not exceed three hundred rupees”, the
words “determined, by notification, by the Council
with the prior approval of the Central Government,
which shall not exceed rupees five thousand” shall
be substituted.
14. In section 20 of the principal Act, after sub-section
(2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(3) If the name of any member has been removed
from the register under clause (c) of sub-section (1), on
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 17.
Amendment of
section 19.
Amendment of
section 20.

40
receipt of an application, his name may be entered
again in the register on payment of the arrears of
determined annual fee and entrance fee along with
such additional fee, as may be determined, by
notification, by the Council with the prior approval
of the Central Government, which shall not exceed
rupees two thousand in any case.”.
15. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following
sections shall be substituted, namely:—
’21, ( 1) The Council shall constitute a
Disciplinary Committee consisting of the President
or the Vice-President of the Council as the Presiding
Officer and two members of the Council elected by
the Council and two members to be nominated by
the Central Government from amongst the persons
of eminence having experience in the field of law,
education, economics, business, finance,
accountancy or public administration:
Provided that the Council may constitute more
regional Disciplinary Committees as and when it
deems fit.
(2) The Disciplinary Committee in making the
inquiry under the provisions of this Act shall follow
such procedure and submit the report to the Council
within such time as may be specified.
21A. ( 1) The Council shall, by notification,
appoint a Prosecution Director and such other
employees for making inquiries in respect of any
information or complaint received by it under the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In order to make inquiries under the
provisions of this Act, the Prosecution Director shall
follow such procedures as may be specified.
21B. For the purposes of an inquiry under the
provision of this Act, the Authority, the Council, the
Disciplinary Committee and the Prosecution
Director shall have the same powers as are vested in
Substitution of
new section for
section 21.
Disciplinary
Committee.
Appointment
of Prosecution
Director.
Authority,
Council,
Disciplinary
Committee and
Prosecution
Director to
have powers of
Civil Court.

41
a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining  him
oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any
document; and (c) receiving evidence on
affidavit.
21C. ( 1) On receipt of a report from the
Disciplinary Committee, if the Council is satisfied
that the member of the Institute is guilty of any
professional or other misconduct, it shall record its
findings accordingly and shall proceed in
accordance with the provisions of section 21D.
(2) In case the Council is not satisfied with the
report of the Disciplinary Committee and is of the
opinion that it requires further inquiry, it may refer
the report again to the Disciplinary Committee for
such further inquiry as may be directed through an
order of the Council.
(3) If the Council disagrees with the findings of
the Disciplinary Committee, it may direct the
Prosecution Director to make an appeal to the
Authority.
21D. Where the Council is of the opinion that a
member is guilty of a professional or other
misconduct mentioned in the Schedule, it shall
afford to the member a reasonable opportunity of
being heard before making any order against him
and may thereafter take anyone or more of the
following actions, namely:—
(a) reprimand the member; or
(b) remove the name of the member from the
register permanently or for such period, as it
thinks fit.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section
“member of the Institute” includes a person who
was a member of the Institute on the date of the
Action by
Council on
Disciplinary
Committee’s
report.
Member to be
afforded
opportunity of
being heard.
5 of 1908

42
alleged misconduct although he has ceased to be a
member of the Institute at the time of the inquiry.’ .
16. In section 22 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “specified m any of the
Schedules”, the words “mentioned in the Schedule
or as may be specified” shall be substituted;
(ii) the words “under sub-section (1) of section
21” shall be omitted.
17. After section 22 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“22A. The Appellate Authority constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 22A of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, shall be deemed
to be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of
this Act subject to the modification that for clause
(b) of said sub-section ( 1), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
(b) the Central Government shall, by
notification appoint two part-time members
from amongst the persons who have been
members of the Council of the Institute of
Company Secretaries for at least one full term.
22B. ( 1) A person appointed as Chairperson
shall hold office for a term of five years from the
date on which he enters upon his office or until he
attains the age of seventy years whichever is earlier.
(2) A person appointed as a member shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which
he enters upon his office or until he attains the age
of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier.
22C. ( 1) The allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson
and members shall be such as may be specified.
(2) The allowances to the Chairperson and
members shall be paid by the Council in such
manner as may be specified.
Amendment of
section 22.
Insertion of
new sections
for section 22.
Constitution of
Authority.
Term of office
of Chairperson
and members
of Authority.
Allowances
and conditions
of service of
Chairperson
and members
of Authority.
38 of 1949

43
22D. ( 1) The Authority shall meet at such time
and place and follow in its meetings and in
discharging its functions such procedure as may be
specified.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Authority
shall be authenticated by an officer duly authorised
by the Chairperson in this behalf.
22E. (1) The Council shall make available to the
Authority such officers and other staff members as
may be necessary for the efficient performance of
the functions of the Authority.
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions
of service of the officers and other staff members
made available to the Authority shall be such as
may be prescribed.
22F. ( 1) The Chairperson or a member may, by
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a member
shall, unless he is permitted by the Central
Government to relinquish his office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of three
months from the date of receipt of such notice or
until a person duly appointed as his successor
enters upon his office or until the expiry of term of
office, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Chairperson or a member shall not be
removed from his office except by an order of the
Central Government on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made
by such person as the President may appoint for this
purpose in which the Chairperson or a member
concerned has been informed of the charges against
him and given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in respect of such charges.
22G. ( 1) Any member of the Institute aggrieved
by any order of the Council imposing on him any of
the penalties referred to in section 21D, may within
Procedure to be
regulated by
Authority.
Office and
other staff of
Authority.
Resignation
and removal of
Chairperson
and members.
Appeal to
Authority.

44
thirty days of the date on which the order is
communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the
Authority:
Provided that the Authority may entertain any
such appeal after the expiry of the said period of
thirty days, if it is satisfied that the member was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
in time.
(2) The Authority may, after calling for the
records of any case, revise any order made by
the Council under section 21D and may—
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce,
or enhance the penalty imposed by the order;
(c) remit the case to the Disciplinary
Committee for such further inquiry as the
Authority considers proper in the circumstances
of the case; or
(d) pass such other order as the Authority
thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall be
modified or set aside unless the Council has been
given an opportunity of being heard and no order
imposing or enhancing a penalty shall be passed
unless the person concerned has also been given an
opportunity of being heard.’.
18. After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the
following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER VIIA
Q
UALITY  REVIEW BOARD
29A. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, constitute a Quality Review Board
consisting of a Chairman and four other members.
(2) The Chairman and members of the Board
shall be appointed from amongst the persons having
eminence and experience in the field of law, education,
economics, business, finance, accountancy or public
administration.
Insertion of
new Chapter
VIIA.
Establishment
of Quality
Review Board.

45
(3) Two members of the Board shall be
nominated by the Council and other two members
shall be nominated by the Central Government.
29B. The Board shall perform the following
functions, namely:—
(a) to fix standards for the services provided
by the members of the Institute;
(b) to review the quality of services provided
by the members of the Institute including
secreterial audit services; and
(c) to guide the members of the Institute to
improve the quality of services and adherence to
the various statutory and other regulatory
requirements.
29C. The Board shall follow in its meeting and in
discharging its functions such procedure as may be
specified.
29D. The terms and conditions of service of the
Chairman and the members of the Board, their place
of meetings, remuneration and allowances shall be
such as may be specified.
29E. The expenditure of the Board shall be borne
by the Council.”.
19. Section 30 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
20. For sections 35 and 36 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“35. ( 1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central
Government may, from time to time, give to the
Council such general or special directions as it
thinks fit, and the Council shall, in the discharge of
its functions under this Act, comply with any such
directions.
(2) If, in the opinion of the Central Government,
the Council has persistently made default in giving
effect to the directions issued under sub-section (1),
it may, after giving an opportunity of being heard to
Functions of
Board.
Procedure of
Board.
Terms and
conditions of
Chairman and
members of
Board.
Expenditure
of  Board.
Omission of
section 30.
Substitution of
new sections
for section 35
and 36.
Power of
Central
Government to
issue
directions.

46
the Council, by notification, dissolve the Council,
whereafter a new Council shall be constituted in
accordance with the provisions of this Act with
effect from such date as may be decided by the
Central Government.
(3) Where the Central Government has issued a
notification under sub-section (2) dissolving the
Council, it may, pending the constitution of a new
Council in accordance with the provisions of this
Act, authorise any person or body of persons to take
over the management of the affairs of the Council
and to exercise such functions as may be mentioned
in the notification.
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Central Government
or the Council or the Disciplinary Committee or the
Tribunal or the Authority or the Board or the
Prosecution Director or any officer of that
Government, Council, Committee, Tribunal,
Authority or Board, for any thing which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or
any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order
made thereunder.
36A. The Chairpersons, members and other
officers and employees of the Tribunal,
Authority and Board, and the Prosecution
Director shall be deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.”.
21. After section 38 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“38A. ( 1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters,
Protection of
action taken in
good faith
Members, etc.
to be public
servants.
Insertion of
new section.
38A.
Power of
Central
Government to
make rules.
45 of 1860

47
namely:—
(a) the manner of election and nomination in
respect of members to the Council under sub-
section (2) of section 9;
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the
Presiding Officers and Members of the Tribunal,
place of meeting, remuneration and allowances
to be paid to them under sub-section ( 3) of
section 10B;
(c) the manner of approval for the foreign
travel tours of the President, the Vice-President
and members of the Council and member of its
Committees, and officers and employees of the
Institute under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 16;
(d) the procedure of inquiry and submission
of report by the Disciplinary Committee under
sub-section ( 2) of section 21;
(e) the procedure of inquiry by the
Prosecution Director under sub-section ( 2) of
section 21A;
(f) any act or omission which may be
determined as professional misconduct under
section 22;
(g) the allowances and terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and members of
the Authority and the manner of payment of
allowances by the Council under section 22C;
(h) the procedure to be followed by the
Authority in its meetings and in discharging its
functions under sub-section ( 1) of section 22D;
(i) the procedure to be followed by the Board
in its meeting and in discharging its functions
under section 29C; and
(j) terms and conditions of service of the
Chairman and Members of the Board under
section 29D.”.

48
22. In section 39 of the principal Act, for sub-section
(4), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) Every rule and every regulation made
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or the
regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or the
regulation should not be made, the rule or the
regulation, shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation.”.
23. For the First Schedule and the Second Schedule
to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
substituted, namely:—
Amendment of
section 39.
Substitution of
new Schedule
for the First
Schedule and
the Second
Schedule.

49
“THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 2lD and 22)
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute in
practice
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
(1) allows any other person to practise in his name as a Company
Secretary unless such other person is a Company Secretary or is a
member of such other recognised profession as may be prescribed in
this behalf, and is in partnership with or employed by him;
(2) pays or allows or agrees to payor allow, directly or indirectly,
any share, commission or brokerage in the fees or profits of his
professional work to any person, other than a member of the Institute
or a partner or a retired partner or the legal representative of a
deceased partner.
Explanation.— In this item, “partner” includes a person residing
outside India with whom a Company Secretary in practice has entered
into partnership which is not in contravention of item ( 4) of this Part;
(3) accepts or agrees to accept, except from a member of the Institute
or from anyone belonging to any of the recognised professions prescribed
for the purpose, any part of the profits, fees or other remuneration arising
out of the work which is not of a professional nature;
(4) enters into partnership with any person other than a Company
Secretary in practice or a member of any other recognised profession
as may be prescribed or a person resident without India who but for
his residence abroad would have been entitled to be registered as a
member of the Institute under clause (e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4
or whose qualifications are recognised by the Central Government or
the Council for the purpose of membership of the Institute provided
that the Company Secretary shares in the fees or profit of the
professional work of the partnership both within and without India;
(5) secures, either through the services of a person not qualified to
be his partner or by means which are not open to a Company Secretary,
any professional work;

50
(6) solicits clients or professional work, either directly or
indirectly, by circular, advertisement, personal communication or
interview or by any other means;
(7) advertises his professional attainments or services, or uses any
designation or expression other than Company Secretary on
professional documents, visiting cards, letterheads or sign boards,
unless it be a degree of a University established by law in India or
recognised by the Central Government or a title indicating
membership of the Institute or of any other institution that has been
recognised by the Central Government or may be recognised by the
Council;
(8) accepts the position of a Company Secretary in practice
previously held by another Company Secretary in practice without
first communicating with him in writing;
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept, in
respect of any professional employment fees which are based on a
percentage of profits or which are contingent upon the findings or
results of such employment, except in cases which are permitted under
any rule or regulation made under this Act;
(10) engages in any business or occupation other than the
profession of Company Secretary unless permitted by the Council so to
engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle a
Company Secretary from being a director of a company except as
provided in the Companies Act.
(11) accepts a position as Company Secretary in practice
previously held by some other Company Secretary in practice in such
conditions as to constitute under-cutting;
(12) allows a person not being a member of the Institute in
practice or a member not being his partner to sign on his behalf or on
behalf of his firm anything which he is required to certify as a
Company Secretary, or any other statements related thereto;
(13) discloses information acquired in the course of his
professional engagement to any person other than the client so
engaging him without the consent of such client, or otherwise than as
required by any law for the time being in force;
(14) certifies or submits in his name or in the name of his firm a
report of an examination of the matters relating to Company

51
Secretarial practice and related statements unless the examination of
such statements has been made by him or by a partner or any
employee in his firm or by another Company Secretary in practice;
(15) permits his name or the name of his firm to be used in
connection with any report or statement contingent upon future
transactions in a manner which may lead to the belief that he vouches
for the accuracy of the forecast;
(16) expresses his opinion on any report or statement given to any
business enterprise in which he, his firm or a partner in his firm has a
substantial interest, unless he discloses the interest also in his report;
(17) deliberately aids in or abets the concealment in his report or
statement of a material fact known to him although the disclosure of
which is necessary to make such statement not misleading;
(18) fails to disclose in his report a material mis-statement known
to him and with which he is concerned in a professional capacity;
(19) is grossly negligent in the conduct of his professional duties;
(20) fails to obtain sufficient information to warrant the
expression of an opinion or makes exceptions which are sufficiently
material to negate the expression of an opinion;
(21) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the
generally accepted procedure relating to the secretarial practice;
(22) fails to keep moneys of his client in a separate banking
account or to use such moneys for purposes for which they are
intended.
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute in service
A member of the Institute (other than a member in practice) shall
be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he, being an
employee of any company, firm or person—
(1) pays or allows or agrees to pay, directly or indirectly, to any
person any share in the emoluments of the employment undertaken by
the member;
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees, profits or gains

52
from a lawyer, a Company Secretary or broker engaged by such
company, firm or person or agent or customer of such company, firm
or person by way of commission or gratification;
(3) discloses confidential information acquired in the course of his
employment other-wise than as required by any law for the time being
in force or as permitted by his employer.
PART III
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally
A member of the Institute whether in practice or not shall be
deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he—
(1) includes in any statement, return or form to be submitted to
the Council any particulars knowing them to be false;
(2) not being a Fellow styles himself as a Fellow;
(3) does not supply the information called for or does not comply
with the requirements asked for by the Council or any of its
Committees;
(4) defalcates or embezzles moneys received in his professional
capacity;
(5) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or
regulations made thereunder;
(6) is guilty of such other act or omission as may be specified.”.

53
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Company Secretaries Act, 1980, which is in force for more
than twenty years requires updation because of the changes that have
taken place during this period and on the basis of experience by the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India and the Government while
administering and implementing the provisions of the Act.
2. A High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri
Naresh Chandra, former Cabinet Secretary, was in the meanwhile
constituted, inter alia, to examine the Auditor-Company relationship
and the disciplinary mechanism for the Auditors. It is proposed to
bring about amendments in the Act to implement the Naresh Chandra
Committee’s recommendations regarding disciplinary procedure and
setting up of Quality Review Board.
3. The Institute also has faced certain difficulties, like in
increasing membership fee to cover increased activities, short term of
the Council, etc., and has suggested a number of amendments in the
Act.
4. It has also been felt necessary to bring, as far as possible,
uniformity in the Acts of the three professional Institutes, namely the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Institute of Cost and
Works Accountants of India and the Institute of Company Secretaries
of India. Some of the amendments in the Act have become necessary to
achieve this uniformity.
5. Some of the main amendments proposed to be made in the Bill
are as follows:—
(a) strengthening of Disciplinary Committee and also
providing for constitution of more than one disciplinary
committee, as and when deemed fit, which will enable the
disposal of the increased number of disciplinary cases,
consequent upon the increase in the membership of the Institute
and in the number of practising company secretaries;
(b) appointment of a Prosecution Directorate which will
hasten the disciplinary process and also impart an objectivity;
(c) constitution of an Appellate Authority to be headed by a
person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be a judge of a High
Court to deal with the appeals against the orders of the Council;

54
(d) setting up a mechanism for review of the quality of secretarial
audit, enhancing the powers to the Council to fix fees, increase the
term of the Council from three to four years, streamlining the
election process and prescribing certain restrictions with regards
to eligibility of members for contesting elections for the Council
of the Institute.
6. The Bill  seeks to achieve the above objects.
JASWANT SINGH
N
EW DELHI;
The 22nd December, 2003.

55
Notes on Clauses
Clause 2 seeks to define various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the fee of associate
members of the Institute.
Clause 4 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the fee of fellow members
of the Institute.
Clause 5 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, may determine the fee for certificate of
practice. The clause also provides for cancellation of certificate of
practice under the circumstances as may be prescribed by regulations.
Clause 6 seeks to provide for enhancing the total strength of the
Council of the Institute from sixteen to twenty and also provides that
the manner of election and nomination will be specified by rules. The
clause also debars persons holding office of profit under Central
Government or a State Government from contesting election to the
Council.
Clause 7 seeks to provide that a member of the Council shall be
eligible for re-election for a maximum of three consecutive terms. The
clause debars sitting and former Presidents of the Council from
contesting election of the Council. This clause also provides for
settlement of election disputes and establishment of election tribunal.
Clause 8 seeks to provide for the continuation in office of the Vice-
President till his successor takes charge, as is the case with the
President of the Council.
Clause 9 seeks to change the period for not filling up a causal
vacancy from six months to one year, prior to the date of expiration of
the duration of the Council.
Clause 10 seeks to provide for enhancement of duration of the
Council from three to four years.
Clause 11 seeks to provide that the Council shall fix allowances of
office bearers of the Council and members of its Committees by
previous sanction of the Government and also to provide that the
Council shall approve foreign travel tours of the members of the

56
Council and its Committees and staff of the Institute in accordance
with rules framed by the Central Government for this purpose.
Clause 12 seeks to, inter alia, provide for increasing the strength of
the Executive Committee and the Examination Committee.
Clause 13 seeks to provide that the Council, with the prior
approval of the Central Government, may determine the annual
membership fee of the Institute. The clause also provides that the list
of members can be supplied to the members on payment of the
prescribed amount.
Clause 14 seeks to provide that the Council may re-enter the name
of the member of the Institute, if his name has been removed for non-
payment of dues, on payment of such additional fee as may be
determined by the Council with the prior approval of the Central
Government.
Clause 15 seeks to, inter alia, provide for constitution of more than
one Disciplinary Committee, appointment of a prosecution directorate
and empowering them and the Appellate Authority to, summon and
enforce the attendance of any person and examining him on oath, to
discover and production of any document, and receive evidence on
affidavit. The clause also provides for action to be taken by the Council
on the Disciplinary Committee report and the penalties, which Council
can impose on a member of the Institute.
Clause 17 seeks to, inter alia, provide that the Appellate Authority
constituted under Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 shall deemed to be
Appellate Authority under this Act with some changes with the term
of office of Chairperson and Members, their allowances and terms and
conditions of service and resignation and removal of Chairperson and
Members. It also provides for the procedures to be adopted by the
authority and powers of the authority with regards to the orders
passed by the Council.
Clause 18 seeks to, inter alia, provide for establishment of a Quality
Review Board, its functions, procedures, the terms and conditions of
service of Chairman and Members, which will review the quality of
audit and other services provided by the members of the Institute.
Clause 20 seeks to, inter alia, empower the Central Government to
issue such general or special directions, as it thinks fit, to the Council,
making it obligatory on the part of the Council to comply with such

57
directions. It also empowers the Central Government to dissolve the
Council after giving an opportunity of being heard. The clause also
seeks to make provision for protection of action taken in good faith.
Clause 21 seeks to confer upon the Central Government the power
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause enumerates the various matters in respect
of which such rules may be made.
Clause 22 seeks to provide for laying of the rules and regulations
on the table of both the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 23 seeks to provide for substitution of a new Schedule for
the existing two Schedules.

58
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to appoint a Prosecution Director, constitute an
Appellate Authority and establish a Quality Review Board. The
expenditure in this regard is to be borne by the Council of the Institute
and there shall be no expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature
from the Consolidated Fund of India.

59
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clauses 3, 4,5 and 13 of the Bill seek to amend sections 4, 5, 6 and
19 of the principal Act so as to empower the Council to determine the
fee with the prior approval of the Central Government.
2. Clause 5 also seeks to amend section 6 of the principal Act so as
to empower the Council to cancel the certificate of practice under the
circumstances as may be prescribed by regulations.
3. Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of the principal Act
so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules the
manner of election and nomination of the members to the Council.
4. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 10B so as to
empower the Central Government to specify the terms and conditions
of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal, their
place of meetings, remuneration and allowances.
5. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules the
manner of approval of the foreign travel tours of the President, the
Vice-President and members of the Council and member of its
Committees, and officers and employees of the Institute.
6. Clause 13 of the Bill also seeks to amend section 19 of the
principal Act so as to empower the Council to prescribe by regulation
the amount a member is to pay for a copy of the list of members.
7. Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 20 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Council to determine the additional fee for
re-entering the name of a member with the prior approval of the
Central Government.
8. Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules the
procedure of inquiry and the period for submission of report by the
Disciplinary Committee and the procedure of inquiry by the
Prosecution Director.
9. Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 of the principal
Act so as to empower the Central Government to specify by rules act or
omission which may be determined as professional misconduct.
10. Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to add a new section after section 22
of the principal Act so as to empower the Central Government to
specify by rules the allowances and terms and conditions of service of

60
the Chairperson and members of the Authority and the manner of
payment of allowances by the Council and the procedure to be
followed by the Authority in its meetings and in discharging its
functions.
11. Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter after
Chapter VII to the principal Act so as to empower the Central
Government to specify by rules the procedure to be followed by the
Board in its meeting and in discharging its functions and the terms and
conditions of service of the Chairman and the members of the Board.
12. The matters in respect of which the said rules or regulations
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it
is not practicable to provide them in the proposed legislation itself.
13. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

61
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE COMPANY  SECRETARIES  ACT, 1980
(56 OF 1980)
„ „„„ „
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “Associate means an Associate member of
Institute;
„ „„„ „
4. (1)  „„„„ „
(3) Every person belonging to any of the classes
mentioned in clauses (c), (d) and (e) of sub-section ( 1)
shall have his name entered in the Register on
application being made and granted in the prescribed
manner and on payment of prescribed entrance fee;
which shall not exceed four hundred rupees in any case.
„ „„„ „
5. (1)  „„„„„
(3) A person, being an Associate who has been in
continuous practice in India as a Company Secretary for
at least five years and a person who has been an
Associate for a continuous period of not less than five
years and who possesses such qualifications or practical
experience as the Council may prescribe with a view to
ensuring that he has experience equivalent to the
experience normally acquired as a result of continuous
practice for a period of five years as a Company
Secretary shall, on payment of the prescribed entrance
fee, which shall not exceed four hundred rupees in any case,
and on application made and granted in the prescribed
manner, be entered in the Register as a Fellow.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this sub-section,
a person shall be deemed to have practised in India for
any period for which he has held a certificate of practice
under section 6, notwithstanding that he did not actually
practise during that period.
Definitions
and
interpretation.
Entry of names
in the Register.
Associates and
Fellows.

62
Explanation II .— In computing the period during
which a person has been an Associate of the Institute,
there shall be included any continuous period during
which the person has been an Associate of the dissolved
company immediately before he became an Associate of
the Institute.
„ „„„ „
6. (1)  „„„„„
(2) A member who desires to be entitled to practise
shall make an application in such form and pay such
annual fee, for his certificate as may be prescribed which
shall not exceed two hundred rupees in any case, and
such fee shall be payable on or before the 1st day of April
in each year.
„ „„„ „
CHAPTER III
COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE
9. (1)  „„„„„
(2) The Council shall be composed of—
(a) not more than twelve persons elected by
members of the Institute from amongst the Fellows
chosen in such manner and from such regional
constituencies as may be notified in this behalf by the
Central Government in the Official Gazette; and
(b) not more than four persons nominated by the
Central Government.
10. (1) Elections under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
section 9 shall be conducted in the prescribed manner.
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any such
election, the matter shall be referred by the Council to a
Tribunal appointed by the Central Government in this
behalf and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final:
Provided that no such reference shall be made
except on an application made to the Council by an
aggrieved party within thirty days from the date of the
declaration of the result of the election.
Certificate of
practice.
Constitution of
the Council of
the Institute.
Mode of
election to the
Council.

63
(3) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by
the Council.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section and in Chapter IX, the Council of the dissolved
company shall, on the commencement of this Act,
become the Council of the Institute and shall function as
such—
(i) for a period of two years from such
commencement, or
(ii) till the Council is constituted in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 9,
whichever is earlier.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,
the Council shall be deemed to have been constituted in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of
section 9 with effect from such date [not being later than
thirty days from the date on which the results of the first
elections, under clause (a) of the said sub-section (2) are
announced] as the Central Government may notify in the
Official Gazette.
„ „„„ „
12. (1)  „„ „ „ „
(4) On the expiration of the duration of the Council,
or of the term of office of the President thereof, the
President shall continue to hold office until such time as
a new President is elected and takes over charge of his
duties.
„ „„„ „
13. (1)  „„ „ „ „
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of a member of the
Council shall be filled by fresh election from the
constituency concerned or by nomination by the Central
Government, as the case may be, and the person elected
or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the
dissolution of the Council:
Provided that no election shall be held to fill a
President and
Vice-President.
Resignation of
membership
and casual
vacancies.

64
casual vacancy occurring within six months prior to the
date of the expiration of the term of the Council, but such
a vacancy may be filled by nomination by the Central
Government after consultation with the President of the
Council.
„ „„„ „
14. ( 1) The duration of any Council constituted
under this Act shall be three years from the date of its
first meeting.
„ „„„ „
16. (1) For the efficient performance of its duties and
functions, the Council shall appoint a Secretary who
shall be a member of the Institute and may—
„ „„„ „
(c) fix the allowances of the President,
Vice-President and other members of the Council
and its Committees.
„ „„„ „
17.  (1)  The Council shall constitute from amongst
its members the following Standing Committees,
namely:–
„ „„„ „
(b) a Disciplinary Committee; and
„ „„„ „
(3) The Executive Committee shall consist of the
President, and the Vice-President, ex officio, and three
other members of the Council elected by the Council.
(4) The Disciplinary Committee shall consist of the
President, ex officio, one member to be nominated by the
Central Government from amongst the members
nominated to the Council by that Government and one
member to be elected by the Council.
(5) The Examination Committee shall consist of the
President or the Vice-President, ex officio, as the Council
may decide, and two other members of the Council
elected by the Council.
Duration and
dissolution of
the Council.
Staff,
remuneration
and
allowances.
Committees of
the Council.

65
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section, any Committee formed under sub-section (2),
may, with the sanction of the Council co-opt such other
members of the Institute not exceeding two-thirds of the
total membership of the Committee as the Committee
thinks fit, and any member so co-opted shall be entitled
to exercise all the rights of a member of the Committee.
„ „„„ „
CHAPTER IV
REGISTER  OF MEMBERS
19. (1)  „„ „ „ „
(3) The Council shall cause to be published in such
manner as may be prescribed a list of members of the
Institute as on the 1st day of April of each year, and shall,
if requested to do so by any such member, send him a
copy of such list.
(4) Every member of the Institute shall, on his name
being entered in the Register, pay such annual
membership fee different in amount according as he is an
Associate or a Fellow as may be prescribed, which shall
not exceed three hundred rupees in any case.
„ „„„ „
CHAPTER V
MISCONDUCT
21. ( 1) Where on receipt of information by, or a
complaint made to it, the Council is prima facie of opinion
that any member of the Institute has been guilty of any
professional or other misconduct, the Council shall refer
the case to the Disciplinary Committee constituted under
section 17, and the Disciplinary Committee shall
thereupon hold such inquiry and in such manner as may
be prescribed and shall report the result of its inquiry to
the Council.
(2) If on receipt of such report the Council finds that
the member of the Institute is not guilty of any
Register.
Procedure in
inquiries
relating to
misconduct of
members of the
Institute.

66
professional or other misconduct, it shall record its
finding accordingly and direct that the proceedings shall
be filed, or the complaint shall be dismissed, as the case
may be.
(3) If on receipt of such report the Council finds that
the member of the Institute is guilty of any professional
or other misconduct, it shall record its finding
accordingly, and shall proceed in the manner laid down
in the succeeding sub-sections.
(4) Where the finding is that a member of the
Institute has been guilty of a professional misconduct
specified in the First Schedule, the Council shall afford to
the member an opportunity of being heard before orders
are passed against him on the case, and may thereafter
make any of the following orders, namely:–
(a) reprimand the member;
(b) remove the name of the member from the
Register for such period, not exceeding five years,
as the Council thinks fit:
Provided that where the Council is of opinion that
the case is one in which the name of the member ought to
be removed from the Register for a period exceeding five
years or permanently, it shall not make any order
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b), but shall forward
the case to the High Court with its recommendations
thereon.
(5) Where the misconduct in respect of which the
Council has found any member of the Institute guilty is a
misconduct specified in the Second Schedule, it shall
forward the case to the High Court with its
recommendations thereon.
(6) On receipt of any case under sub-section (4) or sub-
section (5), the High Court shall fix a date for the hearing of
the case and shall cause notice of the date so fixed to be
given to the member of the institute concerned, the Council
and to the Central Government, and shall afford such
member, the Council and the Central Government an

67
opportunity of being heard and may thereafter make any of
the following orders, namely:–
(a) direct that the proceedings be filed, or dismiss the
complaint as the case may be;
(b) reprimand the member;
(c) remove him from membership of the Institute
either permanently or for such period as the High
Court thinks fit;
(d) refer the case to the Council for further inquiry
and report.
(7) Where it appears to the High Court that the
transfer of any case pending before it to another High
Court will promote the ends of justice or tend to the
general convenience of the parties it may so transfer the
case, subject to such conditions, if any, as it thinks fit to
impose, and the High Court to which such cases
transferred shall deal with it as if the case had been
forwarded to it by the Council.
Explanation I.–In this section, “High Court”
means the highest civil court of appeal, not including
the Supreme Court exercising jurisdiction in the area
in which the person whose conduct is being inquired
into is in service or carries on his profession or has his
principal place of profession at the commencement of
the inquiry:
Provided that where the cases relating to two or
more members of the institute have to be forwarded by
the Council to different High Courts, the Central
Government shall, having regard to the ends of justice
and the general convenience of the parties, determine
which of the High Courts to the exclusion of others shall
hear the cases against all the members.
Explanation II .–For the purposes of this section,
“member of the Institute” includes a person who was a
member of the Institute on the date of the alleged
misconduct although he has ceased to be a member of the
Institute at the time of the inquiry.

68
(8) For the purposes of any inquiry under this
section, the Council and the Disciplinary Committee
referred to in sub-section (1) shall have the same
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person and examining him on oath;
(b) the discovery and production of any
document; and
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits.
22. For the purposes of this Act, the expression
“professional misconduct” shall be deemed to include
any act or omission specified in any of the Schedules, but
nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or
abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast on
the Council under sub-section (1) of section 21 to inquire
into the conduct of any member of the Institute under
any other circumstances.
„ „„„ „
CHAPTER VIII
APPEALS
30. ( 1) Any member of the Institute aggrieved by
any order of the Council imposing on him any of the
penalties referred to in clause (a)  or clause (b)  of
sub-section (4) of section 21, may, within thirty days of
the date on which the order is communicated to him,
prefer an appeal to the High Court:
Provided that the High Court may entertain any
such appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty
days, if it is satisfied that the member was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) The High Court may, on its own motion or
otherwise, after calling for the records of any case, revise
any order made by the Council under sub-section ( 2) or
sub-section ( 4) of section 21 and may—
5 of 1908.
Professional
misconduct
defined.
Appeals.

69
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce,
confirm or enhance the penalty imposed by the
order;
(c) remit the case to the Council for such further
enquiry as the High Court considers proper in the
circumstances of the case;
(d) pass such other order as the High Court
thinks fit:
Provided that no order of the Council shall be
modified or set aside unless the Council has been given
an opportunity of being heard and no order imposing or
enhancing a penalty shall be passed unless the person
concerned has been given an opportunity of being heard.
Explanation.—In this section “High Court” and
“member of the Institute” have the same meanings as in
section 21.
„ „„„ „
35. (1) The Central Government may, from time to
time, issue such directions to the Council as in the
opinion of the Central Government are conducive to the
fulfilment of the objects of this Act and in the discharge
of its functions, the Council shall be bound to carry out
any such directions.
(2) Directions issued under sub-section ( 1) may
include directions to the Council to make any regulations
or to amend or revoke any regulations already made.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the
Council has persistently committed default in giving
effect to the directions issued under this section, the
Central Government may, after giving an opportunity to
the Council to state its case, by order, dissolve the
Council, whereafter a new Council shall be constituted in
accordance with the provisions of this Act with effect
from such date as may be specified by the Central
Government.
(4) Where the Central Government passes an order
Directions of
the Central
Government.

70
under sub-section (3) dissolving the Council, it may,
pending the constitution of a new Council in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, authorise any person or
body of persons to take over the management of the
affairs of the Institute and to exercise such functions as
may be specified in this behalf by the Central
Government.
36. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the Central Government or the Council
in respect of anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any
regulations or orders made thereunder.
„ „„„ „
39. (1)  „ „„„„
(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after its
made by the Council, be forwarded to the Central
Government and that Government shall cause a copy of
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation or both
Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that regulation.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 21 (4) and 22]
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the
Institute in practice
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to
be guilty of professional misconduct, if he—
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Power to make
regulations.

71
(1) allows any other person to practise in his
name as a Company Secretary unless such other
person is a Company Secretary or is a member of
such other recognised profession as may be
prescribed in this behalf, and is in partnership with
or employed by him;
(2) pays or allows or agrees to payor allow,
directly or indirectly, any share, commission or
brokerage in the fees or profits of his professional
work to any person, other than a member of the
Institute or a partner or retired partner of the legal
representative of a deceased partner;
Explanation. —In this item, “partner” includes a
person residing outside India with whom a
Company Secretary in practice has entered into
partnership which is not in contravention of item (4)
of this Part;
(3) accepts or agrees to accept, except from a
member of the Institute or from anyone belonging to
any of the recognised professions prescribed for the
purpose, any part of the profits, fees or other
remuneration arising out of the work which is not of
a professional nature;
(4) enters into partnership with any person
other than a Company Secretary in practice or a
member of any other recognised profession as may
be prescribed or a person resident without India
who but for his residence abroad would have been
entitled to be registered as a member of the Institute
under clause (e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4 or
whose qualifications are recognised by the Central
Government or the Council for the purpose of
membership of the Institute provided that the
Company Secretary shares in the fees or profit of the
professional work of the partnership both within
and without India;
(5) secures, either through the services of a
person not qualified to be his partner or by means
which are not open to a Company Secretary, any
professional work;

72
(6) solicits clients or professional work, either
directly or indirectly, by circular, advertisement,
personal communication or interview or by any
other means;
(7) advertises his professional attainments or
services, or uses any designation or expression
other than Company Secretary on professional
documents, visiting cards, letterheads or sign
boards, unless it be a degree of a University
established by law in India or recognised by the
Central Government or a title indicating
membership of the Institute or of any other
institution that has been recognised by the Central
Government or may be recognised by the Council;
(8) accepts the position of a Company Secretary
in practice previously held by another Company
Secretary in practice without first communicating
with him in writing;
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers
to accept, in respect of any professional
employment fees which are based on a percentage
of profits or which are contingent upon the findings
or results of such employment, except in cases
which are permitted under any regulations made
under this Act;
(10) engages in any business or occupation other
than the profession of Company Secretary unless
permitted by the Council so to engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall
disentitle a Company Secretary from being a
director of a company except as provided in the
Companies Act;
(11) accepts a position as Company Secretary in
practice previously held by some other Company
Secretary in practice in such conditions as to
constitute under-cutting;
(12) allows a person not being a member of the
Institute in practice or a member not being his
partner to sign on his behalf or on behalf of his firm

73
anything which he is required to certify as a
Company Secretary, or any other statements related
thereto.
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the
Institute in service
A member of the Institute (other than a member in
practice) shall be deemed to be guilty of professional
misconduct, if he, being an employee of any company,
firm or person—
(1) pays or allows or agrees to pay, directly or
indirectly, to any person any share in the emoluments of
the employment undertaken by the member;
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees,
profits or gains from a lawyer, a Company Secretary or
broker engaged by such company, firm or person or
agent or customer of such company, firm or person by
way of commission or gratification;
(3) discloses confidential information acquired in
the course of his employment otherwise than as required
by any law for the time being in force or as permitted by
his employer.
PART III
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the
Institute generally
A member of the Institute whether in practice or not
shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct,
if he—
(1) includes in any statement, return or form to be
submitted to the Council any particulars knowing them
to be false;
(2) not being a Fellow styles himself as a Fellow;
(3) does not supply the information called for or
does not comply with the requirements asked for by the
Councilor any of its Committees;

74
(4) defalcates or embezzles moneys received in his
professional capacity.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 21 (5) and 22]
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the
Institute in practice requiring action by a High Court
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to
be guilty of professional misconduct, if he—
(1) discloses information acquired in the course of
his professional engagement to any person other than the
client so engaging him, without the consent of such
client, or otherwise than as required by any law for the
time being in force;
(2) certifies or submits in his name or in the name of
his firm a report of an examination of the matters relating
to Company Secretarial practice and related statements
unless the examination of such statements has been
made by him or by a partner or any employee in his firm
or by another Company Secretary in practice;
(3) permits his name or the name of his firm to be
used in connection with any report or statement
contingent upon future transactions in a manner which
may lead to the belief that he vouches for the accuracy of
the forecast;
(4) expresses his opinion on any report or statement
given to any business enterprise in which he, his firm or a
partner in his firm has a substantial interest, unless he
discloses the interest also in his report;
(5) deliberately aids in or abets the concealment in
his report or statement of a material fact known to him
although the disclosure of which is necessary to make
such statement not misleading;
(6) fails to disclose in his report a material mis-
statement known to him and with which he is concerned
in a professional capacity;

75
(7) is grossly negligent in the conduct of his
professional duties;
(8) fails to obtain sufficient information to warrant
the expression of an opinion or makes exceptions which
are sufficiently material to negate the expression of an
opinion;
(9) falls to invite attention to any material departure
from the generally accepted procedure relating to the
secretarial practice;
(10) falls to keep moneys of his client in a separate
banking account or to use such moneys for purposes for
which they are intended.
PART II
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the
Institute generally requiring action by a High Court
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or
not, shall be deemed to be guilty of professional
misconduct, if he—
(1) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or
the regulations made thereunder;
(2) is guilty of such other act or omission as may be
specified by the Council in this behalf, by notification in
the Official Gazette.

76
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Company Secretaries Act, 1980.
(Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister of Finance.)