28
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee  on Finance on
Demands  for  Grants  (2005-2006)  of  the  Ministry  of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment)]
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands  for  Grants  (2005-2006)  of  the  Ministry  of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 28
Price : Rs. 30.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the  Government .................... 7
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................. 15
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 19
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 21
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 19 December, 2005 ............................................. 22
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of
Finance, Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment ............................ 24
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf
present this Twenty-Eighth Report on action taken by Government on
the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006)
of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment).
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya
Sabha on 20 April, 2005. The Government furnished the written replies
indicating action taken on all the recommendations on 22 July, 2005.
The draft action taken report was considered and adopted by the
Committee at their sitting held on 19 December, 2005.
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 December, 2005 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the  Standing Committee on Finance deals with
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Sixteenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic
Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment) which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.4.2005.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the ten recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl.Nos. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10
(Para Nos. 18, 19, 20, 44, 45, 46, 52, 53, 58, 59, 60, 61, 68,
69, 70, 87)
(Total 6) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Sl.Nos.  3, 4
(Para Nos. 24, 25, 34, 35)
(Total 2) (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl.Nos. 1, 9
(Para Nos. 13, 14, 78)
(Total 2) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
(Nil) (Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that replies in respect of the
recommendations contained in Chapter I should be furnished to the
Committee expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their Recommendations.
Department of Economic Affairs
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority—Other Charges
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 13, 14)
5. The Committee observed that under the head IRDA—Other
Charges, there had been no expenditure since 2003-04. They found
that since 2002-03, the Authority started retaining fees and a percentage
of premium income of insurance companies and incurred expenditure
out of this. They also noted that there was a difference of opinion on
location of the IRDA Fund between the Government of India and the
IRDA. The Government of India finally created a relevant head under
the Public Account of India and the IRDA was asked to transfer the
money into this.
6. The Committee felt constrained to state that this issue was still
alive when the Ministry of Law also furnished its opinion in the matter.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommended that the fund should
be immediately placed in the Public Account of India and IRDA should
draw amounts to discharge its functions from this fund. They wanted
to be informed of the action taken in this regard within a period of
three months.
7. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance
replied as follows:
“On the advise of the Ministry of Law and the Department of
Expenditure, this Ministry has requested the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority (IRDA), time and again, to transfer
the IRDA Fund into Public Account of India. Attention of IRDA
has also been drawn to the Audit Para of AGCR and
Recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance in its
16th Report. However, the Fund is yet to be placed in Public
Account of India. The IRDA was requested at the level of Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs to place the fund in the Public
Account of India immediately. On the representation of the IRDA,

3
Hon’ble Finance Minister has directed that the matter may be re-
examined in the Ministry of Law. The matter has, therefore, been
referred to the Ministry of Law for legal advice.”
8. The Committee are dismayed to note that the IRDA fund is
yet to be transferred to the relevant Head created under the Public
Account of India. The observations made in this regard by AGCR
in its audit report and the Committee’s recommendation for
immediate transfer of the fund into the Public Account have not
accrued the desired result. The Committee feel that to keep a watch
on the expenditure of IRDA and to have its accounts audited, it is
necessary to transfer its receipts to the Public Account. They,
therefore, reiterate the need for taking appropriate action for
transferring the Fund to the relevant Head of Account under the
Public Account of India without further delay, from which the IRDA
could draw the amounts required for discharging its functions and
duties.
Department of Economic Affairs
Debts Recovery Tribunals
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para Nos. 44, 45 and 46)
9. The Committee were concerned to note that as on 30th June,
2004, 64,941 cases were filed in Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs)
involving an amount of Rs. 91,901 crore. Further they found that till
30th September, 2004 only Rs. 10,340 crore had been recovered and
29864 cases were still pending before DRTs.
10. In response to the emphasis made by the Committee on
ensuring speedy disposal of cases the Government informed that the
number of cases pending in the DRTs was declining. As informed, the
number of cases pending was less then 500 in 8 DRTs and less than
1000 in 10 DRTs. The Committee were not satisfied with this reply.
Contrary to the Government’s claims, the Committee found that a
large number of cases were lying in DRTs without being disposed off,
involving huge sums of money. Further, the Committee observed that
the functioning of DRTs was reviewed by the Government from time
to time. They were informed that the Government might take a decision
on opening new DRTs in future to dispose of the cases speedily, if it
was deemed necessary. As regards the existing DRTs, the Committee
noted that there were many vacant posts to be filled.
11. The Committee recommended that the Government should look
into the specific problem of DRTs so that the huge backlog of cases

4
could be cleared expeditiously. The Committee further recommended
that the Government should take advance action to fill up the vacant
posts in the existing DRTs in consultation with Supreme Court. In the
view of the Committee, the Government needed to undertake a
thorough review of the pendency of cases in DRTs, vacancies in the
existing DRTs and go ahead with creation of new DRTs where required.
12. While furnishing the action taken notes, the Ministry of Finance
replied as follows:
“The issue of speedy disposal of pending cases is being taken up
with the Chairpersons of DRATs and Presiding officers of DRTs so
that the number of pending cases can be reduced. A proposal for
opening of new DRTs is also under active consideration of the
Government. As regards the existing DRTs, it is stated that the
four vacant posts of Presiding officers at Coimbatore, Jaipur,
Chandigarh and Nagpur could not be filled up due to the stay on
the selection process ordered by the Hon’ble Madras High Court.
However, steps have been taken to get the stay order vacated so
that the work of the Tribunals may not be hampered. Besides, in
the DRTs where POs could not be posted because of the Courts
stay on the selection process, additional charge has been given to
other POs. The process for filling up of the anticipated vacancies
likely to arise during the current year has been started, so that the
vacancy can be filled without any delay.
Further, a proposal to amend to DRT Act and DRT (Procedure)
Rules to improve the recovery system is also under consideration.”
13. The Committee learn from the reply of the Government that
the issue of ensuring speedy disposal of pending cases has been
taken up with the Chairpersons of DRATs and Presiding Officers of
DRTs, and a proposal for opening of new DRTs was under active
consideration. The Committee, while emphasizing on the need for
speeding up these initiatives, also wish to be apprised of the details
of the same.
14. In view of the huge backlog of cases pending with the DRTs
which involve large amounts of money, the Committee feel that the
Government must address the specific problems of the DRTs
seriously. The Committee also reiterate the need for taking advance
action for filling up the anticipated vacancies in existing DRTs,
expediting the proposal for opening new DRTs and taking
appropriate measures for having the High Court’s stay orders on the

5
selection process of Presiding officers in DRTs at Coimbatore, Jaipur,
Chandigarh and Nagpur vacated. The proposal to amend the DRT
Act and DRT (Procedure) Rules, as intimated, may be brought in
early so that the recovery and the system of recovery could be
improved.
Department of Disinvestment
Policy on Disinvestment
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 78)
15. The Committee were informed that the Government had
decided to consider the sale of minority share holding in profitable
PSEs, modernize and restructure sick but potentially viable PSEs and
sell chronically and terminally sick PSEs. In view of the Committee’s
repeated recommendations for preparation of disinvestment policy
document to be discussed in Parliament, the Committee were given to
understand that white paper on Disinvestment was under preparation
and was expected to be tabled during the Monsoon Session of
Parliament, 2005-06. The Committee recommended that the preparation
of White Paper on Disinvestment might be expedited so that it could
be laid before Parliament during the monsoon session, 2005-06.
16. In their action taken note the Ministry have replied as under:
“Action is being taken to table the White Paper on Disinvestment
of Central Public Sector Enterprises in the Parliament during the
Monsoon Session 2005.”
17. Further, on the issue of laying of White Paper on Disinvestment
before the Parliament, the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Disinvestment, while furnishing action taken statement on the
recommendation of the Committee contained in their 23rd Report, in
their letter dated 25.11.2005, have stated as below:
“The matter of placing a White Paper on Disinvestment of CPSEs
for information of the Parliament is under consideration of the
Government. The White Paper would be a comprehensive
document and detail the historical development of the
disinvestments in CPSEs since 1991-92 and also deal with the
implementation strategy in respect of the policy as enshrined in
NCMP . After the White Paper is finalised and placed for
information of the Parliament, the Government would take a view
on whether a comprehensive document on disinvestments policy
is required.”

6
18. The Committee are constrained to note that the White Paper
on Disinvestment, which has been identified by the Government as
one of the thrust areas for implementation and was supposed to be
tabled in Parliament during the Monsoon Session 2005-06, remains
to be presented inspite of repeated recommendation made by the
Committee and the commitments made by the Government in this
regard. The Committee have now been informed by the Government,
vide their communication dated 25 November, 2005 that the matter
of placing a White Paper on Disinvestment of CPSEs for information
of the Parliament is still under consideration. The Committee are of
the opinion that unless the White Paper is approved by the
Parliament, the disinvestments policy/programme will always remain
opaque. They, therefore, reiterate that the Government should
expedite the finalisation of the White Paper on Disinvestment and
place it in the public domain.

7
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 18, 19 and 20)
The Committee observe that actual expenditure under this head
has fallen short of revised estimates during the period 2002-03 to
2004-05. The reasons for shortfall, as explained by the Ministry in
respect of the year 2002-03 was less receipt of bill than anticipated. In
2003-04, the expenditure was lower due to deferment of
computerization of all Pay and Accounts Offices of the Civil Ministries
since necessary hardware/software was not available with these
Ministries.
The Committee do not accept this excuse for keeping budgetary
allocations higher as the installation of necessary hardware/software
should have been taken note of before going ahead with
implementation of the proposed programme.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the budgetary allocation
should be made based on the actual requirements and available
conditions to avoid savings of huge sums at the end. They would
further like to be apprised of the details of expenditure incurred under
this head during the year 2004-05.
Reply of the Government
(a) The observations and recommendations of the Committee ( vide
Para 18 to 20) have been noted for compliance.
(b) With respect to Para 20 of the Committee’s observations, the
details of expenditure under the Head 2052.00.090.10.00.28 (Secretariat-
Professional Services) during the year 2004-05 in respect of Department
of Expenditure is as follows. The BE under the head for the year was
Rs. 13,75,000/- and RE Rs. 12,34,000/-.
(a) Legal Charges Rs. 1,77,700
(b) Consultancy Rs. 4,20,121
(c) Remunerations Rs. 2,82,510
Total Rs. 8,80,331

8
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para Nos. 44, 45 & 46)
The Committee are concerned to note that as on 30th June, 2004,
64941 cases were filed in Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) involving an
amount of Rs. 91,901 crores. Further they find that till 30th September,
2004 only Rs. 10,340 crores have been recovered and 29,864 cases are
still pending before DRTs.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government
with regard to speedy disposal of cases that the number of cases
pending in the DRTs is declining. In 8 DRTs, there are less than
500 cases pending and in 16 DRTs, less than 1000 cases are pending.
Contrary to this the Committee find that still a large number of cases
are lying in DRTs without being disposed off, involving huge sum of
money. Further, the Committee observed that the functioning of DRTs
is reviewed by the Government from time to time. They have been
informed that the Government may take decision to open up new
DRTs in future to dispose the cases speedily, if it is deemed necessary.
As regard the existing DRTs, the Committee note that all the Benches
are not complete.
The Committee recommend that the Government should look into
the specific problem of DRTs so that huge backlog could be cleared
expeditiously. The Committee would further recommend that the
Government should take advance action to fill up the Benches of
existing DRTs in consultation with Supreme Court. In view of the
Committee, the Government should undertake a thorough review of
the pendency of cases in DRTs, vacancies in the existing DRTs and go
ahead with creation of new DRTs where required.
Reply of the Government
The issue of speedy disposal of pending cases is being taken up
with the Chairpersons of DRATs and Presiding Officers of DRTs so
that the number of pending cases can be reduced. A proposal for
opening of new DRTs is also under active consideration of the
Government. As regards the existing DRTs, it is stated that the 4 vacant
posts of Presiding Officers at Coimbatore, Jaipur, Chandigarh and
Nagpur could not be filled up due to the stay on the selection process
ordered by the Hon’ble Madras High Court. However, steps have been
taken to get the stay order vacated so that the work of the Tribunals
may not be hampered. Besides, in the DRTs where POs could not be
posted because of the Court’s stay on the selection process, additional
charge has been given to other POs. The process for filling up of the
anticipated vacancies likely to arise during the current year has been
started, so that the vacancy can be filled without any delay.

9
Further, a proposal to amend the DRT Act and DRT (Procedure)
Rules to improve the recovery system is also under consideration.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para Nos. 52 & 53)
It is seen that till March 2004, both public and private sector banks
have attained only 15.41 and 15.81 per cent of net bank credit as
advances to agriculture. The Committee are perplexed to find that still
the target of 18 per cent seems to be out of reach of the banks. The
same is the case with advances to weaker sections. The lending to
weaker sections by banks (in public and private sector) is only
7.44 and 1.34 percent of net bank credit as on March 2004 as against
the target of 10 percent. This leads to the conclusion that both public
and private sector banks still feel shy to lend to these sectors. Only
six banks viz. Allahabad Bank, Indian Bank, Indian Overseas Bank,
Punjab National Bank, Syndicate Bank and State Bank of Patiala have
been able to achieve the targets in respect of agriculture and weaker
section lending out of 27 public sector banks. Among private sector
banks, only Jammu and Kashmir Bank Ltd., United Western Bank Ltd.,
Bank of Punjab Ltd., Centurian Bank Ltd. and IDBI Bank Ltd., are
above the target. Further, it is seen that the NPAs in agriculture
advances by both public and private sector banks are lower vis-à-vis
other sectors. Thus it shows that despite lower NPAs banks have not
fulfilled their obligation in respect of targeted credit disbursement to
agriculture.
The Committee take note of the measures taken by the
Government/Reserve Bank of India to address the issue. However,
they feel that firm implementation of these measures is very important
to achieve the goal of smooth flow of credit to these sectors alongwith
change in the mindset of bankers. They desire that the Government/
RBI should ensure that the banks are able to achieve the targets in a
specified time frame. Besides, Government/RBI should see that the
credit to these sectors increase in harmony with credit growth in other
sectors. For this, there is a need to change the attitude of bankers as
far as lendings to these sectors are concerned. The Government should
evolve an effective mechanism to ensure that RBI’s guidelines are
strictly adhered to and banks do not deviate from the mandatory level
of disbursement of credit to agriculture and weaker sections.
Reply of the Government
The Outstanding Credit to Agriculture by the Commercial Banks
has increased from Rs. 64,723 crore as on the last reporting Friday of
March 2002 to Rs. 1,03,839 crore and further to Rs. 1,34,485 crore as

10
on the last reporting Friday of March 2004 and 2005, respectively.
Further, though the public and private sector banks, as groups, have
not achieved agricultural lending target of 18 percent, the outstanding
advances to agriculture as percentage to NBC (Net Bank Credit) by
public sector banks and private sector banks has shown a steady
increase. This may be seen from the appended table:
Outstanding Agricultural Advances
(Rupees in crore)
As at end Public Sector Banks Private Sector Banks
March
Amount % of NBC Amount % of NBC
2002 58,142 14.8 6,581 8.5
2003 70,501 14.5 9,924 10.9
2004* 86,187 15.4 17,652 12.3
2005* 1,12,564 15.7 21,921 12.2
*Data are provisional.
The outstanding advances to Weaker Sections by Public Sector
Banks and Private Sector Banks amounted to Rs. 54,105 crore (8.9% of
NBC) and Rs. 1,593 crore (1.3% of NBC) respectively, as on the last
reporting Friday of September 2004. The outstanding credit to Weaker
Sections by the Commercial Banks has increased from Rs. 30,117 crore
as on the last reporting Friday of March 2002 to Rs. 55,698 crore as on
the last reporting Friday of September 2004.
Government of India and Reserve Bank of India are monitoring
the performance of the banks in lending to agriculture and weaker
sections on an on-going basis through regular returns as well as
meetings with banks at various fora. Banks which fail to achieve the
target/sub-targets under priority sector lending are advised to take
necessary steps to reach the stipulated targets in a time-bound manner.
The domestic Scheduled Commercial Banks, both in the public and
private sector having shortfall in lending ding to priority sector/
agricultural lending target, are required to deposit in Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund established with NABARD. As a
measure of disincentive for non-achievement of agricultural lending
target, the rate of interest for the deposits made by the contributing
banks in RIDF (Rural Infrastructure Development Fund has been
lowered and is charged in inverse proportion to the extent of shortfall

11
in the agricultural lending vis-à-vis the stipulated target of 18 percent.
Keeping in view the declining interest rate scenario and with a view
to further provide disincentive to the banks for not achieving the
agricultural lending target, the lending and deposit rates in respect of
the undisbursed amount of RIDF IV to IX were restructured with
effect from November 1, 2003. Accordingly, the banks are paid 6 percent
in respect of the undisbursed amount of RIDF IV to VII uniformly
and varying rate of interest between the Bank Rate and Bank Rate
minus 3 percentage points (i.e. currently varying between 6% and 3%)
in respect of RIDF VIII and RIDF IX. Thus, banks having a larger
shortfall in lending to agriculture are being given interest at a lower
rate (i.e. currently 3%, this being lower than the banks average cost of
funds) and this should prove to be a disincentive for such banks and
induce them to improve their agricultural lending.
Further, Reserve Bank of India has advised all domestic scheduled
commercial banks to further improve the flow of credit to agriculture,
so that the Government’s aim of doubling the agriculture credit in
3 years can be achieved.
Several steps have been taken by the Government/Reserve Bank
to increase institutional finance to weaker sections. As recommended
by the Advisory Committee on flow of Credit to Agriculture and
Related Activities (Vyas Committee), in order to improve the flow of
credit to small and marginal farmers (which form a part of the weaker
sections), the public sector banks have been advised to make efforts to
increase their disbursements to small and marginal farmers to 40% of
their direct disbursements under Special Agricultural Credit Plan
(SACP) by March 2007. Further, with a view to bringing in urban
poor into formal financial system, banks have been advised to advance
loans to distressed urban poor to prepay their debt to non-institutional
lenders, against appropriate collateral or group security, subject to the
guidelines to be approved by their Boards of Directors.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para Nos. 58, 59, 60, 61)
The Committee are distressed to find that all India Credit deposit
(CD) ratio of Scheduled Commercial Banks has gone down from 62.3%
to 58.3%, as at end-March, 2004 vis-à-vis end March, 2003 and 2002.
Moreover both the public and private sector banks have registered
decline with much rapid fall seen in case of private sector banks.
They also observe that there is a lot of regional variation in CD
ratio of banks. It varies from as low as 42.1 percent in Eastern region
to 89 percent in Western region. This shows that credit disbursement

12
in less developed States is far lower as against the advanced States.
Another unwelcome development, as seen in the region-wise analysis,
is that there has been a decline in this ratio in two major regions of
the country, viz. Northern region and Western region whereas Southern
region has registered only a marginal improvement of 2 to 3 per cent.
In this regard, the Committee observe that the RBI has advised
banks to arrange their lending portfolio in such a way that more
credit could be deployed in the backward States and districts of the
country. Also, it has advised the convenor banks to take up the issue
of CD ratio in SLBC meetings for identifying the measures for
enhancing the CD ratio. They further observe that Expert Group
appointed by the Government of India under the Chairmanship of
Managing Director, NABARD to examine the various aspects of CD
ratio on All-India basis, has submitted its report on February 23, 2005.
In view of all this, the Committee desire that the stepping up of
credit deposit ratio should be taken up on priority basis and measures
should be taken to reduce regional imbalances. They would further
like to be apprised of the major recommendations of the Expert Group
and Action Taken by the Government thereon. The Government should
also consider making public the report of the Expert Group.
Reply of the Government
The final Report of the Expert Group appointed by the Government
of India under the Chairmanship of Shri Y.S.P . Thorat, Managing
Director, NABARD to examine various aspects of C.D. Ratio was
submitted to the Government on 24.2.2005. The recommendations
contained in the Report have been examined in consultation with the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and views of the Government are likely
to be finalized shortly. The Committee would be apprised of the major
recommendations in the Report shortly.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para Nos. 68, 69 & 70)
The Committee observe that Section 7 (3) of the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act, (FRBM) 2003 mandates
that no deviation is permissible in meeting and obligations cast on the
Central Government under the Act, without the approval of Parliament.
They note that minimum annual reduction in the revenue deficit should
be by 0.5 percent of the GDP and in fiscal deficit should be by
0.3 percent of GDP .
However on account of extra resources that have to be shelled out
as a result of implementation of recommendations of Twelfth Finance

13
Commissions (TFC), the targeted reduction in fiscal deficit would be
by 0.2 percent while Revenue Deficit has been kept at the same level
in Budget Estimates 2005-06 as in Revised Estimates 2004-05 i.e.
2.7 percent of GDP .
The Committee express concern over the fact that the Government
has postponed the fiscal correction programme as envisaged by the
FRBM Act. The Committee note the Government’s explanation and are
not inclined to accept the plea given that the targeted reductions in
deficits could not be adhered to because of the implementation of TFC
award. In their opinion, the additional expenditure on account of this
should have been anticipated by the Government in advance and
management of finances should have been done accordingly. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should strictly
adhere to the targets envisaged under FRBM Act, except under
extraordinary circumstances and avoid deviation now and then.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 87)
The Committee note that the Government has set up a fund w.e.f.
1st April, 2005, namely the National Investment Fund (NIF) wherein
the proceeds of disinvestments would be parked and the accruals of
income from the fund would be channelised for use in social sector
projects as well as for capital investment in selected profitable Public
Sector Enterprises. The fund is to be maintained outside the
Consolidated Fund of India and professionally managed by selected
Public Sector Financial entities, which have the requisite experience to
provide sustainable returns to the Government without affecting the
corpus. Though the setting up of the National Investment Fund (NIF)
for parking disinvestments proceeds is in tune with the
recommendation made by them earlier, the Committee feel that several
important issues relating to the management of fund and utilisation of
the proceeds of Income from the fund need to be addressed in detail
and the Government’s policy thereon made clear. The Committee also
recommend that the accruals of disinvestments proceeds to the National
Investment Fund should be utilised in an entirety for Investment in
social sector projects and for meeting the capital expenditure of Public
Enterprises.
Reply of the Government
The decision of the Government is that the corpus of the National
Investment Fund is of a permanent nature. The permanent nature of
the Fund was conceived to counter the criticism that the Government
was selling capital assets to generate revenues to meet current

14
expenditure. The permanent nature of the corpus ensures that the
CPSEs related capital assets get transformed into investment by the
Government which are productively employed and only the income is
used to provide a sustainable source of finance for social sector needs
and the capital requirements of profitable and revivable CPSEs. Action
is being taken to operationalise the National Investment Fund.

15
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 24 & 25)
The Committee note that the Ministry have allocated Rs. 25 crore
at BE for 2003-04 which was revised to Rs. 35 crore at RE, and the
actuals for the same year was Rs. 41.58 crore. Similarly, for 2004-05,
Rs. 51.90 crore allocated at BE was revised to Rs. 46.70 crore and the
actual expenditure by 23rd March 2005 was Rs. 28.10 crore. Allocations
for BE 2005-06 have been made for Rs. 5 crore which is much lower
to the actuals of 2004-05. They are not convinced by the reply of the
Government that the Disinvestment programme for 2005-06 was not
finalized at the time of finalisation of Budget Estimates for 2005-06.
Going by the previous trend noticed in 2003-04 and 2004-05, the
Committee are constrained to state that Government have taken the
entire budgetary exercise very casually which is pronounced in wide
fluctuations between BE, RE and Actuals. The Committee recommend
that the Government to project its budgetary allocations in a realistic
way. At the same time they also recommend that the programme for
Disinvestment should be prepared well in advance so that realistic
sum could be allocated for the purpose.
Reply of the Government
The RE 2003-04 was raised from 25 crore in BE to Rs. 35 crore as
disinvestments cases in respect of MFL, FACT, RCF, NFL, ITDC
properties in Jaipur and Bhubaneshwar, HCL, STC, BALCO (Residual
equity), HZL, NIL, MOIL, SIIL, HOCL, EIL/EPIL, NEPA, IPCL
(Residual equity), MUL were originally expected to be completed
during 2003-04 and consequently payment to Advisers, Asset Valuers,
Legal Advisers, etc. in connection with these cases was also expected
to fall due.
The decision for undertaking 6 IPOs was taken by the Government
in the later half of 2003-04, therefore, the provision under this head
was further required to be raised to Rs. 45.63 crore by way of
Supplementary Grant.

16
At the BE stage, it is difficult to determine precisely the
disinvestments transactions that would get completed in the year.
Completion of disinvestments transactions through strategic sales
depends on a variety of factors including time taken for due diligence
as the same is dependent on the number of parties, investor’s interest,
final price bid, court cases, if any etc. However, keeping in view the
completed transactions and the stages at which the process is in other
cases, the estimates are revised at the RE stage and therefore, the
difference.
During the year 2004-05, the BE for the year 2004-05 of
Rs. 51.90 crore was projected on the basis of the estimates of
expenditure that would cover the spill-over of expenditure in connection
with the six IPOs completed during February-March, 2004 and also
the cases of strategic sales that were being anticipated to get closed in
2004-05. Declaration of general elections slowed down the process as
under the Model Code of Conduct the Government could not take
major decisions. The new Government was formed in May, 2004 and
it took time to formulate its policy on disinvestments. In view of these
developments the anticipated activities/transactions could not be
concluded and therefore, the requirement was reduced at the RE stage
to 46.70 crore.
As the policy parameters/implementation strategies in regard to
divestment in CPSEs were finalized in January, 2005, the activities in
the Department remained low even in the later half of the Financial
Year 2004-05. The activities during the year were mainly in the areas
of residual matters pertaining to the disinvestments transactions
concluded in the previous years. This was so because of reasons
explained above and hence the total actual expenditure under the head
“Professional Serices” upto 23rd March, 2005 was only Rs. 28.10 crore.
This included a sum of Rs. 2.72 crore which was authorized to the
Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity (DAVP) for issuing
advertisements on behalf of Department of Disinvestment. Out of
Rs. 2.72 crore an expenditure of Rs. 1.15 crore only was incurred by
DAVP during the year. The total expenditure under this head upto
31st March, 2005 was Rs. 27.39 crore.
After the general elections, the new Government was formed in
May, 2004 and at the time of submission of Budget Estimates for the
year 2005-06 the Govt. had not finalized the strategies for
implementation of its disinvestments policy and till Sept.-Oct., 2004,
the disinvestments activities which were likely to be undertaken during
2005-06 were not clear. A token provision of Rs. 5 crore was, therefore,
made.

17
While preparing the Budget Estimates and the Revised Estimates
every effort is made to project realistic estimates but due to the fact
that the expenditure under the Head “Professional Services” depends
on a number of factors, it is very difficult to make accurate projections.
However, the Government would in future, in keeping with the spirit
of the recommendations of the august Committee, make additional
efforts to ensure that the budgetary projections are more realistic and
accurate. Efforts will also be made to ensure that the disinvestment
programme for the ensuring year(s) is chalked out well in advance so
that there are no variations in the projected estimates and the actual
expenditure.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para Nos. 34 & 35)
The Committee note that despite adoption of 90 day delinquency
norms with effect from 31st March, 2004, both gross and net NPAs of
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) declined by 0.7 percent in
2003-04. However, they are perturbed to find out that top 10 defaulters
to the banking industry owe as much as Rs. 3908.96 crores, as on
31st March, 2004. After enactment of Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Invest Act (SARFAESI)
in December, 2002, the Banks have recovered Rs. 1748.49 crores as on
30th June, 2004 out of the total involved amount of Rs. 19744.02 crores.
The recoveries under the SARFAESI Act was lower due to its challenge
in the Supreme Court and consequent deletion of Section 17(2) of the
Act. In order to rectify the lapses in the Act, it was amended by the
Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2004.
Even amending Section 19 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks
and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (DRT Act) has not yielded the
desired results since banks cannot take simultaneous action under
SARFAESI Act and DRT Act. Therefore, the Indian Banks Association
(IBA) has desired that DRT Act should be further amended to enable
banks to make recoveries smoothly , under the SARFAESI Act. They
note the Government reply in this regard informing that they
(Government) are addressing this issue. They recommended the
Government to immediately look into the matter and amend the
relevant Acts suitably to remove any hurdle that comes in the way of
making recoveries in an effective manner. The Government should
take other strong and effective measures to realize NPAs expeditiously.

18
Reply of the Government
It may be stated that the apprehension of the Banks has been
examined and keeping in view of the following aspects no further
action is called for, at this stage:
1. DRT is the court of adjudication between the borrower and
secured lender for any action under SARFAESI Act. Hence,
simultaneous proceedings under both the Acts cannot be
allowed.
2. The issue raised by the Bankers is only a transitory problem
where banks may not have initiated action under SARFAESI
Act; their case in DRT would be pending; and 3 years from
the default date may be coming to an end.
3. The limitation of 3 years is from the date the loan becomes
a substandard account. Within three years of the date, on
which the last due instalment was not paid, the bank has
to file a case with DRT. Three years is too long a period for
the banks to complete their action under SARFAESI Act.
4. If banks initiate negotiations with borrowers after 90 days
of default (when loan becomes NPA) and if negotiations
fail after 180 days thereafter the banks can initiate action
under SARFAESI Act and complete such action in a
maximum period of one year. Even thereafter, a period more
than a year would be available for filing a case in the DRT.
5. The banks have to examine the viability of the negotiations
under the SARFAESI Act before filing application for
withdrawal from the DRTs in the cases where limitation
period becomes very short.
6. So far as yielding of the desired results after amending
Section 19 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and
Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (DRT Act) it may be stated
that the said amendment was notified only during December,
2004 and it is too early to assess the results at this stage.

19
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl.No. 1, Para Nos. 13, 14)
The Committee observed that under the head IRDA-other charges,
there has been no expenditure since 2003-04. They find that since
2002-03, the Authority started retaining fees and a percentage of
premium income of insurance companies and incurred expenditure
out of this. They also note that there is difference of opinion on location
of the IRDA Fund between the Government of India and the IRDA.
The Government of India has finally created a relevant head under
the Public Account of India and the IRDA has been asked to transfer
the money into this.
The Committee feel constrained to state that this issue is still alive
when the Ministry of Law also furnished its opinion in the matter.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the fund should
be immediately placed in the Public Account of India and IRDA should
draw amounts to discharge its functions from this fund. They would
like to be informed of the action taken in this regard within a period
of three months.
Reply of the Government
On the advise of the Ministry of Law and the Department of
Expenditure, this Ministry has requested the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority (IRDA), time and again, to transfer the IRDA
Fund into Public Account of India. Attention of IRDA has also been
drawn to the Audit Para of AGCR and Recommendations of the
Standing Committee on Finance in its 16th Report. However, the Fund
is yet to be placed in Public Account of India. The IRDA is again
being requested at the level of Secretary , Department of Economic
Affairs to place the fund in the Public Account of India immediately.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 78)
The Committee are informed that the Government have decided
to consider the sale of minority share holding in profitable PSEs,

20
modernize and restructure sick but potentially viable PSEs and sell
chronically and terminally sick PSEs. In view of the Committee’s
repeated recommendations for preparation of disinvestment policy
document to be discussed in Parliament, the Committee are given to
understand that white paper on Disinvestment is under preparation
and is expected to be tabled during the Monsoon Session of Parliament,
2005-06. The Committee recommend that the preparation of white paper
on Disinvestment may be expedited so that it is laid before Parliament
during the monsoon session, 2005.
Reply of the Government (i)
Action is being taken to table the White Paper on Disinvestment
of Central Public Sector Enterprises in the Parliament during the
Monsoon Session 2005.
Reply of the Government (ii)
[Vide Ministry of Finance, Department of Disinvestment,
letter dated 25.11.2005]
“The matter of placing a White Paper on Disinvestment of CPSEs
for information of the Parliament is under consideration of the
Government. The White Paper would be a comprehensive document
and detail the historical development of the disinvestments in CPSEs
since 1991-92 and also deal with the implementation strategy in respect
of the policy as enshrined in NCMP . After the White Paper is finalised
and placed for information of the Parliament, the Government would
take a view on whether a comprehensive document on disinvestment
policy is required.”

21
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
19 December, 2005 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

22
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 19 December, 2005 from 1500 hrs.
to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

23
3. The Committee, then considered the draft reports on (i) Action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Sixteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment), (ii) Action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of
Planning, and (iii) Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
4. The Committee adopted the draft action taken reports mentioned
above without any modification/amendment.
5. ** ** ** ** ** **
6. ** ** ** ** ** **
7. While deliberating on the draft action taken reports, the
Committee also decided that separate notes may be called for from
the Ministries/Departments concerned on the following issues:
(i) Utilisation of the accruals to the National Investment Fund
(NIF) set up for parking the disinvestment proceeds.
(ii) ** ** ** ** ** **
(iii) ** ** ** ** ** **
(iv) ** ** ** ** ** **
(v) ** ** ** ** ** **
8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
and to make verbal and other consequential changes and present the
same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

24
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF THE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC
AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
Total      % of
Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 10
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 6 60
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 5,
6, 7, 8, 10)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 2 20
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3 & 4)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 2 20
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.Nos. 1 & 9)
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect Nil 00.00
of which final reply of the Government
is still awaited
(Nil)