29
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands  for Grants (2005-2006) of  the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue)]
TWENTY NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTY NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands  for Grants (2005-2006) of  the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Pausa, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 29
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have
been accepted by the  Government .................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................ 36
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 42
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ........................................................................ 50
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 19 December, 2005 ............................................. 51
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Seventeenth Report of the Standing Committee
on Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) ........................ 54
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
6. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf
present this Twenty-Ninth Report on action taken by Government on
the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 20th April, 2005. The Government furnished the replies
indicating action taken on all the recommendations on 27th July, 2005.
The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by the
Standing Committee on Finance at their sitting held on 19 December,
2005.
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the  Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha
on 20 April, 2005.
2. The Report contained 9 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 5 & 6
(Total 4)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation Nos. 2, & 9
(Total 2)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 4, 7 & 8
(Total 3)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government were still awaited:
( Total Nil)
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Vigilance Mechanism
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 43)
5. The Committee felt that ensuring strict vigilance action against
corrupt officials not only discourages corruption, but also encourages
uprightness and gives moral courage to the honest officers. They further
felt that the extent of the efficiency of the vigilance mechanism decides
the relative extent of evasion of tax. They observed that one of the
major causes for corruption in tax departments relates to connivance
of the corrupt officials with the evaders. The Committee were
constrained to notice that there were many vigilance cases that were
pending and advised the Government to speed up disposal of the
cases by making special efforts.
6. The Government, in their action taken reply, stated as follows:
“Central Board of Direct Taxes:
The Director General of Income Tax (Vig.) {DGIT (Vig.)} &
Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO), Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
are already seized of the matter. Every year, the DGIT (Vig.) &
CVO, CBDT prepares an Action Plan for disposal of cases
pertaining to complaints, investigation and disciplinary proceedings
etc. for all the four Directorates of Income Tax (Vig.) and monitors
their performance on monthly basis. Wherever the shortfall, the
concerned Director of Income Tax (Vig.) is directed to put extra
efforts so that the targets are met. In the cases of long delayed
Inquiry Proceedings the DGIT (Vig.) has written D.O. letters to the
Inquiry Officers (IOs) indicating the specific date before which they
should send their reports. Apart from this, the cadre controlling
Chief Commissioners of Income Tax have been requested to impress
upon the IOs working in their Charges to complete the Inquiry
Proceedings within six months of their appointment as IOs and in
case of delay on the latter’s part take serious action against them.
However, due to shortage of adequate manpower, both at the officer
level and the supporting staff and also due to lack of proper
infrastructure, it has not been possible to cope with the increasing
workload which has resulted in increase in pendency of vigilance

3
cases. Instructions have been issued to all the four Regional
Directors of Income Tax (Vig.) to strictly abide by the time
stipulations laid down by the CVC vide their letter No. 000/VGL/
18 dated 23.05.2000 while dealing with vigilance matters.
Central Board of Excise and Customs:
As regards Committee’s observation regarding pendency of
vigilance cases and speedy disposal of the same, special efforts are
being made to speed up disposal of vigilance cases. As a part of
these efforts, Chief Commissioners have been requested to advise
all the disciplinary authorities viz. Commissioners, Addl./Joint
Commissioners under their charge to ensure that charge memos
wherever warranted are issued expeditiously. The Inquiry Officer/
Presenting Officer are promptly appointed after taking prompt
decision on written statements of defence, matter is pursued with
IOs to conclude inquiries early and decisions on inquiry reports
are taken promptly. The Chief Commissioners have also been
requested to ensure that vigilance cases in their jurisdictions are
effectively monitored by senior officers. It is hoped that these efforts
would contribute to expeditious disposal of the vigilance cases.”
7. The Committee had, upon considering the large quantum of
vigilance cases pending and the importance of maintaining a
corruption-free environment in the tax offices, recommended for
ensuring speedy disposal of the cases. In response thereto, the
Government have detailed the measures initiated in this direction.
The Committee observe from the reply that so far as the Central
Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) are concerned, problems of shortage
of manpower and lack of proper infrastructure hinder quick disposal
of the cases. The Committee want the Government to address the
issue expeditiously, so as to ensure a corruption-free environment in
the tax offices, which would be in the larger interest of the people
as well as the economy as a whole. In so far as the Central Board
of Excise and Customs (CBEC)) are concerned, the Committee note
that some special efforts are being taken to dispose of the pending
vigilance cases. However, the relatively large number of vigilance
cases booked and the negligible number of cases disposed of are
matters of serious concern to the Committee, which need to be
addressed with utmost seriousness. In this regard, the Committee
desire that the Government should take appropriate measures to
ensure that the stipulations laid down by the CVC in dealing with
vigilance matters are strictly adhered to. The Committee also desire
that periodical targets for disposal of vigilance cases should be fixed.
They also wish to be kept apprised of the details of the number of
vigilance cases pending and disposed of.

4
Computerisation Efforts
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para Nos. 109 and 110)
8. The Committee had, in one of their earlier reports, recommended
that Computerisation should be done in such a manner that all the
departments involved in tax collections were able to interchange
information between them. Further, the Committee had recommended
for devising a unique identification number not only for various
taxation purposes but also for all the financial transactions in the
economy. The Committee, reiterated the recommendations made in the
earlier report and desired that the Government should view the process
of Computerisation in a holistic manner with a centralised supervisor
to monitor formulation and execution of various computerisation
projects being undertaken at present as well as in the future and bring
them under one single umbrella. This, the Committee, desired to be
done within a specified time frame. The committee also wanted to be
apprised of the decision of the Government and further progress in
that regard.
9. The Committee further desired that, keeping in mind the critical
importance of Computerisation of all the tax departments, a
consolidated demand and expenditure should be introduced in the
demands for grants for the computerisation efforts. The Committee
also desired that the Government should come out quickly with a
“White Paper” on Information Technology in Tax Administration that
would provide a comprehensive overview of what was being done
and what was proposed to be done to use IT to widen the tax base
and increase tax collections, covering CBDT, CBEC and VAT as well.
The Committee were of the opinion that with the computerisation of
the tax administration, the Government should seriously look into the
possibility of maximising the scrutiny of tax returns.
10. The Government in their action taken reply stated as under:
“Central Board of Direct Taxes:
(i) The recommendation of the Committee to create a unique
identifier for exchange of information between various
taxation departments was accepted. PAN has been conceived
of as the unique taxpayer identifier between various taxation
departments. Both Income Tax as well as Customs and

5
Central Excise Departments are using PAN or PAN based
identification numbers in their computerisation programme.
(ii) The reconstituted Empowered Committee has the mandate
to look after the computerisation projects in different
departments under the Department of Revenue as a
coordinated project.
(iii) The empowered Committee is acting as the centralized
supervisor to monitor formulation and execution of various
Computerisation projects being undertaken in the
Department of Revenue.
Central Board of Excise and Customs:
”CBEC has been using PAN as a common business identifier in all
its operations. State Governments, however, have declined to adopt
PAN as a mandatory common identifier in VAT implementation.”
11. The Government, in their action taken reply also stated as
under:
“The Empowered Committee mentioned in the reply to the
observations in para 107 serves to coordinate the computerization
programmes in the area of taxation. However, since the
implementation of the programmes is done by different agencies
for Direct Taxes and Indirect Taxes, it may not be practical to
consolidate the demand and expenditure and show under one
demand.
A White Paper will be brought out shortly as suggested by
the Committee.”
12. The Committee, considering the advantages that shall accrue
from the computerization efforts recommended for initiating efforts
for having a ‘unique tax identification number’, which would help
in better interconnectivity between various tax departments of the
country, including that of the tax machinery of the States. The
Committee note that the Government have taken up their
recommendation in the right earnest by conceiving the Permanent
Account Number (PAN) as the unique tax payer identifier for
exchange of information between various taxation departments.
However, the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) have, in
their reply, stated that the State Governments have declined to
adopted PAN as a mandatory common identifier in V AT
implementation. The Committee advise the Government to take up

6
the matter with the ‘Empowered Committee on V AT’ so that the
benefits accruing from a ‘single’ or ‘unique’ tax payer identifier
system are realised by the States as well.
13. The Committee note that in deference to their suggestion,
the Government have reconstituted the Empowered Committee to
act as the central supervisor for purposes of monitoring, formulation
and execution of various computerization projects of the Department
of Revenue. The Committee further note that as recommended by
them, the Government have agreed to bring out a White Paper on
‘Information Technology in Tax Administration’. The Committee
would appreciate if the ‘While Paper’ is prepared and brought out
at the earliest.
Arrears of Revenue
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para Nos. 119, 120 & 121)
14. The Committee observed that the Government had, in the last
year’s budget, mentioned that collection of arrears of tax revenue would
be one of the main source of increase in tax revenue and also fixed
a target in regard thereto.
15. They noted with concern that the extent of realization of arrears
of the personal income tax component of Direct Taxes upto February,
2005 raised doubts about the achievability of the balance targets. There
was also considerable deficiency in regard to realisation from the
Indirect Taxes too. They found this to be a serious failure as the target
fixed was to be realised out of such tax arrears that were not contested
and were not under any process of litigation. They sought specific
reasons for the same from the Government.
16. They further noted that though the targets of Tax revenue for
the year 2005-06 had not been announced publicly, internal targets
had been set. The Committee were not in agreement with the changed
policy of setting internal targets and urged the Government to come
out publicly with the targets fixed for collecting uncontested revenue
arrears.
17. The Government in their action taken reply stated as under:
“Central Board of Direct Taxes:
The Government had in the Budget for 2004-05 fixed a target
of Rs. 7,000 crore for recovery of arrears of direct taxes. Against
this target, the Government collected an amount of Rs. 7,083 crore.

7
In the Budget Estimates of direct tax collections for 2005-06,
the collections on account of arrear-recovery is already incorporated,
though no quantification of the estimated collections of arrears has
been made in the Budget document. However, the Government
has set an internal target to collect Rs. 10,342 crore from the arrears
of direct taxes, which is about 45% more than the actual collections
of 2004-05. These targets are for the entire arrear amount brought
forward from last year.
Central Board of Excise and Customs:
For the financial year 2004-05, targets of Rs. 750 crore and
Rs. 2250 crore were fixed for Customs and Central Excise arrears
collections respectively. The actual realisations were Rs. 843.49 crore
and Rs. 1799.38 crore for Customs and Central Excise respectively.
Overall for indirect taxes, 88% of the target was achieved. It is
mentioned that targets were fixed not only with reference to
uncontested tax arrears but also contested arrears i.e. cases where
stay applications were pending with Tribunal/Commissioners
(Appeals) and also cases where permissible appeal period was not
over and parties were likely to go in appeal.
In the Budget Estimates of indirect tax collections for 2005-06,
the collections on account of arrears recovery is already
incorporated, though no separate quantification of the estimate of
arrears collection targets has been made in the Budget document.
The targets are fixed not only with reference to uncontested tax
arrears but also, inter-alia, with reference to cases pending before
appellate authorities, where stay application are pending.”
18. The Committee note that except for Central Excise, the
recovery of arrears of tax exceeded the targets as envisaged in the
Budget for the year 2004-05. However, in regard to the
recommendation of the Committee that the Government should
continue to come out publicly with the targets fixed for recovery of
arrears, the Ministry have inter alia stated that though the estimated
collections of tax arrears have not been quantified in the Budget
document for 2005-06, internal targets are fixed for recovery of such
arrears. The Committee do not agree with this change of policy and
therefore reiterate their recommendation for specifically setting out
the targets for recovery of tax arrears in the Budget document in the
coming years. The Committee also recommend that the Government
formulate a concrete action plan for revering the tax arrears in entirety
by devising separate means for recovering of contested and
uncontested arrears. The concrete action plan may be submitted to
the Committee within six months of tabling of this Report.

8
Pendency of Appeals
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 138 & 140)
19. The Committee observed that the pendency position of appeals
both under the Direct Taxes as well as the Indirect Taxes were a serious
cause of concern. It was observed that a whopping Rs. 55,138 crores
and Rs. 19473 crores, were locked up in disputes at various levels
under the Direct Taxes and Indirect Taxes respectively. Of this, the
locked up revenue with the Tribunals concerning Direct and Indirect
Taxes, accounted for more than half of the total revenue locked up
under the Direct and Indirect Taxes. The Committee desired to be
furnished with detailed information on the pendency position of
appeals, both under Direct and Indirect Taxes inter alia indicating the
length of pendency of the cases and the amounts involved. The
Committee noted that one of the main causes for the delay in disposal
of cases was because the Income Tax Tribunal gave stay beyond the
mandatory 180 days provided for in the Income Tax Act.
20. The Committee desired that a study might be conducted by
the Government regarding the large number of cases pending at various
stages of appeal, with specific focus on the reasons for the huge
pendency with the Tribunals and suitable remedial measures to be
taken to reduce them drastically. They further observed that inordinate
delay in disposal of cases might indirectly encourage the assesses to
go in for appeal even where there is no hope. The Committee wanted
the Government to take all these steps in a time bound manner and
be intimated about the actions taken in this regard by the Government.
21. The Government in their action taken reply stated as under:
“Central Board of Direct Taxes:
The total revenue locked up in cases before the ITAT as on
31st March 2004 was Rs. 2784411 (lacs). The detail of agewise
pendency of appeals filed by the Revenue, before the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal, as on March 2004 is as follows:
Age of appeals Before ITAT (in No.)
Less than One year 29595
1 to 2 years 12878
2 to 3 years 9487
3 to 4 years 6874
4 to 5 years 11394
Above 5 years 1586
Total 71814

9
Central Board of Excise and Customs:
As regards detailed information on the pendency position of
Appeals in respect of Indirect Taxes, a detailed analysis of the
cases pending at various appellate fora and the amount involved
therein as on 31.12.2004 and as on 31.3.2005 as per the Table 1.
The study of the comparative statements highlights the following
points:
(1) In respect of Supreme Court cases, there is a marginal
increase in number of cases and the amount involved has
also decreased by 3.01% as compared to the position on
31.12.2004.
(2) In respect of High Court cases, there is an increase in
number of cases by 2.7% but a marginal decrease in amount
involved compared with the figures on 31.12.2004.
(3) The number of cases in the CESTAT has increased by 2.77%
as on 31.3.2005 as compared with the position on 31.12.2004.
There is a decrease in the amount involved by 2.48%.
(4) The earlier trend of decrease in the number of cases pending
with the Commissioners (Appeals) in continuing. In fact,
pendency from 10739 cases as on 31.12.2004 has come down
to 9140 cases as on 31.03.2005. Similarly, the rvenue involved
in such cases has also reduced from Rs. 1421 crores to
Rs. 1197 crores. Thus there is a decrease in number of cases
by 14.88% and the amount involved by 15.76%.
(5) A study of the number of appeals (on percentage basis)
filed by the Department and by the parties in the various
appellate fora, as on 31.3.2005, indicates the following trend:
Sl.No. Appellate Forum Total No. of Percentage of Percentage
Cases as on Cases Filed by of Appeals
31.3.2005 the Department Filed by
the Parties
1. Supreme Court 2038 65 35
2. High Court 8793 31 69
3. CESTAT 23396 43 57
4. Commissioner (A) 9140 19 81

10
From the above, it may be concluded that the percentage of
appeals filed by the parties before High Courts, CESTAT and
commissioner (Appeals) is very high in comparison to the appeals
filed by the Department before these fora. The high percentages of
parties’ appeals indicate that the Orders-in Original were in favour
of the Department or the Department has won these cases in the
concerned lower appellate fora. However, the percentage of
departmental appeals in the Supreme Court continues to be on
higher side.
(6) The number of appeals filed by the Department before the
Supreme Court during the quarter ending March, 2005 has
come down when compared with the appeals filed by the
parties during the same period as per the Table 2.
As regards the length of pendency of cases, information is not
available and is being collected from the field formations.”
TABLE 1
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT IN RESPECT
OF COURT CASES
Sl.No. Appellate Position as on Position as on
Forum 31.12.2004 31.03.2005
Total Total Total Percentage Total Percentage
No. of Amount No. of increase/decrease Amount increase/
Appeals involved Appeals in No. from involved decrease in
(Rs. in 31.12.2004 (Rs. in amount from
crores) crores) 31.12.2004
1. Supreme Court 2031 3453 2038 (+) 0.34% 3349 (-) 3.01%
2. High Court 8562 3527 8793 (+) 2.70% 3499 (-) 0.79%
3. CESTAT 22765 11072 23396 (+) 2.77% 10797 (-) 2.48%
4. Commissioner 10739 1421 9140 (-) 14.88% 1197 (-) 15.76%
(Appeals)

11
TABLE 2
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT ABOUT APPEALS FILED BY THE
DEPARTMENT/PARTIES (FOR QUARTER ENDING DECEMBER
2004/QUARTER ENDING MARCH 2005)
Sl.No. No. of Appeals field by Department No. of Appeals field by Parties
Appellate During During Percentage During During Percentage
Forum Quarter Quarter Increase/decrease Quarter Quarter Increase/
ending ending in No. from ending ending decrease in
Dec. 2004 March 31.12.2004 Dec. 2004 March No. from
2005 2005 31.12.2004
1. Supreme Court 125 92 (-) 26.4% 53 106 (+) 100%
2. High Court 259 433 (+) 67.18% 524 591 (+) 12.78%
3. CESTAT 1130 1097 (-) 2.92% 1931 2083 (+) 7.87%
4. Commissioner 490 546 (+) 11.42% 3642 3867 (+) 6.18%
(Appeals)
22. The Government in their action taken reply also stated as under:
“Central Board of Direct Taxes:
The number of cases pending at various stages with the
appellate authorities as on 31st March 2004 is as follows:
Authority No. of cases
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal* 71,814
High Court 29,334
Supreme Court 4,443
(*of Deptt. only)
It can thus be appreciated that substantial number of appeals
is pending with Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. The functioning
of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is under Ministry of Law
and hence no further comments/study can be tendered/conducted
on the functioning and resultant pendency of the cases resting as
on date with the ITAT.
Central Board of Excise and Customs:
A Committee has been constituted to conduct the study
regarding pendency of cases at various stages of appeals, with
specific focus on reasons for huge pendency before various Benches
of CESTAT, and to suggest measures for reducing the pendency”.

12
23. Concerned over the huge number of cases of appeals pending
at various appellate fora, particularly at the level of Appellate
Tribunals and exorbitantly high amount of revenue locked up in
such cases, the Committee desired to be furnished with related details
inter alia covering the pendency position of the cases and the amount
involved. The Government have, in their reply furnished data on
the pendency position of cases in respect of both Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of Customs and Excise
(CBEC). The Committee convey their deep concern on the enormity
of the pendency of cases, particularly in regard to appeals pending
with the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (ITAT).
24. The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) have, in
their reply, stated that “the percentage of appeals filed by the parties
(i.e., assessees before High Courts, CESTAT and Commissioner
(Appeals) is very high in comparison to appeals filed by the
Department before these fora”. However, it is seen from quarterly
comparison of appeals filed by the department as well as the
assessees that the percentage increase of cases filed by the department
before High Courts during the quarter ending March, 2005 has
increased enormously. This being a cause for serious concern, they
desire that the Committee, which has been constituted by CBEC to
conduct a study regarding pendancy of cases at various stages of
appeals should be specifically mandated to undertake a detailed
analysis of the reasons for the persistence of such cases. They also
desire that the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) too should
consider constituting such a Committee, to study inter-alia, the
reasons for pendancy before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunals
(ITAT s) and to suggest remedial measures to bring down the
pendency of cases.
25. In addition, in view of the large quantum of cases pending
before the Tribunals, the Committee desire that creation of ad-hoc
Benches to clear the backlog may also be considered.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 7)
The Committee note with serious concern that within a period of
one year, the allocations of funds have been revised on three occasions
for the “three years plan for implementation of the Comprehensive
Computerization Programme (perspective plan)”. They observe that
this has happened because of reasons such as belated approval of the
project by the Cabinet,  delay in formation of the Empowered
Committee to oversee the implementation of the computerization
programme and further delay in finalization of an agency for
implementation of perspective plan.
Reply of the Government
The Department appreciates the concern raised by the Committee,
and will make all efforts to ensure that such situation does not occur
in future.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 8)
The Committee have, on earlier occasions too, advised the
Government to obtain necessary approval and keep everything in order
before going in for demand for grants. The Committee are of the
opinion that this would avoid delays in implementation of the project
and ensure that funds are not blocked unnecessarily.
Reply of the Government
The advice of the Committee is noted for the future and is being
acted upon.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 30)
The Committee notice that though it is a positive direction that
the revenue collections from the direct taxes have taken in the year

14
2003-04 the actual collections of the Personal Income Tax has been
lower as compared to the Budget Estimates. In so far as revenue
collections from the Indirect Taxes are concerned, they observe that
the actual collections continue to be negative. The Committee are of
the opinion that apart from some uncontrollable factors, the tendency
of the Government to alter the rate of tax/duty structure intermittently
causes unexpected downfalls in revenue collections. The Committee
advise the Government to restrain from giving tax breaks too often
and restrict them to once in a specific period, say once a year. They
further observe that the BE fixed for the tax collections for the year
2005-06 is too ambitious. Thought it is indicative of a positive outlook,
there are apprehensions about the achievability, particularly after seeing
the track record of the Government, who are finding it difficult to
match the revenue collections to that of the growth in the GDP . In this
regard, the Committee are of the opinion that unrealistic revenue targets
should not be made. This apart, the Committee’s apprehension is that
the tendency to hardpress the assessees, particularly under indirect
taxes, to not to utilize cenvat credit, but to pay the taxes through cash
payments, might increase.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
Under the direct taxes, tax breaks are given only during the annual
Budget through the Finance Act. Only the procedural and
administrative difficulties are removed through administrative orders
during the course of the year, which have practically no adverse impact
on the revenue collections.
The revenue targets of direct taxes for 2005-06 have been fixed on
the basis of macro-economic assumptions of economic growth, historical
trends of direct tax buoyancy, measures for additional resources
mobilization and initiatives for tax-administration reform. The
endeavour of the Government has always been to fix realistic revenue
targets. Though the revenue target of direct taxes for 2005-06, may
appear ambitious, the same are achievable in view of the trends of
direct tax collections in the last three years.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
Changes in the duty structure and rates are generally undertaken
as part of the Budget, except in exceptional circumstances.

15
Budget Estimates are made taking into accounts all material factors.
The methodology adopted for preparing the Budget Estimate is
continuously improved taking into account past experience.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 31)
Repeated failures to achieve the targets of revenue collection are
noticed in a number of Chief Commissionerates under the Income Tax
Department and in Commissionerates both under the Customs and
Central Excise Departments. The Committee desire to know the specific
reasons for such repeated failures and the administrative actions taken
against the officers concerned. They further want the Government to
analyse the reasons for the shortfalls and rectify them so as to reverse
the trend in the revenue collections.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
Budget Estimates of direct tax collections are fixed on the basis of
certain macro-economic assumptions. These very Estimates are allocated
amongst the Chief Commissionerates keeping in view their past
performance and revenue-potential of the region. Significant deviation
from the targets are, therefore, possible when the assumptions of
economic growth, market conditions, growth in real estate, growth in
manufacturing sector, income-levels, price-levels, interest rates, etc. do
not come true to the extent expected. Apart from the macro-economic
factors, there are region-specific factors, which adversely affect the
revenue-collection of a particular Chief Commissionerate. Certain Chief
Commissionerates receive heavy tax contribution from industries of a
particular sector. In a year when such sector does not perform well,
the tax collection of that Chief Commissionerate remains much below
the target.
The Government is taking necessary steps to fix realistic targets
for Chief Commissionerates so as to bring about greater accountability
of the officers. The targets for 2005-06 are being fixed on the basis of
the weighted average growth rate of collections of the Chief
Commissionerates in last three years and realistic estimates of the
revenue potential of the region. It is expected that substantial shortfall
from targets would be avoided by such allocation of targets and it
would be possible to enforce greater accountability.

16
Central Board of Excise and Customs
Actual collection of revenue vis-a-vis the estimates/targets of a
Commissionerate depends upon various factors both internal and
external. Revenue collection is a function of industrial growth, volume
of imports, inflation rate, fluctuations in the prices of commodities
and exchange rate. The estimates are based on certain assumptions,
which may not turn out to be correct. Collection of revenue is
monitored on a regular basis and reasons are analysed with inputs
from field formations. Corrective measures are taken from time to
time to maximize revenue collections.
Steps Taken to Augment the Revenue Collection
A number of steps have been taken and are being continuously
taken to augment tax collection and enhance the revenue buoyancy.
These include rationalization of tariff structure, review and withdrawal
of tax exemptions to the extent possible, plugging revenue leakage by
strengthening anti-smuggling and anti-evasion measures, monitoring
and disseminating international prices of imported commodities and
simplification of tax collection procedures to improve tax compliance.
Besides these are budgetary measures, the other measures being taken
are as below:
A. Action Points (Customs):
(i) Expediting clearance of imported goods which have already
been assessed, but not cleared.
(ii) Expeditious adjudication of unconfirmed demands.
(iii) Recovery of arrears of revenue free from any restraint. In
cases involving significant revenue where recovery has been
stayed, action is taken for vacation of the stay orders and
for early hearing of such cases.
(iv) Finalisation of provisional assessments.
(v) V erification of compliance with end-use conditions wherever
end-use based exemptions have been claimed, and
enforcement of bonds/bank guarantees where compliance
has not been reported with time-limit prescribed.
(vi) Monitoring of fulfilment of export obligations under the
export promotion schemes. Enforcement of bank guarantees
or other security wherever the obligations have not been
complied with.

17
(vii) Faster completion of pending investigations for issue of show
cause notices.
(viii) Special watch for abnormal variations in units values, with
a view to check under valuation of imported goods and
over valuation of exported goods under export promotion
schemes.
(ix) Follow-up action on audit paras involving significant
amounts of revenue.
(x) Action to be taken for recovery in cases where orders have
already been issued by the Settlement Commission.
B. Action Points (Excise)
(i) Regular monitoring of revenue trends from the level of range
offices in the field up to the Chief Commissioner/Board’s
office.
(ii) Close watch on production and clearance trends of top
20 revenue-yielding commodities.
(iii) Close monitoring of clearances of lower rated or exempt
items as a proportion to total value of clearances.
(iv) Monitoring of default in monthly payment of duty.
(v) A broad correlation between receipt and utilization of
principal raw materials and production to guard against
misuse of cenvat facility as also suppression of production
and clearances.
(vi) Regular review of cenvat credit availment and utilization
trends and follow up action in case of any disproportionate
cenvat availment.
(vii) Ensuring that there is no mis-declaration or misuse regarding
availment of conditional exemptions.
(viii) A watch on generation of by products and wastes/scraps/
rejects to ensure that no dutiable items escape the payment
of duty.
(ix) Systematic working of anti-evasion units with better
cultivation of informers, collection of intelligence and proper
targeting of delinquent units including 100% EOUs etc.

18
(x) Identification of commodities and assessees with reference
to different modus operandi like suppression of production,
clandestine removals, misuse of cenvat credit and mis-
declaration of assessable values for focused enforcement.
(xi) The effective implementation of the current internal audit
scheme with constant improvement in the quality of audit.
(xii) Ranges, Divisions, Anti-Evasion parties and internal audit
parties to work in harmony for achieving the common goal
of combating evasion and positive guidance to all bonafide
assessees.
(xiii) Senior officers to frequently interact with important assessees
and trade associations so that genuine taxpayers may be
helped and tax compliance enhanced.
(xiv) Thr ough frequent inspections or visits to the lower
formations, the senior officers are required to regularly assess
the performance and get the deficiencies removed. Chief
Commissioners to also monitor such visits and the results
achieved.
(xv) Expeditious finalization of pending appeals with
Commissioner (Appeals), Adjudication and provisional
assessments.
(xvi) Priority to be given to cases with higher revenue
implications and older cases.
(xvii) Effective handling of appeals before courts and Tribunal as
also applications before the Settlement Commission.
(xviii) Recovery of arrears of revenue free from any restraint. In
cases involving significant revenue where recovery has been
stayed, action is taken for vacation of the stay orders and
for early hearing of such cases.
(xix) Risk based scrutiny of monthly/quarterly returns by range
officers. Addl/Jt. Commissioners to scrutinize the returns of
the assessees paying duty above Rs. 5 crore per annum
every 6 months. Similar scrutiny for units paying duty
between Rs. 1 crore and Rs. 5 crore to be done by
Dy./Asstt. Commissioners.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 55)
The Committee understand that the Settlement Commission have
been created to avoid complex and lengthy process of litigation and

19
the cost involved in pursuing the cases, both for the assessee as well
as the Government. The extent of belief of the assessees to approach
the system with a positive attitude is dependent on the extent to
which these commissions are able to function efficiently and effectively.
It is observed that presently there are vacancies in the Income Tax
Settlement Commission, which have not been filled for years. This has
happened because of the absence of clear-cut policy as to how these
posts are to be filled in, and lack of serious efforts by various
Government agencies involved. Hence the Committee urge the
Government to come out with clear-cut policy/instructions in so far
as the filling up of the vacancies in the Settlement Tribunals is
concerned.
Reply of the Government
The Central Board of Direct Taxes was requested to make serious
efforts to fill up vacant posts and come out with clear-cut instructions
so far as filling up of vacancies in the Settlement Commission is
concerned. The CBDT had informed that there is separate policy for
filling up of the post in the various benches of the Settlement
Commission. The vacancies are filled up from the existing staff allotted
to the Chief Commissioners of Income Tax. Subsequently, the CBDT
had issued orders posting seven CITs in various benches of the Income
Tax Settlement Commission as Departmental representatives vide their
order dated 31st May, 2005. As regards the posting of Additional CITs
and JCITs to ITSC Benches, the CBDT has directed the concerned Chief
Commissioners of Income Tax to fill up the existing vacancies from
amongst the staff under their control.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 56)
The Committee note with serious concern that there has been a
tendency of non-cooperation by the Commissioners of Income Tax in
furnishing the necessary reports under certain provisions of the Income
Tax Settlement Commission rules. This denotes the attitude of the field
officers in supporting the functioning of the Commission. The
Committee want the Government to take serious view of such defaults
and initiate suitable action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Central Board of Direct Taxes have issued letters to the
concerned Chief Commissioners of Income Tax to take suitable action

20
to ensure that there is no undue delay in submission of reports by the
concerned Commissioner of Income Tax under their charges under
Rules 6 and Rule 9 of the ITSC Rules.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 57)
The Committee note that the non-finalisation of the recruitment
rules in time, non-revision of the pay scales of certain officers and
lack of certain basic monetary benefits to the officials posted in the
Customs and Central Excise Settlement Commission, are taking their
toll, which might affect the very efficiency of the functioning of the
Commission. They observe that the performance of the Commissions,
particularly that of the Income Tax Settlement Commission, indicate
marked decline in disposal of the cases, which is not at all to the
Committee’s expectations. They are of the opinion that the shortcomings
observed above are the main reasons for the dismal shortfalls in the
performance of the Settlement Commissions. Though the Government
have initiated some remedial measures, the Committee advise the
Government to pursue the matters in a time bound frame and solve
them expeditiously. They are of the opinion that the Government have
not been serious enough to ensure the smooth functioning of both the
Commissions. Hence, the Committee urge the Government to undertake
a thorough review of the functioning of the Settlement Commissions
and remove all the obstacles in the functioning on a war footing. The
Committee desire that the Government shall submit a status report in
this regard within three months.
Reply of the Government
The draft Recruitment Rules for Group ‘A’ & ‘B’ in the Customs
and Central Excise Settlement Commission have been prepared in
consultation with Department of Personnel and Training and have been
referred to Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) for their approval.
These will be notified after getting the approval of UPSC and the
Minister of State for Revenue in the Ministry of Finance.
The Recruitment Rules for Group ‘C’ & ‘D’ have been approved
by the Minister of State for Revenue in the Ministry of Finance and
have been referred to the Ministry of Law for vetting. These rules will
also be notified after the approval by the Ministry of Law.
The non-revision of pay scales of certain officers in the Commission
refers to the revision of pay scales of Senior Investigating Officers and
Junior Investigating Officers in the Customs and Central Excise

21
Settlement Commission, who are drawn from the cadre of
Superintendents and Inspectors of the Customs and Central Excise
Department. Whereas the pay scales of Superintendents and Inspector
have been revised to Rs.7500-12000/-and Rs. 6500-10500/-respectively
in the Customs and Central Excise Department, the pay scales of Senior
Investigating Officers and Junior Investigating Officers, who are drawn
from the rank of Superintendents and Inspectors, continue to remain
as Rs. 6500-10500/and Rs. 5500-9000/-respectively The Department of
Revenue have recommended the revision of pay scales and referred it
to Department of Expenditure through IFU. This matter is now under
consideration of the Department of Expenditure and a decision is
awaited.
The Committee has also referred to lack of certain monetary benefits
to the officials of Commission. This is regarding the difficulty
mentioned by the Commission that the officers/staff working on
deputation are drawing deputation allowance, whereas the officers/
staff taken on loan basis from the Customs and Central Excise
Department do not have any monetary benefits. A proposal in this
regard has been obtained from the Customs and Central Excise
Settlement Commission. However, since the proposal is incomplete,
detailed justification for deployment of officers on loan basis have
been called for. On receipt of the said proposal, further action will be
taken by the Ministry.
The CBDT have also posted seven officers of the level of CIT to
various benches of the Income Tax Settlement Commission vide its
order dated 31.05.2005.
[F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. (Rev)]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 103)
The Committee understand that computerisation of all the
Government formations involved in the policy making on taxation
and its implementation is expected to bring higher efficiency in the
functioning of the tax machinery and result in faster assessments and
collection of taxes, less interface between the tax officials and the public
and more transparency in tax administration. Further it also facilitates
widening and deepening of tax base and discourages tax evasion. The
Committee express their disappointment that in spite of India’s
acknowledged prowess in IT planning and Software, IT application in
both the CBDT and the CBEC has lagged behind and still suffers from
lack of clarity and coordination.

22
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The current phase of computerisation programme in Income Tax
Department is as envisaged in Vision Document 2005 accepted by the
Government in the year 2000. It has been further supplemented by the
decisions arising from acceptance of the Kelkar Committee’s report.
Therefore, there is requisite clarity behind the objectives set out for
the current phase of the computerisation programme.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
Achievements till date
Customs
The first attempt at computerization of the Customs operations
was made in 1986, when the processing of documents at six major
Customs Houses was automated. However automation was a process
parallel to the manual assessment of import and export documents
and while a database was created, it did not really help in expediting
Customs clearances.
The concept of EDI in Customs operations was visualised by the
department as early as 1993. Accordingly a Pilot Project was launched
at Delhi Air Cargo with EDI as its basis. The automation of import
operations started in May, 1995, at Delhi. This system featured online
assessment, duty payment and clearance procedures as well as EDI
connectivity with clearing agents.
As application software for internal automation, ICES captures the
entire workflow and the activities at various stages of processing of
declarations of goods for imports and exports. Some of the salient
features of the existing Customs EDI system are as follows:
(i) Electronic filling of Goods declarations.
(ii) Electronic processing of declaration on a first come first
served basis.
(iii) Electronic messaging with the banks for the collection of
duties and disbursal of duty drawaback.
(iv) Electronic messaging with custodians and other agencies
concerned with cargo clearance.
(v) Single point of interface of trade with Customs.

23
Presently the Customs operations have been automated at 33 major
Customs locations covering sea ports, airports, land customs stations
and inland container depots. In the financial year 2004-05, ICES handled
about 4.5 million declarations of import and export in the automated
custom locations.
The Electronic Data Interchange is taking place between Customs
and the community partners. The customs clearance is a complex
process involving regular interaction with a large number of agencies.
Information is required to be exchanged on a real time basis. The
ICES connects Customs with the Customs House Agents, Banks,
Custodians like the Airports Authority of India, Port Trusts, Container
Corporation of India, Reserve Bank of India, Director General of Foreign
Trade, Director General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics,
CBEC’s internal offices like the Directorate of Valuation, and DGRI.
The Indian Customs E-commerce Gateway (ICEGATE)
E-filling has been facilitated through the customs e-commerce
gateway (ICEGATE). Presently, about 4000 CHAs, importers and
exporters, airlines and console agents have been registered as users on
ICEGATE. Apart from import and export declarations, manifests (cargo
related information), transhipment requests by carriers and Transfer
Release Advice by custom Houses are also transmitted electronically
through the ICEGATE. About 9000 import and export declarations per
day were filed in March-April 2005 through this facility. In the financial
year 2004-05, the total number of transactions through ICEGATE was
about 24 lakh and the total submissions of Bills of Entry and Shipping
bills were about 21 lakh.
In overall terms, over 90% of the import and export declarations
were filed electronically on the Customs EDI system (including
ICEGATE) in the year 2004-05 from the automated customs locations.
The Customs EDI system provides a variety of access channels for
information dissemination to the trading community through:
(a) Enquiry Counters
(b) Touch Screen Kiosks
(c) SMS on GSM mobile phones
(d) Help mails
(e) Web based Systems
(f) Documents tracking facility on ICEGATE
(g) Helpdesk (ICEGATE)

24
CBEC’s Certifying Authority for issue of Digital Certificates
As part of the gateway project and to ensure e-filing in a secure
manner, CBEC has set up a Certifying Authority (CA) for issue for
digital signature certificates.
Computerization in Central Excise
In 1991, a Software called SERMON (System for Monitoring Excise
Revenue) was introduced in most Central Excise Commissionerates. It
is intended to build up database of production, clearance and revenue
and to ensure uniformity of assessment, classification and valuation. It
also provides the facility of monitoring revenue for taking policy
decisions—detailed analysis like commodity-wise, rate-wise, notification-
wise etc. is also possible. Focus has been on achieving 100% capture
of assessee profile and monthly returns.
Emphasis is now on the utilization of data for selective audit,
based on risk analysis. Assessee profile, monthly returns and audit
data base are the basic data elements needed for developing Risk-
Assessment Module for selective audit.
Provision of registration of central excise assessees through a central
server has also been made recently . Electronic filing of Central Excise
and Service Tax returns has been made operational.
The launch of SERMON online applications from a central server,
accessed through the Internet, was achieved in 2001. The online
registration of service Tax assesses was launched in February 2002,
and the online registration of Central excise assesses commenced from
October 2002.
In 2003, the e-filing of Service Tax returns commenced. In the
same year, it also launched an Electronic Departmental Communication
System. E-filing of Central Excise returns by the assessees was enabled
from 1.6.2004. An application to capture the returns data pertaining to
major Central Excise assessees directly into the central server was
launched on 3.1.2005. A pilot project for online capture and transmission
of duty payment data was launched at Chennai on 17.1.2005.
SAPS (System for Allotment of PAN based Service taxpayer code
software) is a web based software developed primarily with the
intention of building up a data base of profiles of service tax assessees
right at the time of registration. The SAPS software was launched in
February 2002. Board had issued circular 140/03/2002-ST dated

25
21.2.2002 instructing that allotment of service taxpayers code should
be made by using SAPS software.
CRRS (Cyber Revenue Realisation Summary) was initially launched
in April, 2001 to capture the central excise revenue details from each
Central Excise Commissionerate, for the basic purpose of checking the
completeness of RT-12 data sent by each Commissionerate. This system
replaced the Monthly Telegraphic Summary of the CBEC. CRRS was
initially launched in April, 2001 to capture the central excise revenue
details from each Central Excise Commissionerate, for the basic purpose
of checking the completeness of RT-12 data sent by each
Commissionerate. It was further modified to capture the details of
revenue collected from Service Tax also. In April, 2002, it was further
enhanced to include category-wise revenue from Service Tax. Now, the
system has been further enhanced to capture Customs revenue collected
by Customs formations throughout the country. There are separate
modules for Central Excise, Service Tax and Customs formations. This
data resides on the central server and can be accessed by the Board
for policy requirements.
SACER (System for Allotment of Central Excise Registration
Number) is a web based software which has been developed primarily
with the intention of building up a data base of profiles of Assessees
in the process of registration itself and to ensure easy access to
information and avoid duplication in the allotment of Central Excise
Registration Number. SACER has been commissioned from 1.10.2002.
PAMS (Provisional Assessment Monitoring System) is a software
created for monitoring the pendency of provisional assessments. In
order to capture crucial information/sanction orders on the system, it
was decided to make it necessary for the AC/DC permitting the
provisional assessment to do so using the PAMS module, thereby
capturing crucial data at the initial stage itself. This would then help
monitor the dates for getting the approval of the Commissioner and
the CC, as the case may be, to continue with the provisional assessment
after the six months period. It would also help monitor the expiry of
bank guarantee etc. It was launched in June, 2003.
ER-1 data is captured in stand-alone systems at each Division using
SERMON 5i. The data is consolidated at each Commissionerate
Headquarters and then sent to the Directorate of Systems, Chennai
from where it is made available to users like the Board, Tax Research
Unit, Chief Commissioner Unit, etc. The data is placed on a central
server to make it available to authorized officer anywhere any time.

26
STREMS (Service Tax Revenue Monitoring System)
ST-3 data is captured on a stand alone system at each Division
using STREMS. The data is consolidated at each Commissionerate
Headquarters and then sent to the Directorate of Systems, Chennai,
from where it is made available to users like the Board, TRU, CCU,
etc. The data is placed on a central server to make it available to
authorised officers anywhere anytime. Divisions are at present not
capturing this data, complaining of a shortage of data-entry staff. They
have informed that consequent to the cadre reorganization in the
department, the cadre of DEOs has been abolished leading to a backlog
of data entry. It is hoped that with the introduction of e-filing of
returns, this issue will find a solution.
EDECS (Electronic Departmental Communication System)
Computerisation and automation of procedures has been gathering
rapid pace in the department. The Directorate of Systems has often
faced difficulty in communicating with the large number of field
formations. This has led to the development of a new application
which combines the features of an ordinary mail with that of a
formatted document. This new communication system is called E-DECS
(Electronic Departmental Communication System). EDECS has been
launched on 31st March, 2003.
A website for facilitating assessees’ transactions with the department
(exciseandservicetax.nic.in) has been launched in July, 2004 with the
following facilities:
(i) E-filing of Central Excise and Service Tax returns
(ii) Web-enabled Central Excise tariff query system
(iii) Assessee helpline
Benefits of automation
1. Introduction of automation has considerably streamlined and
reengineered the clearance processes. In imports, the number of
procedures has been reduced from 18 to 6 and in exports from 15 to
5. In exports, appraisement has been dispensed with except in specific
cases viz. requirement of export promotion schemes, or where the FOB
value of export is more than Rs. 10 lakhs or the drawback amount
beyond Rs. one lakh.

27
The Automation has brought down the processing stages
sustantially by introducing electronic workflows. With the risk
management based clearances, the module being under development
and likely to be rolled out in all EDI locations in about 3 months,
Customs is now moving towards a systems governed clearance
mechanism wherein the majority of cases, self-assessed consignments
will be cleared without examination.
2. Electronic credit of Drawback in the bank has been enabled.
The exporter is not required to file a separate claim for drawback (as
was done in the manual system) and the shipping bill itself is treated
as a claim for drawback. After the export manifest is filed by the
carrier, the system calculates the drawback due and payment is credited
into the exporter’s account.
3. Dissemination of information to the trade through a variety of
means viz. through Document Tracking System on ICEGATE, Touch
Screen Kiosks,  SMS, display of Document status on TV monitors and
on local websites leading to greater transparency in the monitoring of
shipments by trade.
4. Accountability—through time stamping of all activities. Delays
can now be pinpointed and suitable corrective action taken.
5. Authenticated and validated transaction—leading to accurate
reporting: With the use of EDI and Internet based filing system data
is received directly from the trade without any manual intervention.
6. Reduction in transaction costs in exports for the trade—this has
been documented in studies carried out by agencies such as the EXIM
Bank.
In addition, with the implementation of ICEGATE, the following
benefits have accrued to the clients:
(a) continued use of in-house application without the need to
re-enter data since clients have to only add a plug-in to
generate messages in the prescribed standards. They also
get a choice of transmission protocols & messaging
standards.
(b) Transparency—through Document Tracking, status Query
and Help Desks at ICCEGATE.
(c) Reduced cost of documentation/filing/compliance.
(d) Speedier clearance of Cargo.

28
Future plans
(i) Introduction of Self-assessment based on Risk Management
System and Post Audit in customs clearance to promote
faster clearance of cargo, to facilitate low risk importers/
exporters and to provide effective enforcement in high-risk
cases. The systems is under pilot.
(ii) Expansion of Indian Customs EDI System to 3 more
locations increasing the number of automated locations from
32 to 35. This will cover about 90% of the International
Trade transactions of the country.
(iii) Under the Consolidation Project, recently approved by the
CCEA, an additional 35 locations are proposed to be brought
under automation, thus bringing a total of 70 Customs
stations into the ambit of ICES.
(iv) Implementation of a computerised system for excise and
service tax documentation that will enable on-line filing of
returns and all other claims/permission requests. This project
has already commenced and is expected to be implemented
in a time frame of one year. A tight integration with the
Customs system is also envisaged.
(v) To introduce Internet based payment of customs duties as
part of the trade facilitation and for promoting faster
clearance of cargo. A pilot implementation has been
introduced at Air Cargo Bangalore. Discussions have been
held with the Principal Controller of Accounts regarding re-
conciliation of revenue collected in an EFT environment.
Full scale implementation of electronic payment of duties
involving multiple banks can be undertaken subject to
approvals on payment, accountal and reconciliation
procedures, from Controller General of Accounts and the
Reserve Bank of India.
(vi) T racking of arrears of revenue through automated
mechanism to enable recovery of arrears and to contribute
to revenue generation. The software has been implemented
and Custom Houses have been directed to populate the
database with the arrears information for raising alerts,
whenever defaulters transact on the system.

29
(vii) A system to automatically reconcile Central Excise revenue
receipts paid into the banks with information in the Central
Excise returns submitted to the department is under pilot
implementation at  Chennai.
(viii) Implementation of Digital Signature Certificates in customs
clearance:—For the financial year 2005-06, the aim is to issue
about 5000 certificates. The constraint in this case is that of
manpower. A staff requirement of 36 has been projected for
the work (currently the project is being run by 4 people).
The number of certificates issued may not be achieved in
the absence of the required personnel.
(ix) Delivery of objectives listed under the Umbrella Project
called “Consolidation of application and infrastructure of
CBEC”:—It is expected to be implemented in a time frame
of 18 months from the date of funds availability. The
deliverables under this Umbrella Project are as under:—
Consolidation of the existing and proposed IT infrastructure
Comprehensive networking linking all offices of CBEC—
1. Development of Web based application for Customs, Central
Excise and Service Tax covering all major activities of CBEC.
The work has been awarded to the selected vendor.
2. Setting up of Data Warehouse for meeting information and
analytic needs of the CBEC and the Ministry of Finance. A
consultant has been appointed to conduct the study.
3. Setting up of intranet service for CBEC and its officers to
enable communication and interchange of information.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 104)
The Committee observe that the efforts of the Government towards
Computerisation of the entire tax administration machinery seem to
be undertaken in a piecemeal and casual manner which causes delays.
Further, they observe that there has been no co-ordination between
different tax Departments.

30
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The computerisation programme in Income Tax Department has
been taken as a comprehensive proposal. Basic elements for
coordination with other Taxation Departments have been kept in mind
while preparing the computerisation proposal, in particular the planning
of a common identifier such as PAN which is also being used by the
other Taxation Departments, namely, Central Excise, Customs, Director
General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) etc. However, inter-agency access to
each other’s database was conceived in a very limited manner at that
stage.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
CBEC started their automation efforts with the purpose of
developing a workflow application for cargo clearance and collection
of duty which was their prime responsibility. It developed a system
where declarations from the importer and exporter could be
electronically received and processed on the screen of the customs
officers who took decisions on the system.
However, in the business of cargo clearance many other agencies
like Ports, Banks, Airports, DGFT, RBI, Airlines, Shipping lines, Drug
Controller, Transporter and the trade community are also involved.
Thus a paperless environment was dependent on the automation efforts
of all these agencies which were at different levels of development. As
such, CBEC had to undertake the automation programme largely in
terms of its objectives.
The Tax Policy of the Government is dynamic and changes occur
every year in terms of budget pronouncements.
The automation efforts of CBEC are not haphazard. Investments
have been committed to projects periodically. These cannot be
considered piecemeal as the projects take time to mature both in terms
of technology absorption by the users as well as the department’s
capacity to derive benefits. The recently approved consolidation project
assimilates all the previous developments and integrates the diverse
applications of the Department into one consolidated application which
can provide a comprehensive/composite view of tax administration.
The project attempts to take advantage of lower costs of computing
power and network bandwidth.

31
Consolidation of IT infrastructure and applications will derive the
benefits from the latest technologies and the readiness of all concerned
and participating agencies of the department and the stakeholder
community.
Keeping in mind that the automation efforts of CBEC and CBDT
entailed a future sharing of data, the Ministry of Finance decided in
1999 to use PAN as a common business identifier. At present PAN is
used as an identifier by all wings of CBEC,  i.e. Customs, Central Excise
and Service Tax. However, PAN has not been accepted by the State
Governments as a mandatory identifier for VAT related transaction.
CBEC and CBDT have recently been attempting to develop a
composite view of their assessees and this has resulted in the decision
of the Ministry of Finance to set up a Large Tax payers Unit, which
will comprise CBEC and CBDT officers. Synergy with V AT system of
State Governments has also been identified as an objective.
The constitution of Empowered Committee mentioned in response
to paras 106 and 107 below would also ensure maintenance of synergy
between computerisation projects of CBDT and CBEC.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 105)
The Committee note and appreciate that in so far as
computerisation in the Income Tax Department is concerned, the efforts
like e-filing of returns, e-payment of tax, faster processing of returns
and issue of refunds and consolidation of regional data bases into
single national data base are progressing in the right direction, which
will enhance the efficiency of the department. They observe that on
some of these decisions a time frame for their implementation have
been mentioned. They desire that the Government should make all
out efforts in completing the projects in time.
Reply of the Government
All efforts are being made to adhere to the time line. An
Empowered Committee has been reconstituted with representatives
from all concerned Departments to speed up the decision making
process.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]

32
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 106)
The Committee observe that delays in according sanctions to the
projects, their implementation and delays in completion of tenders
have resulted in either not spending the money allotted or reducing
the RE drastically.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The delays in implementation of the sanctioned projects were
primarily on account of time taken in complying with the prescribed
procedures relating to issue of tenders, evaluation of bids and award
of contract etc.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
An Empowered Committee has been constituted, vide order dated
9
th May, 2005, in order to expedite and synergize implementation of
computerization projects of CBEC and CBDT. This Committee has
members from the various departments involved in granting approval
as well as experts from the field of Information Technology. The
Committee has also the provision for a nominee of the Empowered
Committee of State Finance Ministers. The terms of reference of the
Empowered Committee, inter-alia, includes:
1. Appointment of technical/project consultants for expeditious
and effective implementation of computerization plan.
2. Approval of detailed implementation strategy.
3. Approval to request for proposals and tender documents in
connection with the above projects.
4. Approval of technical proposals relating to procurement of
hardware, network design, software modification, system
integration etc. for implementation of computerisation plans.
5. Approval of evaluation of technical bids and shortlisting of
bidders related to the above.
6. Approval of evaluation of commercial bids relating to the
above and award of the final contract.

33
7. Formulation of Information Technology strategy that will
achieve synergy between CBDT and CBEC in the first
instance and to work toward synergy with State VAT
systems;
8. Monitor all aspects related to change management in
connection with project implementation and roll out
computerisation projects;
9. Ensuring readiness of the department on the one hand and
trade and industry on the other to implement electronic
interfaces between Government and Industry.
It is expected that the Empowered Committee would help in
ensuring synergy between the projects of CBDT and CBEC and also
help in timely and effective implementation of projects.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 107)
The Committee desire that a dedicated machinery be created for
planning, co-ordinating and helping a timely implementation of various
computerisation projects. It shall obtain all the necessary sanctions well
in time before coming out with the relevant demands. It shall also
ensure timely and proper execution of tenders and implementation of
the projects in time.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The Department of Revenue has reconstituted the Empowered
Committee on Computerisation. This is chaired by Advisor to Finance
Minister and includes Secretary (Revenue) and Secretary (Expenditure).
Its mandate includes implementation of computerisation projects in
both Income Tax and Central Excise & Customs Departments. The
Committee also has representatives from the Empowered Committee
on VAT. Its mandate includes coordinated implementation of
computerisation projects across different taxation departments.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
The reply to this Paragraph is same as given to the preceding
paragraph 106.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]

34
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 108)
The Committee observe that insufficiency of the manpower in the
certifying authority under indirect taxes has been indicated to be a
matter of concern. They want the Government to look into the matter
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
A detailed proposal for manpower is being dealt in CBEC in F.No.
A-11013/55/2004-Ad. IV . The deployment of manpower is awaited
which has caused delay in issuing the digital signatures.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 109)
The Committee had, in one of their earlier reports, recommended
that Computerisation was to be done in such a manner that all the
departments involved in tax collections will be able to interchange
information between them and further recommended to devise a unique
identification number not only for various taxation purposes but also
for all the financial transactions in the economy. The Committee, once
more, reiterate their recommendations and desire that the Government
should view the process of Computerisation in a holistic manner with
a centralised supervisor to monitor formulation and execution of
various computerisation projects being undertaken at present as well
as in the future and bring them under one single umbrella. This should
be done within a specified time frame. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the decision of the Government and further progress in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
(i) The recommendation of the Committee to create a unique
identifier for exchange of information between various
taxation departments was accepted. PAN has been conceived
of as the unique taxpayer identifier between various taxation
departments. Both Income Tax as well as Customs and
Central Excise Departments are using PAN or PAN based
identification numbers in their computerisation programme.
(ii) The reconstituted Empowered Committee has the mandate
to look after the computerisation projects in different
departments under the Department of Revenue as a
coordinated project.

35
(iii) The empowered Committee is acting as the centralized
supervisor to monitor formulation and execution of various
Computerisation projects being undertaken in the
Department of Revenue.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
CBEC has been using PAN as a common business identifier in all
its operations. State Governments, however, have declined to adopt
PAN as a mandatory common identifier in V AT implementation.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 110)
They further desire that, keeping in mind the critical importance
of Computerisation of all the tax departments, a consolidated demand
and expenditure be introduced in the demands for grants for the
computerisation efforts. The Committee desire that the Government
come out quickly with a “White Paper” on Information Technology in
Tax Administration that will provide a comprehensive overview of
what is being done and what is proposed to be done to use IT to
widen the tax base and increase tax collections, covering CBDT, CBEC
and VAT as well. The Committee are of the opinion that with the
computerisation of the tax administration, the Government should
seriously look into the possibility of maximising the scrutiny of tax
returns.
Reply of the Government
The Empowered Committee mentioned in the reply to the
observations in para 107 serves to coordinate the computerization
programmes in the area of taxation. However, since the implementation
of the programmes is done by different agencies for Direct Taxes and
Indirect Taxes, it may not be practical to consolidate the demand and
expenditure and show under one demand.
A White Paper will be brought out shortly as suggested by the
Committee.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]

36
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 18 & 19)
The Committee observe that lack of coordination among different
agencies involved in ensuring the quality of the scanners required and
taking care of the formalities involved in the entire process of
procurement and installation of scanners has resulted in obtaining
“deficient scanners” and delay in executing civil works for installation
of scanners.
The whole affair, the Committee are of the opinion, has been done
on a trial and error method which has caused wasteful expenditure.
The Committee take serious view of it and require the Government to
furnish an explanatory note on the whole affair, detailing the nature
of mistakes committed by each authority/person involved and penal
action, if any, taken on the erring officials/authority.
Reply of the Government
Co-ordination among Agencies
Different agencies have been involved at different stages of the
procurement and installation/commissioning of the container scanners
at JNPT, Nhava Sheva, but from the stage of conceptualization of the
project to the actual commissioning of the scanners, care has been
taken to institute mechanisms that ensure proper co-ordination amongst
the different agencies.
At the initial stage the requirements of Customs and other agencies
(NCB&IB) that can potentially derive benefit from installation of the
container scanners were collected by a single agency,  i.e. the Directorate
of Revenue Intelligence, CBEC, Department of Revenue and
communicated to the Department of Atomic Energy. On the basis of
the user requirement and the market survey carried out by M/s ECIL
(Public Sector Undertaking under the Department of Atomic Energy),
a proposal was made to the Department of Revenue. This proposal
was communicated to the Department of Revenue by the

37
Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission and Secretary, Department of
Atomic Energy.
At the stage of placing of order upon M/s ECIL for delivery and
installation/commissioning of one 9 MeV Relocatable X-Ray System
and one Mobile Gamma Ray System, the approval of the Committee
on Non-Plan Expenditure and the Finance Minister having been
obtained, a Price Negotiation Committee was set up under the
chairmanship of Member (Customs), CBEC, which comprised of a
technical expert (nominee of M/s Bharat Electronic Ltd.), Financial
Adviser and DGRI.
Thus, at this stage also care was taken to have the user, the
technical expert and the financial expert together look into the price
quoted by M/s ECIL and negotiate with them for reduction in the
cost and other terms and conditions including the delivery schedule.
The Committee held three meetings from 29.7.2003 to 1.8.2003 and
subsequent to the negotiations with M/s ECIL, the price was brought
down to Rs. 31.27 crores from Rs. 34.08 crores. The Committee also
discussed the terms and conditions of the MoU which was signed on
12.8.2003.
The order having been placed upon M/s ECIL, a Project
Implementation Committee was constituted under the chairmanship
of Member (AS), CBEC, so as to ensure close monitoring of the
implementation of the project. The other members of the Committee
are Chief Commissioner of Customs, Nhava Sheva, DGRI, Financial
Adviser and Commissioner [Preventive Operations]. The Project
Implementation Committee has kept a close watch over the
implementation of the project. So far, 8 meetings of the Committee (as
detailed below) have been held and it has been the constant endeavour
of the Committee to expedite the project by removing the bottlenecks
that have been encountered during the implementation:
(i) First meeting held on 10th September, 2003 at New Delhi.
(ii) Second meeting held on 14th November, 2003 at Nhava
Sheva.
(iii) Third meeting held on 28th January, 2004 at New Delhi.
(iv) Fourth meeting held on 11th March, 2004 at Nhava Sheva.
(v) Fifth meeting held on 6th April, 2004 at New Delhi.
(vi) Sixth meeting held on 26th May, 2004 at Nhava Sheva.

38
(vii) Seventh meeting held on 21st July, 2004 at Nhava Sheva.
(viii) Eighth meeting held on 24th  September, 2004 at Nhava
Sheva.
These meetings were attended by officers of the JNPT Custom
House,  Financial Adviser (Finance), representatives from M/s ECIL,
M/s ECIL-Rapiscan, M/s CWC and other concerned agencies. During
these meetings, the day-to-day problems being encountered in the
implementation of the project were extensively discussed and necessary
directions given to the representatives of M/s ECIL, M/s ECIL-Rapiscan
and M/s CWC.
The project has also been monitored by the Chief Commissioner
of Customs, Mumbai-II on day-to-day basis. Besides, as directed by
CBEC, the Chief Commissioner is sending a fortnightly report so that
progress in the matter is readily available.
Thus, there has been continuous and close interaction with other
agencies during the implementation of the project.
Commissioning of Relocatable Scanner
So far as the Relocatable X-ray Scanner System is concerned, it
would be premature to comment on its performance because the work
of installation of the equipment has been only recently completed i.e.
25th March, 2005. Since then, the machine has been on extended trial
and so far, such trials are going on satisfactorily . The final Site
Acceptance Test has now been conducted in the first week of June,
2005 and the Relocatable X-Ray Scanner is to be handed over to the
department shortly. The performance of the Relocatable X-Ray Scanner
System and our experience with it would therefore be only available
after a couple of months. Delay in executing the civil works undertaken
by M/s CWC has taken place but this is not on account of lack of
coordination between different agencies involved. The civil work for
the installation of the relocatable scanners was started in the month of
December, 2003 and work was expected to be completed by June,
2004. However, due to the unexpected delay in completing the work
of large number of piles, the date of completion was posted to
September, 2004. This schedule could not be adhered to because of the
further delay in the piling work. Finally, the civil work could be
completed in December, 2004. The reasons for delay in the completion
of the civil works are mainly as under:
(a) V ery soft soil at the chosen site of installation necessitating
extensive pile work for the foundation.

39
(b) Delay in piling work (due to time taken in checking of mix
design, recasting of concrete cubes and pre-engagement of
consultant).
(c) Improper levelling of tunnel floor.
(d) The stringent radiation norms of Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board which required a particular type of construction on
account of proximity to the office building.
(e) Inclement weather conditions during monsoons.
Performance of Mobile Scanner
As regards the Mobile Gamma Ray Scanner, it was made
operational with effect from 29th March, 2004. Initially there were a
number of problems which related to poor quality of image, water
seepage, short circuiting of PCBs, failure of hydraulic system, failure
of sensors etc. There was also the problem of lack of spares, toolboxes,
jack assembly etc. However, these issues were immediately taken up
with the vendors and the problems resolved. It is in fact due to the
continuous monitoring of the project that the Mobile Gamma Ray
Scanner System has largely stabilized and is now reported to be
functioning satisfactorily. On an average, 120 containers are being
scanned every day.
Gamma Ray Systems are generally used for inspecting empty and
light to medium loaded containers. X-ray Systems are most suited for
high density cargo scanning. Keeping in view the respective technical
strengths of the two systems i.e. Mobile Gamma Ray Scanner System
and Relocatable X-ray Scanner System as well as for logistical reasons,
a system for optimum utilization of the two container scanners is
being evolved. The details are as follows:
The mobile scanner has been installed inside the port area at JNPT,
and is being used for scanning low density material requiring lower
penetration. Secondly, export containers in this port which are cleared
by the ICDs/CFSs located elsewhere largely go directly into the port.
Once they enter the port, it may not be advisable to bring them out
for scanning purpose. Therefore, the mobile scanner which is already
installed in the port premises can scan the export containers as also
the low density import cargo. The relocatable scanner which has higher
penetration capacity will be used for scanning the heavy import cargo.
Both the container scanners will thus complement each other.

40
The installation of container scanners at JNPT, Nhava Sheva, is a
new initiative of the country. This being a new and sophisticated
technology, the project has been implemented as a pilot project. Though
a number of problems have been encountered, the same have been
addressed and in doing so, the Project Implementation Committee has
played a key role in coordinating the work of different agencies. Now
that the Relocatable X-Ray Scanner Systems is to be shortly
commissioned, optimum utilization of both these scanners with their
respective technical strengths shall become possible. It cannot therefore
be said that the procurement has been done on trial and error basis
nor has there been any wasteful expenditure.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 150)
The Committee observed that the Central Economic Intelligence
Bureau was created to co-ordinate and strengthen the intelligence
activities and enforcement action by various agencies concerned with
investigation into economic offences and enforcement of economic laws.
Reply of the Government
The Central Economic Intelligence Bureau has been fulfilling the
stated objective at regional level through the forum of 18 Regional
Economic Intelligence Committees (REICs) located at Ahmedabad,
Bangalore, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi,
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kochi, Kolkata, Lucknow, Madurai, Mumbai, Patna,
Pune, Shillong and Vadodara. Representatives of various intelligence/
investigating agencies i.e. Customs, Central Excise, Income Tax, CBI,
Enforcement Directorate, RBI, Sales Tax, ROC, EOW, State Police are
members of REICs.
At the national level, the CEIB regularly interacts with the
intelligence and enforcement agencies, both within and outside the
Department of Revenue, with a view to provide effective coordination
in the area of economic offences.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 151)
The Financial Intelligence Unit–India (FIU-IND) has recently been
set up with a view to coordinate and strengthen collection and sharing
of financial intelligence through an effective national, regional and

41
global network to combat money laundering and related crimes. It
will be a multi-disciplinary unit with experts from Income Tax, Customs
and Central Excise, Law, Commercial Banks, Capital Market,
Information Technology etc. for establishing links between suspicious
or unusual financial transactions and underlying criminal activities.
Reply of the Government
Government has appointed Director (FIU-IND) in the rank and
status of Joint Secretary and sanctioned 42 posts, to be filled in by
officers from different agencies/departments. Action has been initiated
to fill up the sanctioned posts and instal necessary infrastructure at
the identified site, Samrat Hotel to make FIU-IND fully operational.
The process is expected to be completed by 15th August, 2005.
Further, Rules under the Prevention of Money Laundering
(Amendment) Act, 2005 have been finalized and notified in the Gazette
of India. Relevant notifications to bring the Act into force have also
been issued along with the aforesaid Rules.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 152)
The Committee also emphasize that the Economic Intelligence
Council (EIC) which is provided with the Secretarial assistance by the
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB), should meet frequently
and the functioning of CEIB should be pro-active in coordinating with
all the intelligence agencies dealing with economic and financial crimes.
Reply of the Government
Working Group/EIC meetings are held as and when required. The
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau takes proactive action in
coordinating with various intelligence agencies as already explained in
reply to paragraph 150.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]

42
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 43)
The Committee feel that strict vigilance action against corrupt
officials not only discourages corruption, but also encourages
uprightness and gives moral courage to the honest officers. The extent
of the efficiency of the vigilance mechanism decides the relative extent
of evasion of tax. One of the major causes for corruption in tax
departments relates to connivance of the corrupt officials with the
evaders. The Committee are constrained to notice that there are many
vigilance cases that are pending as on date and advice the Government
to speed up disposal of the cases by making special efforts.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The Director General of Income Tax (Vig.) [DGIT (Vig.)] & Chief
Vigilance Officer (CVO), Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) are
already seized of the matter. Every year, the DGIT (Vig.) & CVO,
CBDT prepares an Action Plan for disposal of cases pertaining to
complaints, investigation and disciplinary proceedings etc. for all the
four Directorates of Income Tax (Vig.) and monitors their performance
on monthly basis. Wherever the shortfall, the concerned Director of
Income Tax (Vig.) is directed to put extra efforts so that the targets are
met. In the cases of long delayed Inquiry Proceedings the DGIT (Vig.)
has written D.O. letters to the Inquiry Officers (IOs) indicating the
specific date before which they should send their reports. Apart from
this, the cadre controlling Chief Commissioners of Income Tax have
been requested to impress upon the IOs working in their Charges to
complete the Inquiry Proceedings within six months of their
appointment as IOs and in case of delay on the latter’s part take
serious action against them. However, due to shortage of adequate
manpower, both at the officer level and the supporting staff and also
due to lack of proper infrastructure, it has not been possible to cope
with the increasing workload which has resulted in increase in
pendency of vigilance cases. Instructions have been issued to all the

43
four Regional Directors of income Tax (Vig.) to strictly abide by the
time stipulations laid down by the CVC vide their letter No. 000/
VGL/18 dated 23.5.2000 while dealing with vigilance matters.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
As regards Committee’s observation regarding pendency of
vigilance cases and speedy disposal of the same, special efforts are
being made to speed up disposal of vigilance cases. As a part of these
efforts. Chief Commissioners have been requested to advise all the
disciplinary authorities viz. Commissioners, Addl./Joint Commissioners
under their charge to ensure that charge memos wherever warranted
are issued expeditiously. The Inquiry Officer/Presenting Officer are
promptly appointed after taking prompt decision on written statements
of defence, matter is pursued with I.Os to conclude inquiries early
and decisions on inquiry reports are taken promptly. The Chief
Commissioners have also been requested to ensure that vigilance cases
in their jurisdictions are effectively monitored by senior officers. It is
hoped that these efforts would contribute to expeditious disposal of
the vigilance cases.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para Nos. 119, 120  & 121)
The Committee observe that the Government had, in the last year’s
budget, mentioned that collection of arrears of tax revenue would be
one of the main source of increase in tax revenue and also fixed a
target in regard thereto.
They note with concern that the extent of realization of arrears of
the personal income tax component of Direct Taxes upto February,
2005 raises doubts about the achievability of the balance targets and
that there is also considerable deficiency in regard to realisation from
the Indirect taxes too. They find this to be a serious failure as the
target fixed was to the realised out of such tax arrears that were not
contested and were not under any process of litigation. They seek
specific reasons for the same from the Government.
They further note that though the targets for the year 2005-06
have not been announced publicly, internal targets have been set. The
Committee are not in agreement with the changed policy of setting
internal targets and urge the Government to come out publicly with
the targets fixed for collecting uncontested revenue arrears.

44
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The Government had in the Budget for 2004-05 fixed a target of
Rs. 7,000 crore for recovery of arrears of direct taxes. Against this
target, the Government collected an amount of Rs. 7,083 crore.
In the Budget Estimates of direct tax collections for 2005-06, the
collections on account of arrear-recovery is already incorporated, though
no quantification of the estimated collections of arrears has been made
in the Budget document. However, the Government has set an internal
target to collect Rs. 10,342 crore from the arrears of direct taxes, which
is about 45% more than the actual collections of 2004-05. These targets
are for the entire arrear amount brought forward from last year.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
For the financial year 2004-05, targets of Rs. 750 crore and
Rs. 2250 crore were fixed for Customs and Central Excise arrears
collections respectively. The actual realisations were Rs. 843.49 crore
and Rs. 1799.38 crore for Customs and Central Excise respectively.
Overall for indirect taxes, 88% of the target was achieved. It is
mentioned that targets were fixed not only with reference to
uncontested tax arrears but also contested arrears i.e. cases where stay
applications were pending with Tribunal/Commissioners (Appeals) and
also cases where permissible appeal period was not over and parties
were likely to go in appeal.
In the Budget Estimates of indirect tax collections for 2005-06, the
collections on account of arrears recovery is already incorporated,
though no separate quantification of the estimate of arrears collection
targets has been made in the Budget document. The targets are fixed
not only with reference to uncontested tax arrears but also, inter-alia,
with reference to cases pending before appellate authorities, where
stay application are pending.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 138)
The Committee observe that the pendency position of appeals both
under the Direct taxes as well as the Indirect Taxes are serious cause
of concern. It is observed that a whopping Rs. 55,138 crores and
Rs. 19473 crores, are locked up in dispute at various levels under the

45
Direct Taxes and Indirect Taxes respectively. Of this, the locked up
revenue with the Tribunals concerning Direct and Indirect Taxes,
account for more than half of the total revenue locked up under the
Direct and Indirect Taxes. The Committee also desire to be furnished
with detailed information on the pendency position of appeals, both
under  Direct and Indirect Taxes inter alia indicating the length of
pendency of the cases and amounts involved. The Committee note
that one of the main causes for the delay in disposal of cases by the
Income Tax Tribunal gives stay beyond the mandatory 180 days
provided for in the Income Tax Act.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The total revenue locked up in cases before the ITAT as on 31st
March 2004 was Rs. 2784411 (lacs). The detail of agewise pendency of
appeals filed by the Revenue, before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
as on March 2004 is as follows:
Age of appeals Before ITAT (in No.)
Less than One year 29595
1 to 2 years 12878
2 to 3 years 9487
3 to 4 years 6874
4 to 5 years 11394
Above 5 years 1586
Total 71814
Central Board of Excise and Customs
As regards detailed information on the pendency position of
Appeals in respect of Indirect Taxes, a detailed analysis of the cases
pending at various appellate fora and the amount involved therein as
on 31.12.2004 and as on 31.3.2005 is enclosed (Annexure-I). The study
of the comparative statements highlights the following points:
(1) In respect of Supreme Court cases, there is a marginal
increase in number of cases and the amount involved has
also decreased by 3.01% as compared to the position on
31.12.2004.

46
(2) In respect of High Court cases, there is an increase in
number of cases by 2.7% but a marginal decrease in amount
involved compared with the figures of 31.12.2004.
(3) The number of cases in the CEASTAT has increased by
2.77% as on 31.3.2003 as compared with the position on
31.12.2004. There is a decrease in the amount involved by
2.48%.
(4) The earlier trend of decrease in the number of cases pending
with the Commissioners (Appeals) is continuing. In fact,
pendency from 10739 cases as on 31.12.2004 has come down
to 9140 cases as on 31.3.2005. Similarly, the revenue involved
in such cases has also reduced from Rs. 1421 crores to
Rs. 1197 crores. Thus there is a decrease in number of cases
by 14.88% and the amount involved by 15.76%.
(5) A study of the number of appeals (on percentage basis)
filed by the Department and by the parties in the various
appellate fora, as on 31.3.2005, indicates the following trend.
Sl.No. Appellate Forum Total No. of Cases Percentage of Percentage of
as on 31.3.2005 Cases Filed Appeals Filed
by the by the Parties
Department
1. Supreme Court 2038 65 35
2. High Court 8793 31 69
3. CESTAT 23396 43 57
4. Commissioner (A) 9140 19 81
From the above, it may be concluded that the percentage of
appeals filed by the parties before High Courts, CESTAT
and Commissioner (Appeals) is very high in comparison to
the appeals filed by the Department before these fora. The
high percentages of parties’ appeals indicate that the Orders-
in Original were in favour of the Department or the
Department has won these cases in the concerned lower
appellate fora. However, the percentage of departmental
appeals in the Supreme Court continues to be on higher
side.
(6) The number of appeals filed by the Department before the
Supreme Court during the quarter ending March, 2005 has

47
come down when compared with the appeals filed by the
parties during the same period (Annexure-II).
As regards the length of pendency of cases, information is not
available and is being collected from the field formations.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 139)
Further, the Government have stated that since the Tribunals
function under the Ministry of Law, the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue are not in a position to justify the pendency
of such huge number cases in the Tribunals. While appreciating the
effort of the Chief Commissioners of Income Tax to call on the
Members/President of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, in effort to
resolve high demand appeals on priority basis, the Committee urged
the Government to also pursue the matter with the Ministry of Law
and find a solution to the problem within a time-frame. They take
note of the particular efforts taken by the Income Tax Department in
minimising the number of appeals, like requesting the Supreme Courts
and High Court to adjudicate tax disputes on priority basis, fixing
monitoring limits as regards filing of appeals before the Tribunal/
High Court/Supreme Court, filing appeals only on issues involving
“substantial question of law” etc. which are in the right direction that
the Committee feel that the Central Board of Excise and Customs may
try to follow.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The Member (Audit & Judicial), Central Board of Direct Taxes, has
vide letter to even no dated 12/5/2005 (copy enclosed) addressed to
the Law Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice, apprised him of the
deep concern expressed by the Committee while requesting for suitable
intervention in the matter to expedite the disposal of pendency with
the ITAT in time bound manner. The copy of the same has also been
endorsed to the president ITAT for doing the needful.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
The following measures have been taken to reduce pendency of
cases in Courts:
(i) A mechanism of Secretary-level/Minister-level meetings with
Ministry of Law is now in place with a view to increase

48
the efficiency and efficacy in the conduct of Departmental
litigation. The first Secretary-level meeting was held on
6.12.2004. Subsequently, the Finance Minister, in the meetings
held reviewed the progress of the Secretary-level meeting
with the Solicitor General of India, Law Secretary and other
officials concerned in Ministry of Law on 1.4.2005 and
16.5.2005.
(ii) The Finance Ministry had advised the concerned Chief
Commissioners of Customs and Central Excise to coordinate
with the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax and jointly
seek an appointment with the Chief Justice of the High
Court in their respective zones and to hand over to the
Chief Justice a letter from F.M. along with a list of high
value and important cases pending in the High Court.
Progress of the cases is being monitored.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 140)
The Committee further desire that a study may be conducted by
the Government regarding the large number of cases pending at various
stages of appeal, with specific focus on the reasons for the huge
pendency with the Tribunals and suitable remedial measures to be
taken to reduce them drastically. Inordinate delay in disposal of cases
may indirectly encourage the assessees to go in for appeal even on a
case no hope. The Committee want the Government to take all these
steps in a time bound manner and be intimated about the actions
taken in this regard by the Government.
Reply of the Government
Central Board of Direct Taxes
The number of cases pending at various stages with the appellate
authorities as on 31st March 2004 is as follows:
Authority No. of Cases
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal* 71,814
High Court 29,334
Supreme Court 4,443
(*of Deptt. only)

49
It can thus be appreciated that substantial number of appeals is
pending with Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. The functioning of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is under Ministry of Law and hence no
further comments/study can be tendered/conducted on the functioning
and resultant pendency of the cases resting as on date with the ITAT.
Central Board of Excise and Customs
A Committee has been constituted to conduct the study regarding
pendency of cases at various stages of appeals, with specific focus on
reasons for huge pendency before various Benches of CESTAT, and to
suggest measures for reducing the pendency.
F.No. H-11013/6/2005-Parl. [Rev.]

50
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERV ATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
21 December, 2005 Chairman,
30 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

51
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 19 December, 2005 from 1500 to
1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas  D. Patil
8. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Yashwant Sinha
12. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3.  Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

52
3. The Committee, then considered the draft reports on (i) Action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Sixteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06)
of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure and Disinvestment), (ii) Action taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Planning
and (iii) Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
4. The Committee adopted the draft action taken reports mentioned
above without any modification/amendment.
5. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft action
taken report on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth
Report on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) with the modifications/amendments shown
in Annexure.
6. ** ** **
7. While deliberating on the draft action taken reports, the
Committee also decided that separate notes may be called for from
the Ministries/Departments concerned on the following issues:
(i) ** ** **
(ii) Action Plan for recovering the tax arrears in entirety—
contested as well as uncontested.
(iii) ** ** **
(iv) ** ** **
(v) ** ** **
8. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports
and to make verbal and other consequential changes and present the
same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

53
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT  ACTION TAKEN
REPORT ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF
THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) AT
THEIR SITTING HELD ON 19 DECEMBER, 2005]
Page Para Line Amendment/Modification
11 18 10 After:
…targets for recovery of tax arrears in the
budget document in the coming years.
Add:
The Committee also recommend that the
Government formulate a concrete action
plan for recovering the tax arrears in
entirety by devising separate means for
recovery of contested and uncontested
arrears. The concrete action plan may be
submitted to the Committee within six
months of tabling of this Report.

54
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-06) OF THE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Total % of
Total
(i) Total Number of Recommendations 9
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 4 44.44%
have beenaccepted by the Government:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 3,
5 & 6)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 2 22.22%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2 & 9)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 3 33.33%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 4, 7 & 8)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect Nil
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
(Nil)