REPORT
I. BACKGROUND
The process of money laundering involves cleansing of money
earned through illegal activities like extortion, drug trafficking and gun
running etc. The tainted money is projected as clean money through
intricate processes of placement, layering and laundering. The serious
threat posed by money laundering to the financial systems and
sovereignty was being progressively realized by various countries of
the world. As a consequence of this realization, the international
community took the following initiatives to curb the menace of money-
laundering:—
(i) The 1998 United Nations Convention against illicit traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Vienna
Convention of 1998), provided a comprehensive legal
definition of money laundering. This definition has formed
the basis of subsequent legislations on anti-money launder-
ing Laws of various countries;
(ii) The Basle statement of principles, enunciated in 1989,
outlined basic policies and procedures that banks should
follow in order to assist the law enforcement agencies in
tackling the problem of money laundering; and
(iii) The Financial Action Task Force on money laundering
(FATF), 1989 made 40 recommendations, which provide the
foundation for comprehensive legislation to combat the
problem of money laundering. The recommendations were
classified under various heads. Some of the important heads
are:—
(a) Declaration of laundering of moneys earned through
serious crimes should be treated a criminal offence;

2
(b) To work out modalities of disclosure by financial
institutions regarding suspicious transactions;
(c) Confiscation of the proceeds of crime;
(d) Declaring money laundering to be an extraditable
offence; and
(e) Promoting international co-operation in investigation of
money laundering.
(iv) Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action
adopted by UN General Assembly by its Resolution
No. S 17/2 of 23rd February, 1990 inter-alia resolved the
mechanism to prevent using of financial institutions from
being used for laundering of drug related money and
enactment of legislation to prevent such laundering.
2. The Ministry of Finance had appointed an inter-ministerial
Committee to look into all aspects of money laundering and to suggest
suitable legislation, if necessary. The Committee in their report
submitted to the Ministry in July, 1997, pointed out inter-alia that
money laundering was posing serious threat to the financial
systems of our country. The Committee suggested enactment of a
comprehensive legislation to deal with this problem.
3. Addressing the need for the enactment of a focused
legislation for preventing money laundering and connected activities,
confiscation of proceeds of crime, setting up of agencies and mechanism
for co-ordinating measures for combating money laundering etc., the
Prevention of Money-laundering Bill, 1998 was introduced in Lok
Sabha on the 4th August, 1998. The Hon’ble Speaker referred the Bill
to the Standing Committee on Finance, which presented its Report on
the 4th March 1999 to Lok Sabha. After incorporating the recommen-
dations of the Standing Committee, the Government introduced the
Prevention of Money Laundering Bill, 1999 in Parliament on October 29,
1999.  The Bill was enacted on 17 January, 2003.

3
(a) The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA)
4.   The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) was
brought into force in 2005 to prevent money-laundering and to provide
for confiscation of property derived from, or involved in, money-
laundering and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The Act also addressed the international obligations under the Political
Declaration and  Global Programme of Action adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations to prevent money-laundering.
5. The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA 2002)
forms the core of the legal framework put in place by India to combat
money laundering. PMLA 2002 and the Rules notified there under came
into force with effect from July 1, 2005. Director, Financial Intelligence
Unit (FIU-IND) and Director (Enforcement) have been conferred with
exclusive and concurrent powers under relevant sections of the Act to
implement the provisions of the Act.
6. The PMLA 2002 and rules notified thereunder impose
obligation on banking companies, financial institutions and inter-
mediaries to verify identity of clients, maintain records and furnish
information to FIU-IND. PMLA 2002 defines money laundering offence
and provides for the freezing, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds
of crime.
(b) The Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill,
2008
7.  To further strengthen India’s Anti Money Laundering/
Countering Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) legal framework,
various agencies including Ministries and Departments of the Central
Government and the State Governments have reportedly forwarded
proposals to the Ministry of Finance to amend the PMLA.  These are
sought to be implemented through the Prevention of Money
Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008.  The Bill was introduced in Rajya
Sabha on 17 October, 2008 and was referred to the Standing Committee
on Finance on 31 October, 2008 for examination and report thereon.

4
8. The Prevention of Money-laundering  (Amendment) Bill,
2008 seeks to bring certain financial institutions like Full Fledged
Money Changers, Money Transfer Service Providers such as Western
Union and International Payment Gateways including VISA and
Master Card within the reporting regime of the Act. The Bill
incorporates provisions to combat financing of terrorism and it
introduces a new category of offences, which have cross-border
implications. The Bill seeks to amend the Act, to provide, inter alia ,
to:
(a) include  institutions  like  Full  Fledged  Money  Changers
and  Money Transfer Service Providers and to bring the
business activities such as casinos under the reporting
regime of the Act;
(b) make provisions for the ‘offences with cross border
implications’ and to add new Part C in the Schedule to the
Act for such offences;
(c) ensure that the investigating agency can attach any property
and search a person only after completing investigation and
also to enhance the period of provisional attachment of
property from 90 days to 150 days;
(d) empower the Enforcement Directorate to search the premises
immediately after the offence is committed and the police
has filed a report under section 157 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973;
(e) increase  the  age  of  retirement  of  Chairperson  and
Members  of  the Adjudicating Authority from 62 years to
65 years;
(f) provide mandatory consultation with the Chief Justice of
India before removal of the Chairperson or a Member of the
Appellate Tribunal;

5
(g) enable the Central Government to return the confiscated
property to the requesting country in order to implement
the provisions of the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption; and
(h) expand the scope of the Act by adding certain offences in
Part A and Part B of the Schedule to the Act.
9. With a view to seeking clarification on the proposals of the
Bill, the Committee have, apart from taking evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue),
Reserve Bank of India, Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
and the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), sought the written views of
the Chambers of Commerce in the form of memoranda.  The Committee
also heard the views of the representatives of Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI), Institute of Company Secretaries of India
(ICSI) and the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and
Industry (FICCI).
10. The Committee believe that it has become imperative to
strengthen the country’s legal framework for preventing money
laundering and counter financing of terrorism.  Enacting the
Prevention of Money Laundering  (Amendment) Bill, 2008 is a step
in this direction.  In the course of their deliberations on the specific
proposals of the Bill, the Committee felt that apart from modifying
some of the provisions, certain additional measures and concerted
efforts are required to achieve the intended objectives.  The
Committee are of the view that international norms/guidelines like
those of OECD group of nations should also be taken into account
apart from plugging other avenues generating illegal funds like
hawala etc. for effective enforcement of anti-money laundering law.
Some of the provisions and the observations and recommendations
of the Committee are dealt with in the subsequent sections of this
report.

6
II. CLAUSES 2(1) (da) AND 2 (1) (rb) — DEFINITIONS
OF AUTHORISED PERSON AND PAYMENT
SYSTEM OPERATOR
11. The Clauses 2 (1) (da) and 2 (1) (rb), which seek to
incorporate the definitions of ‘Authorised person’ and ‘payment system
operator’ for bringing Full Fledged Money Changers (FFMC), Money
Transfer Service Providers (MTSP such as Western Union Money
Transfer) and international payment gateways (such as Visa and Master
Card) within the Act’s reporting regime read as under:—
Clause 2 (1) (da) — Authorised Person
In section 2 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002,
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),.
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
(da) ”authorised person” means an authorised person as
defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999, and includes  a  person  who  has  been
authorised  or  given  general  or  special  permission by the
Reserve Bank of India and overseas principals with whom the
person so authorised or having general or special permission
conducts a service involving international money transfer;
Clause 2(1) (rb) — ‘Payment System Operator’
Payment System Operator means any person, who operates,
maintains, facilitates or sustains a payment system involving
the use of credit card or any other similar card or system,
which enables payment to be effected between a payer and a
beneficiary.
6

7
12. By way of giving the rationale for proposing to incorporate
the definition of ‘Authorised Person’ and ‘Payment System Operator’
in the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) in their Background Note, submitted, inter-
alia as follows:
“The firms and companies that undertake money changing
business under sub section (1) of section 10 of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act (FEMA) and carry on inward money
transfer services under the Money Transfer Services Scheme
(MTSS) in terms of section 3 of FEMA are authorized by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) which gives specific permission to
these firms and companies.  However, the sector of International
Payment Gateways at present is unregulated in terms of anti
money laundering measures. It is now proposed to bring Full-
Fledged Money Changers (FFMCs), Money Transfer Service
Providers (MTSP such as Western Union Money Transfer) and
International Payment Gateways (such as Visa and Master Card)
within the Act’s reporting regime by inserting new definitions of
“authorised person” and “payment system operator” and
amending the definition of “Financial Institution.”
13. The RBI, in their written memorandum on incorporation of
the definition of ‘Authorised person’, as proposed, stated as follows:—
“The insertion of the phrase ‘authorised persons’ as defined in
clause (c) of section 2 of FEMA, 1999 at sub-section 2(da) of the
proposed PMLA Bill, 2008 would facilitate covering Full Fledged
Money Changers under the purview of Section 12 of PMLA, 2002.
As regards Money Transfer Service Providers, these may be
brought under the purview of PMLA by also including a person
authorized under Section 4 of Payment and Settlement Act, 2007
for undertaking such business. Accordingly, the proposed
amendment may be recast as ‘authorised person’ means an
authorised person as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 and includes a person who has

8
been authorized or given general or special permission by the
Reserve Bank of India under Section 4 of the Payment and
Settlement System Act, 2007 to operate a payment system, as
defined under Section 2(1)(i) of the Act ibid, with whom the
person so authorized or having general or special permission
conducts a service involving international money transfer.”
14. Similarly, on the proposed incorporation of the definition
of ‘Payment System Operator’, the RBI, in their Memorandum
submitted inter-alia as follows:
“it would be more appropriate if the ‘payment system operator’
proposed in the Bill  is defined as per definition of ‘system
provider’ as defined  in sub-section 2 (1)  (q) read with sub-section
2 (1) (i) of Payment and Settlement Act, 2007.  This would also
help including Money Transfer Service Providers under the
purview of PMLA”.
15.  Section 4 of the Payment and Settlement System Act, 2007
relating to issue of authorization by the Reserve Bank for commencing
or operating a payment system provides as under:
(1) No person, other than the Reserve Bank, shall commence or
operate a payment system except under and in accordance
with an authorisation issued by the Reserve Bank under the
provisions of this Act:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply
to:—
(a) the continued operation of an existing payment system
on commencement of this Act for a period not
exceeding six months from such commencement, unless
within such period, the operator of such payment
system obtains an authorisation under this Act or the
application for authorisation made under Section 7 of
this Act is refused by the Reserve Bank;

9
(b) any person acting as the duly appointed agent of
another person to whom the payment is due;
(c) a company accepting payments either from its holding
company or any of its subsidiary companies or from
any other company which is also a subsidiary of the
same holding company;
(d) any other person whom the Reserve Bank may, after
considering the interests of monetary policy or efficient
operation of payment systems, the size of any payment
system or for any other reason, by notification, exempt
from the provisions of this section.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, under sub-section (1) of this section,
authorise a company or corporation to operate or regulate
the existing clearing houses or new clearing houses of banks
in order to have a common retail clearing house system for
the banks throughout the country:
Provided, however, that not less than fifty-one per cent of
the equity of such company or corporation shall be held by
public sector banks.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, “public sector
banks” shall include a ‘’corresponding new bank”,
‘’State Bank of India’’ and ‘’subsidiary bank’’ as defined in
Section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
16. The definitions of Payment System and System provider
as per the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 read as
under:—
Sec. 2(i) “payment system” means a system that enables payment
to be effected between a payer and a beneficiary, involving
clearing, payment or settlement service or all of them, but does
not include a stock exchange;

10
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, “payment system”
includes the systems enabling credit card operations, debit card
operations, smart card operations, money transfer operations or
similar operations;
(q) “system provider” means a person who operates an authorised
payment system.
17.  In this regard, when specifically enquired by the
Committee about the aforesaid suggestion made by RBI, the Secretary,
Department of Revenue in his deposition before the Committee
informed as under:
“…Definition of ‘authorised persons’ is proposed to be adopted
from section 2 ( c) of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
with a view to bringing all entities, including FFMCs, authorised
by the Reserve Bank under the Act.  Further, definition of
‘payment system provider’ is proposed to be adopted from the
Payment and Settlement System Act, 2007.  With adoption of these
definitions and their inclusion in ‘financial institutions’ as
proposed in clause 2(iii) of the proposed Bill, all institutions
authorised by the RBI under FEMA and Payment and Settlement
System Act will be brought within the ambit of reporting entities
under Section 12 of the PMLA.  This is expected to strengthen
our hands in the matter of financing of unlawful activities,
including terrorism.”
18. While incorporation of the definitions of ‘authorized
person’ and ‘payment system operator’ as proposed in Clause 2 (1)
(da) and Clause 2 (1) (rb) is intended to facilitate covering money
transfer service providers, full-fledged money changers, and
international payment gateways etc. under the purview of the
PMLA, the RBI has suggested aligning the definitions, as proposed,
with the provisions and definitions of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Act, 2007.  The Committee note in this regard that the
provisions of the Section 4 of the Payment and Settlement Systems

11
Act, 2007 provide for authorization of operation of payment system
by the RBI, and the definition of payment system as contained in
the Act ibid specifically covers inter-alia money transfer operations
or similar operations.  With a view to leaving no scope for
ambiguity in the provisions proposed in the Bill for bringing money
transfer operators etc. under the purview of the PMLA, the
Committee recommend that as suggested by RBI and as indicated
by the Revenue Secretary in his deposition, the definitions of the
terms, ‘authorized person’, and ‘payment system operator’ may be
made more comprehensive and in consonance with the provisions
of the Payment and Settlement System Act, 2007.

12
III. CLAUSE 2(ja)—DESIGNATED BUSINESS OR PROFESSION
19. Clause 2 (ja) proposed to be added in Sub-section (1) of
Section 2 so as to inter-alia cover ‘casinos’ reads as under:—
(ja) .....’designated business or profession’..... means carrying on
activities for playing games of chance for cash or kind, and
includes such activities associated with casino or such other
activities as the Central Government may, by notification, so
designate, from time to time.
20. In this regard, SEBI, in their written memorandum,
inter-alia submitted as under :—
“It may be considered whether apart from casinos, other
Designated Non Financial Businesses and Professions (DNFBP)
as defined in the ‘Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Methodology
for Assessing Compliance with FATF 40 Recommendations and
FATF 9 Special Recommendations’ may be brought under the
compliance and reporting regime of the Act. As per FATF
methodology, Designated non-financial businesses and professions
mean Casinos (which also includes internet casinos), Real Estate
Agents, Dealers in Precious Metals, Dealers in Precious Stones,
Lawyers, Notaries, Other Independent Legal Professionals and
Accountants, Trust and Company Service Providers and are
required to take certain action as provided in recommendation
12 and 16 of the FATF recommendations.”
21. However, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
in their Background Note stated as under:—
“Worldwide, certain Designated Non Financial Businesses and
Professions (DNFBPs) such as lawyers, chartered accountants,
gold or gems dealers, property dealers, casinos etc., also fall within
12

13
the reporting regime of the Anti Money Laundering laws.  In the
Indian context, it is not feasible to include all these entities in
PMLA’s reporting regime just now.  However, there are some
active ‘Casinos’ in India.  It is proposed to bring casinos within
the ambit of PMLA’s reporting obligations by inserting a generic
definition of the term in the Act, there being no existing definition
of ‘casino’ in any statute.”
22.  While it has been proposed to bring casinos within the
ambit of PMLA by incorporating a generic definition of the term,
in Clause 2 (ja), as pointed out by SEBI, other Designated Non-
Financial Businesses and Professions such as gold or gems dealers
etc.  would continue to remain outside the purview of the Money
Laundering Act.  The Committee understand that many countries
that are signatories to the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have
included such designated businesses and professions under the
ambit of money laundering legislations.  In the Indian context,
however, the Ministry of Finance have felt that presently it was
not feasible to expand the ambit of the PMLA to cover such
designated entities and professions.  With a view to making the
compliance and reporting regime under the law more broad-based
and comprehensive, the Committee, nevertheless, recommend that
the Government consider expanding the ambit of the law by
covering such designated entities and activities causing suspicion.

14
IV. CLAUSE 2 (ra) — OFFENCES OF CROSS
BORDER IMPLICATIONS
23. At present, PMLA does not provide for considering predicate
offences committed outside India as scheduled offences to be tried in
India. Further, it is possible that proceeds of crime are remitted to India
or are transferred or an attempt is made to transfer them out of India.
To cover these situations and in order to include conduct that occurred
in another country, which constitutes an offence in that country and
is an offence in India, as a scheduled offence under PMLA, a new
definition of “offence of cross-border implications” is proposed to be
inserted as clause (ra) in sub-section (1) of section 2 of the PML Act,
which reads as under:—
Clause (ra) – “offence of cross border implications” means.—
(i) any  conduct  by  a  person  at  a  place  outside  India
which constitutes an offence at that place and which would
have constituted an offence specified in Part A, Part B or
Part C of the Schedule, had it been committed in India and
if such person remits the proceeds of such conduct or part
thereof to India; or
(ii) any offence specified in Part A, Part B or Part C of the
Schedule which has been committed in India and the
proceeds of crime, or part thereof have been transferred to
a place outside India or any attempt has been made to
transfer the proceeds of crime, or part thereof from India
to a place outside India.
24. It has been further proposed that vide Clause 11 of the Bill,
in Section 60 of the principal Act, after sub-Section (6), the following
sub-Section shall be inserted, namely:—
“When any property in India is confiscated as a result of execution
of a request from a contracting State in accordance with the
14

15
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may either return
such property to the requesting State or compensate that State
by disposal of such property on mutually agreed terms that would
take into account deduction for reasonable expenses incurred in
investigation, prosecution or judicial proceedings leading to the
return or disposal of confiscated property.”
25. The Secretary, Department of Revenue in his deposition
further elaborated on the offences listed in the PMLA, 2002 as below:—
“Whoever indulges or attempts or assists in any process or
activity connected with the “proceeds of crime” and projecting
it as untainted property shall be guilty under the Section.
“Proceeds of crime” is defined as property derived by any person
as a result of criminal activity relating to a “scheduled offence.”
Thus, proceeds from all criminal activities do not constitute
money laundering; only those included in the Schedule will apply.
These offences are also called predicate offences. The Schedule
to the Prevention of Money Laundering Act has two parts, namely,
Part A and Part B. Part A includes offences under Section 121
and 121A of the Indian Penal Code of waging war against the
Government of India as well as certain offences under the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. Part B, on
the other hand, includes a number of offences under the Indian
Penal Code, Arms Act and certain offences under the Wild Life
(Protection) Act. “Scheduled offence” has been further defined as
all offences specified under Part A or those offences specified
under Part B, where the total value involved is Rs. 30 lakh or
more. It can thus be seen that the structure of the Act criminalizes
money laundering, only if the value involved in the offence is
more than Rs. 30 lakh except in respect of offences of waging
war and drug trafficking. This threshold limit of Rs. 30 lakh has
been fixed in order that the provisions of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, a stringent Act, are not misused by the field level
implementing agencies.

16
Another important feature of the Act is the obligation
under Section 12 of the Act of banking companies, financial
institutions and intermediaries to maintain certain records of
transactions, furnishing information on transactions and to verify
and maintain records of identity of its clients. The authority to
which such records are to be sent is the Director, Financial
Intelligence Unit – India (FIU-IND) whose responsibility it is to
analyze such information and disseminate it to the concerned
authorities such as Central Board of Excise and Customs, Central
Board of Direct Taxes, Enforcement Directorate, Intelligence
Bureau etc.
The Act also provides for attachment, adjudication and
confiscation of proceeds of crime. It also gives powers of
summons, search and seizure to officers concerned. An
Adjudicating Authority is set up for deciding on confiscation of
property, an Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals. The case under
the Prevention of Money Laundering Act as well as the basic
predicate offence, has to be prosecuted in Special Courts.
One of the important weaknesses in the Act is the threshold
limit of Rs. 30 lakh which applies uniformly to most of the
predicate offences i.e. offences included in the Schedule. In the
context of preventing money laundering and combating terrorism,
questions have been repeatedly asked by international agencies
as well as other member countries of such organisations as to how
effective our response can be, if money laundering cases less than
the threshold limit are not even criminalized. It is felt that
international cooperation will be greatly strengthened if the
threshold limit is relaxed for those cases which have cross-border
implications and for offences against property under Chapter-
XVII of the Indian Penal Code with specific reference to theft,
extortion, robbery, dacoity, criminal misappropriation etc. One of
the important components of the proposed amendment is in this
direction. A Part-C has been added to the Schedule, wherein
offences under Part-A or Part-B without any monetary threshold

17
or offences against property under Chapter-XVII of the Indian
Penal Code are all included, if it is an offence of cross-border
implication. “Offence of cross-border implication” is also defined.
Through this amendment, it is proposed to remove the weakness
of not being able to bring cases less than the threshold limit also
under the ambit of the Money Laundering law. At the same time,
for offences which do not have cross-border implications, the
threshold limit of Rs. 30 lakh will remain.
As already indicated, Part-A of the Schedule which has no
threshold limit included only waging of war and drug offences.
It is now proposed to amend the Act so that Part-A will include
offences relating to counterfeit currency, opium, poppy, cannabis,
controlled drugs, important offences under the Explosive
Substance Act and all the major offences under Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act.
The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is particularly
relevant because it includes offences of terrorist act, raising fund
for terrorist act, conspiracy for terrorism, harbouring of terrorists,
being a member of a terrorist gang or organisation, holding
proceeds of terrorism, support given to terrorist organisations, etc.
Even in part B, which has a threshold limit of Rs.30 lakh, several
new offences have been added.  These include a number of
offences under the IPC, additional offences under the Wild Life
(Protection) Act and Prevention of Corruption Act, new offences
under the Explosives Act, SEBI Act, Customs Act, Transplantation
of Human Organs Act, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, Emigration Act, Passports Act, Foreigners’ Act,
Copyright Act, Trade Marks Act, Information Technology Act, etc.
These will substantially strengthen our legislation criminalising
money laundering, whenever such offences are involved.”
26. Although the Bill envisages covering offences having
cross-border implications under the PMLA, the Committee are
constrained to observe that it is extremely difficult to track the

18
transfer of funds and financing of terrorist activity in the absence
of bilateral agreements.   The Committee, therefore, desire that
MOUs for mutual co-operation in this regard should be concluded
with other countries.  This will ensure that the provisions contained
in the Bill, which are of far reaching nature, do not become
infructuous in pursuing cross border offences including terrorism
and money-trail arising therefrom.  In this connection, the
Committee desire that the proposed amendment in Section 11 of
the Bill providing for return of confiscated property located within
the country to the requesting/contracting State should not remain
merely one- sided and reciprocal arrangements ought to be enabled.
27. The Committee would also like to emphasise that keeping
in view the recent surge in cross border terrorism, it is necessary
that the enforcement agencies galvanize their machinery so as to
keep themselves abreast of the emerging trends of money
laundering and terror funding.  In view of the enormity of the
problem, it is imperative that appropriate computer programme/
anti-money laundering software, specially with regard to suspicious
transactions, should be developed and constantly updated for this
purpose.  The reporting instrument developed to monitor
transactions, namely, Know Your Customer (KYC) also needs to
be strengthened by way of fresh guidelines by the regulator.  There
should be a provision by way of test-check and quarterly audit to
verify the KYC information furnished by clients. The requisite
information should be available online with restricted access to all
the user agencies and, any gross violation of KYC guidelines
including those relating to old accounts should be made punishable.

19
V. OTHER SCHEDULED OFFENCES
(i) SEBI’s suggestion  regarding Investor Protection
28. The Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill,
2008 also seeks to extend the scope by adding certain predicate offences
in Part-B of the Schedule which, inter-alia, includes “Prohibition of
manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading and substantial
acquisition of securities or control.
29. In this regard, SEBI, in their written memorandum,
submitted as follows:—
“One consequence of such inclusion of predicate offences in the
Schedule is that proceeds in respect of Fraudulent and Unfair
Trade Practices (FUTP), Insider Trading and Takeover violations
will now be subject to attachment by Director under Section 5
of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) and can be
confiscated by Central Government under Section 8 and
confiscated proceeds will vest absolutely in Central Government
under section 9, if same is treated as proceeds of crime or charged
having committed scheduled offences.
In this context, it may be mentioned that SEBI has ordered refunds
in cases such as manipulation in primary issues. Similarly, in the
case of IPO irregularities, SEBI has directed reallocation of shares
to the retail investors. However, with the inclusion of above
provisions in PML Act as predicate offences, such proceeds will
be liable to be attached under PMLA and investors in such case
will not be entitled to refund or reallocation. Hence it is suggested
that there should be a specific provision in PMLA to enable refund
19

20
of proceeds attached under PMLA in respect of above offence
(which is proposed to be included as a predicate offence) to the
investors and that such proceeds are not liable to be confiscated.”
(ii) IBA’s suggestion regarding Counterfeit Notes
30. In connection with possession of counterfeit currency
(shifted from Part-B to Part-A in the schedule in the Bill) Indian
Banks’ Association (IBA) have suggested in their memorandum as
follows:—
“In the ordinary course of business inspite of exercising
caution, even if a single piece of counterfeit currency note escapes
scrutiny and finds place in the cash balance at any branch of a
bank, the enforcement agency could charge the branch with the
offence under Part ‘A’ of the Schedule to the Act.  We appreciate
the need for shifting the Section 489-A and 489-B of IPC from
Part ‘B’ to Part ‘A’ of the Schedule to meet the international
obligations to curb the financing of terrorism.  But, we apprehend
that this may cause unintended inconvenience to the genuine
customers and Banks who may unknowingly receive one or two
pieces of counterfeit notes.  In our opinion, it would be more
appropriate, if some threshold limit say Rs. 100,000/-  (Rs. one
lac) is fixed in respect of the offences under section 489-A and
489-B of the IPC.  However, since the issue has also larger
implications for the banking industry, the matter may need to be
debated thoroughly.”
31.  The Committee find substantial credence in the contention
made by SEBI that addition of paragraph 8 to Part B of the Schedule
to PMLA to include “Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive
devices, insider trading and substantial acquisition of securities or
control” leaves the possibility of depriving the investors of refunds
or reallocation of shares that may be ordered by SEBI in cases

21
involving manipulations of primary issues, etc. The Committee are,
therefore, of the opinion that as suggested by SEBI, it may be
necessary to incorporate a specific provision in the PMLA to make
the proceeds from such offences not liable to confiscation, and to
enable refund of such proceeds.
32. Keeping in view the suggestion of Indian Banks’
Association (IBA) for providing a threshold with regard to
possession of counterfeit currency in bank dealing, the Committee
would suggest that an appropriate threshold may be fixed in this
regard so that genuine dealings are duly protected.

22
VI. CLAUSES 6 AND 7 — AMENDMENT OF SECTION 17 AND
SECTION 18 — POWERS OF SEARCH AND SEIZURE
33. Clause 6, proposing to amend section 17 of the principal Act,
reads as follows:
In sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Provided that no search shall be conducted unless, in relation
to the scheduled offence, a report has been forwarded to a
Magistrate under section 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, or a complaint has been filed by a person authorised to
investigate the offence mentioned in the Schedule before a
Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence,
as the case may be,”
34.  Clause 7, proposing to amend Section 18 of the principal Act
reads as follows:
In section 18 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:
“Provided that no search of any person shall be made unless, in
relation to the scheduled offence, a report has been forwarded
to a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has been filed by a person
authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in the Schedule,
before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the
scheduled offence, as the case may be.”;
(ii) in sub-section (9), the proviso shall be omitted.
22

23
35. While elaborating the rationale of the above proposal, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), in their background note
have submitted as below:—
“The existing proviso (i) of sub-section (1) of section 5 and
proviso (a) of sub-section (9) of section 18 of PML Act provide
that a report under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
is to be forwarded to a Magistrate before action is taken by the
investigating agency under PML Act.  Similarly, proviso (ii) of
sub-section (1) of section 5 and proviso (b) to sub-section (9) of
section 18 provide for “a police report” or “a complaint” being
filed for taking cognizance of an offence by the Special Court
constituted under sub-section (1) of section 36 of the Narcotic
Drugs Psychotropic Substance Act,(NDPS) 1985, before initiating
attachment proceedings under sub-section (1) of section 5 and
search proceedings against any person under sub-section (9) of
section 18.
In respect of scheduled offences that the police authorities
are authorized to investigate, the Magistrate or court will take
cognizance of the offence on receipt of a police report under
section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. However, in
respect of scheduled offences that non-police agencies investigate,
there is a clear provision in some of the Acts, such as NDPS Act,
Wild Life (Protection) Act, Antiquities and Art Treasure Act and
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, that Courts will take
cognizance upon receipt of complaint from authorized persons.
Hence, the provisos to sub-section (1) of section 5 and sub-
section(9) of section 18 of PML Act are proposed to be substituted
by a new  formulation to enable the investigating agency under
this Act to take up the matter at the stage of filing of report by
police authorities under section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in those offences where police authorities are
investigating agencies and at the stage of filing of complaint
before the Magistrate or court by authorized persons in respect
of those offences in which non-police authorities are the

24
investigating agencies. This will also take care of the anomaly in
the existing law that attachments and searches of persons cannot
be carried out under PML Act in cases where the predicate offence
is under the Wildlife Protection Act wherein only non police
agencies carry out investigations and no report under section 173
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is filed by them.”
36. The Committee note that an amendment has been
proposed in Sections 17 and 18 of PMLA 2002 to enable the
investigating agency to take up the matter at the stage of filing
of report by police authorities or filing of complaint before the
magistrate or court by authorized persons in respect of offences
in which non police authorities are the investigating agencies.  The
Committee desire that this provision coupled with the existing
powers of confiscation and attachment of property should not lead
to any kind of overbearing conduct by officials. The Committee,
therefore, expect that adequate safeguard measures will be put in
place to ensure that the powers vested in the enforcement
authorities are used judiciously and do not result in any undue
harassment of individuals.

25
VII. CLAUSE 9 — REMOVAL OF CHAIRPERSON AND
MEMBER OF APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
37. Clause 32 of the Principal Act which deals with the
resignation and removal of the Chairperson and Members of Appellate
Tribunal reads as under:—
“Resignation and removal—  (1) The Chairperson or any other
Member may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to
the Central Government, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or any other Member shall,
unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish
his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of
three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office
or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the
earliest.
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed
from his office except by an order made by the Central
Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or
incapacity, after an inquiry made by a person appointed by the
President in which such Chairperson or any other Member
concerned had been informed of the charges against him and
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those
charges.”
38. The proposed Bill intends to add the following proviso to
Sub-section 2 of Section 32 of the Principal Act:—
“Provided that the Chief Justice of India shall be consulted before
removal of the Chairperson or a Member who was appointed on
the recommendation of the Chief Justice of India.”
25

26
39. The Ministry of Finance, in their Background Note on the
Bill giving their rationale for making amendments to the section 32
of the Principal Act states as under:—
“Since the appointment of Chairperson and Member of the
Appellate Tribunal is to be made on the recommendation of the
Chief Justice of India, it logically follows that his removal should
only be undertaken in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
In view of this, it is proposed to insert a proviso in sub-section
(2) of section 32 to provide for consultation with Chief Justice
of India before removal of the Chairperson or Member of the
Appellate Tribunal who was appointed in consultation with the
Chief Justice of India.”
40. Clause 28 of the Principal Act prescribing qualifications for
appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal do
not require consultation with Chief Justice of India before appointing
them unless the person considered to be appointed is a sitting Judge
of High Court or Supreme Court.  Clause 28 of Principal Act is given
below:—
“Qualifications for appointment .— (1) A person shall not be
qualified for appointment as Chairperson unless he is or has been
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court or is qualified
to be a Judge of the High Court.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member
unless he—
*(a) is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has
held a post in Grade I of that Service for at least three
years; or
(c) has been a member of the Indian Revenue Service and
has held the post of Commissioner of Income-tax or
*The Bill prososes to omit this clause.

27
equivalent post in that Service for at least three years;
or
(d) has been a member of the Indian Economic Service and
has held the post of Joint Secretary or equivalent post
in that Service for at least three years; or
(e) has been a member of the Indian Customs and Central
Excise Service and has held the post of a Joint Secretary
or equivalent post in that Service for at least three years;
or
(f) has been in the practice of accountancy as a chartered
accountant under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949
(38 of 1949) or as a registered accountant under any
law for the time being in force or partly as a registered
accountant and partly as a chartered accountant for at
least ten years:
Provided that one of the members of the Appellate
Tribunal shall be from category mentioned in clause
(f); or
(g) has been a member of the Indian Audit and Accounts
Service and has held the post of Joint Secretary
or equivalent post in that Service for at least three
years.
(3) No sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court
shall be appointed under this section except after consulta-
tion with the Chief Justice of India.”
41. The Committee note that similar to the provision in the
principal Act for appointment of a sitting Judge of Supreme Court
or High Court as Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal, prior
consultation with the Chief Justice of India has also been proposed
now with regard to the removal process as well of Chairperson,
if he is a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court. While

28
observing that this amendment is in tune with the related provision
in the principal Act, the Committee are, however, not satisfied with
the prescription regarding eligibility qualifications provided in the
principal Act, wherein even a person qualified to be a Judge of
the High Court is eligible for appointment as Chairperson of the
Appellate Tribunal.  The Committee are of the considered view that
only a sitting or retired Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court
should be eligible for appointment as Chairperson of the Appellate
Tribunal in order to preserve the judicial character of the Tribunal.
The Committee further note that the Principal Act provides
for practice of accountancy as a Chartered Accountant as one of
the eligibility criteria for appointment as Member of the Appellate
Tribunal.  The Committee, however, feel that the eligibility criteria
needs to be made more broad-based by including similar
professionals like Company Secretaries with requisite experience.

29
VIII. ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS OF
FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE (FATF)
42. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on Money
Laundering is an inter-governmental body, which sets standards, and
develops and promotes policies to combat money laundering and
terrorist financing.  It currently has 33 members: 31 countries and
Governments and two international organizations; and more than
20 observers. In recent years the FATF has noted increasingly
sophisticated combinations of techniques, such as the increased use of
legal persons to disguise the true ownership and control of illegal
proceeds, and an increased use of professionals to provide advice and
assistance in laundering criminal funds.  The FATF now calls upon
all countries to take the necessary steps to bring their national systems
for combating money laundering and terrorist financing into
compliance with the new FATF recommendations, and to effectively
implement these measures.
43.  Explaining the purpose and objectives of Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), the representative of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) appearing before the Committee on
15.12.2008 stated inter-alia as follows:—
“It primarily had two purposes. Its first purpose was to generate
necessary political will to bring about the National legislative
changes. But more importantly, the second purpose was to
establish global standards and measures for combating money-
laundering, terrorist financing and fostering international coop-
eration amongst countries. In 1990, they issued what are called
40 recommendations.”
29

30
44. In response to a specific query as to whether Pakistan is one
of the members of the Task Force, the representative stated as
follows:—
“It is not a Member. In fact, it is a country on which a
directive has recently been issued by the FATF. We are also not
yet a member…
This body, as I mentioned, established and issued forty
standards for dealing with anti money-laundering; plus nine
standards to deal with combating the financing of terror. Together
these forty plus nine recommendations have, so to say, become
the global standard for assessing whether countries are in
alignment with accepted benchmarks on fighting money-
laundering and terror.
In 1998 India was actually identified by the FATF as
strategically important and was invited to make its application
for becoming a member. The first step that was required is to
become a member of a regional body. So, we became member
of the Asia Pacific Group which is the regional body of FATF
countries of this region. In 2003, the Government sent an explicit
request communicating what is called the political commitment
of the Government to subscribe to the FATF principles. In 2005,
another fresh communication was issued by the new Government
reiterating what had been communicated in 2003. And then the
formal process of the FATF evaluation started.
We have been granted what is called ‘observer status’ during
which a mutual evaluation is done to evaluate whether we are
in compliance with these forty plus nine standards.  The first thing
the evaluation found out, and this was an evaluation done in 2005,
was that we had not covered all of what are called 20 serious
predicate offences listed in the forty plus nine recommendations.
It is in a bid to handle this particular recommendation that we
should cover all of the 20 designated crimes in the FATF
recommendation that, among other things, this amendment is
being attempted.

31
9/10 crimes, depending on the exact legal definition that we
follow, are right now not included in our PML Act. One of the
major purposes of the amendment Act would be to bring all these
designated offences within the definition of our legislation.  Just
to give an example, many other countries have done a reverse
process. They have done a process whereby any crime in a country
automatically is covered in the PML legislation.
To just supplement the point that the Revenue Secretary was
making, there is a criminal legislation, for instance in IPC, which
criminalizes, let us say the act of murder.  PML Act goes beyond
that and says, if there is an illegal proceeds of crime from that
act of murder and if that illegal proceeds were used and layered
with legal money and passed off as non-legal money, then you
commit the offence of money-laundering under our Act.
Many countries have done a simple legislation and have
said, for instance in UK, any crime automatically, if the proceeds
of crime are there and are hidden, constitutes a PML offence in
that country. India consciously decided, and at the instance very
explicitly of the previous Standing Committee, that if you include
every petty crime it will not be possible to manage it in a practical
fashion. Therefore, we adopted what is called the serious offence
approach. So, we listed out offences in Part A and Part B.
Now what we have discovered is some serious offences as
accepted by the international community have not got included
in our legislation. Just to give one example, trafficking in animal
skins is a designated offence already. But trafficking in human
beings who are alive is not a designated offence. So, there were
such anomalies. I am just giving one example to prove a point.
The idea was to include all of the 20 offences that have been
identified by the international community collectively. The hope
is that with this our case for becoming a member of the FATF,
not merely an observer, would actually get stronger and we would
actually be able to influence events and outcomes that are

32
happening in the FATF, one of which the Hon. Chairman alluded
to, namely, Pakistan has been given an explicit directive and other
member countries have been told that if Pakistan does not deal
with these directives, other FATF member countries should stop
having financial transactions with entities in Pakistan.
So, it is that kind of seriousness with which the FATF is
approaching the business and it was our belief that we should
do all that we can do legislatively to become compliant with FATF
standards.”
45. The Committee note that presently we only have an
‘observer’ status with the inter-governmental Financial Action Task
Force (FATF) on money laundering.  The Committee desire that
the Government must take necessary initiative to become a full
fledged member of FATF to enable sharing of information and
multi-lateral intelligence.  The Committee further note that as
submitted by a representative of Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs), Pakistan has been given a directive by FATF
and its non-compliance would result in FATF member countries
stopping financial transactions with entities in Pakistan.  The
Committee would now like the Government to take this matter to
its logical end.  The Government should also impress upon other
member countries of FATF to ensure that countries abetting
terrorism are sternly dealt with.
 N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
18 December , 2008 Chairman,
27 Agrahayana, 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

33
APPENDIX IAPPENDIX IAPPENDIX IAPPENDIX IAPPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 15th December, 2008 from
1600 hours to 1745 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
12. Shri Rupchand Pal
13. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
14. Shri R. Prabhu
15. Shri K.S. Rao
16. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
17. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
18. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
19. Shri Mahendra Mohan
10. Shri Moinul Hassan
11. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri R.K. Suryanarayan — Deputy Secretary-II
33

34
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri P.V. Bhide, Secretary
2. Shri Jose Cyriac, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. K.P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Arun Goel, Director, Financial Intelligence Unit
5. Shri Arun Mathur, Director, Enforcement
6. Smt Priya V.K. Singh, Director, Coordination
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
1.  Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor
2.  Shri Anand Sinha, Executive Director
3.  Shri Vinay Baijal, Chief General Manager
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Chairman then informed the Members that the Minister
of Parliamentary Affairs had requested him to expedite finalisation of
the report of the Committee on the Prevention of Money Laundering
(Amendment) Bill, 2008 and requested the Members to give their
opinion on the matter. Members expressed the unanimous view that
the provisions of the Bill needed to be examined in detail before
finalisation of the Report.
4. On a specific query by the Chairman, the officers of the
Secretariat informed that there was no formal communication from the
Government requesting for expediting the finalisation of the report of
the Committee on the Bill.
5. The Committee, first, heard the views of the representatives
of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) on the salient features
of the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008 and

35
subsequently, the Committee separately heard the views of the
Governor, Reserve Bank of India on the subject.
6. Attention of the witnesses was invited to the provisions
contained in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
7. The major issues discussed were lacunae in the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act, 2002, multilateral agreement for sharing
information on money laundering, India’s participation in Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), inclusion of Designated business/profession
under the ambit of proposed Act, etc.
8. The Committee directed the representatives to furnish written
replies to the points raised by the Members immediately.
9. The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

36
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16th December, 2008 from
1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri Lakshman Seth
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
12. Shri Mahendra Mohan
13. Shri Vijay J. Darda
14. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayan — Deputy Secretary-II
36

37
PART-I
(1700 to 1740 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
1. Mr. Prasanna Kotian, Head-Corporate Affairs, South Asia,
Western Union Services India Pvt. Ltd.
2. Ms. Navita Vinayak, Deputy Director, FICCI
3. Ms. Shweta Vij, Research Associate, FICCI
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI)
1. Shri Sanjay Grover, Council Member
2. Shri N.K. Jain, Secretary & CEO
3. Shri Sutanu Sinha, Director
4. Mrs. Lakshmi Arun, Education Officer
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)
1. Shri Ved Jain, President
2. Shri Uttam Prakash Agarwal, Vice-President
3. Mr. T. Karthikeyan, Acting Secretary
4. Dr. Alok Ray, Sr. Deputy Secretary
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), Institute of
Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) and Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI) to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.

38
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of ICAI, ICSI and FICCI on the provisions contained in the Prevention
of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008. The major issues
discussed related to strengthening of KYC norms, regular verification
of these norms, expanding the infrastructure of Financial Intelligence
Unit (FIU), duration of maintenance of records under clause 5 of the
Bill etc.
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdraw.
PART-II
(1740 to 1800 hrs.)
4. ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

39
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th December, 2008 from
1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
3. Shri Rupchand Pal
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R. Prabhu
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Mahendra Mohan
10. Shri Vijay J. Darda
11. Shri S. Anbalagan
12. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayan — Deputy Secretary-II
39

40
WITNESSES
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
(i) Shri C.B. Bhave, Chairman
(ii) Shri S. Raman, Chief General Manager
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
(i) Shri T.S. Narayanasami, Chairman & Managing Director
(ii) Shri  M.R. Umarji, Chief Advisor – Legal
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and Indian Banks’
Association (IBA) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their
attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker.
3.  The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives
of SEBI and IBA on the provisions contained in the Prevention of
Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008. The major issues discussed
related to identity of the foreign institutional investors investing in
Indian capital market through Participatory Note Route (PNs), bringing
FIIs under the ambit of PMLA, prescribing threshold limit on the
amount involved in crimes mentioned in section 489A & B of IPC,
approval of Chief Justice of India for appointment/removal of
Chairperson/Members of Appellate Tribunal, strengthening KYC
norms etc.
4.  The Chairman then directed the representatives to furnish
written replies on certain points raised by the Members to which replies
were not readily available with them.
The witnesses then withdraw.
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

41
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th December, 2008 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijoy Krishna
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
10. Shri Mahendra Mohan
11. Shri Vijay J. Darda
12. Shri S. Anbalagan
13. Shri Moinul Hassan
14. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
15. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayan — Deputy Secretary-II
41

42
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration, the draft report
on the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008 and
adopted the same with modifications as shown in the Annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same
to Parliament.
A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

43
ANNEXURE
Modifications made in the draft report on the Prevention of
Money-Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008 of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue).
Para Line Modification
12 3
10 2 For
“anti-money laundering legal framework”,
Read
“legal framework for preventing money laundering,”
7 After
“…the intended objectives,”
Insert
“The Committee are of the view that international
norms/guidelines like those of OECD group of
nations should also be taken into account apart from
plugging other avenues generating illegal funds like
hawala etc. for effective enforcement of money
laundering law”.
22 14 For
“…with suspicious track record”,
Read
“…causing suspicion”,
27 10 After
“….guidelines by the regulator”,
4343

44
12 3
Insert
“There should be a provision by way of test-check
and quarterly audit to verify the KYC information
furnished by clients”.
12 After
“…all the user agencies”,
Add
“…and, any gross violation of KYC guidelines
including those relating to old accounts should be
made punishable”.

45
Bill No. XXXI of 2008
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the
Prevention of Money-laundering (Amendment)
Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) after clause (d), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(da) “authorised person” means an
authorised person as defined in clause (c) of
section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management
Act, 1999 and includes a person who has been
authorised or given general or special permis-
sion by the Reserve Bank of India and overseas
principals with whom the person so authorised
or having general or special permission
conducts a service involving international
money transfer:’;
15 of 2003.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
42 of 1999.
Amendment
of section 2.
45
APPENDIX IIAPPENDIX IIAPPENDIX IIAPPENDIX IIAPPENDIX II
AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA

46
(ii) after clause ( j), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ja) “designated business or profession”
means carrying on activities for playing games of
chance for cash or kind, and includes such
activities associated with casino or such other
activities as the Central Government may, by
notification, so designate, from time to time;’;
(iii) in clause ( l), for the words “a non-
banking financial company”, the words “an
authorised person, a payment system operator and
a non-banking financial company” shall be
substituted;
(iv) in clause (q), after the words and figures
“Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934”, the words “and
includes a person carrying on designated business
or profession” shall be inserted;
(v) after clause (r), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ra) “offence of cross border implications”,
means—
(i) any conduct by a person at a place
outside India which constitutes an offence at that
place and which would have constituted an
offence specified in Part A, Part B or Part C of
the Schedule, had it been committed in India and
if such person remits the proceeds of such conduct
or part thereof to India; or
(ii) any offence specified in Part A, Part B
or Part C of the Schedule which has been
committed in India and the proceeds of crime, or
2 of 1934.

47
part thereof have been transferred to a place
outside India or any attempt has been made to
transfer the proceeds of crime, or part thereof from
India to a place outside India.
Explanation.—Nothing contained in this
clause shall adversely affect any investigation,
enquiry, trial or proceeding before any authority
in respect of the offences specified in Part A or
Part B of the Schedule to the Act before the
commencement of the Prevention of Money-
laundering (Amendment) Act, 2008.’;
(rb) “payment system operator” means any
person, who operates, maintains, facilitates or
sustains a payment system involving the use of
credit card or any other similar card or system,
which enables payment to be effected between a
payer and a beneficiary;’.
(vi) in clause (y), for sub-clause (ii), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ii) the offences specified under Part B
of the Schedule if the total value involved in
such offences is thirty lakh rupees or more:
or
(iii) the offences specified under Part C of
the Schedule.”.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (l),—
(a) for the words “ninety days”, the
words “one hundred and fifty days” shall be
substituted:
Amendment
of section 5.

48
(b) for the proviso, the following pro-
viso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that no such order of attach-
ment shall be made unless, in relation to the
scheduled offence, a report has been forwarded
to a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person authorised to investigate
the offence mentioned in the Schedule, before
a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of
the scheduled offence, as the case may be;”.
4. In Section 6 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (l), for the words “one
or more Adjudicating Authorities”, the words
“an Adjudicating Authority” shall be substi-
tuted;
(ii) in the proviso to sub-section (8), for
the word “sixty-two”, the word “sixty-five”
shall be substituted.
5. In section 12 of the principal Act, for
sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(2)(a) The records referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (l) shall be maintained for a
period of ten years from the date of transactions
between the clients and the banking company
or financial institution or intermediary, as the
case may be;
(b) the records referred to in clause (c)
of sub-section (l) shall be maintained for a
period of ten years from the date of cessation
of transactions between the clients and the
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 12.

49
banking company or financial institution or
intermediary, as the case may be.”.
6. In section 17 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (l), for the proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that no search shall be con-
ducted unless, in relation to the scheduled
offence, a report has been forwarded to a
Magistrate under section 157 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person authorised to investigate
the offence mentioned in the Schedule before
a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of
the scheduled offence, as the case may be.”
7. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (l), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that no search of any person
shall be made unless, in relation to the
scheduled offence, a report has been forwarded
to a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure., 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person authorised to investigate
the offence mentioned in the Schedule, before
a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of
the scheduled offence, as the case may be.”;
(ii) in sub-section (9), the proviso shall
be omitted.
8. In section 28 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), clause (a) shall be omitted.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 18.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 28.

50
9. In section 32 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Chief Justice of India
shall be consulted before removal of the
Chairperson or a Member who was appointed
on the recommendation of the Chief Justice of
India”.
10. In section 38 of the principal Act,
for the words “one or more of the other
Members”, the words “third Member” shall be
substituted.
11. In section 60 of the principal Act, after
sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(7) When any property in India is confis-
cated as a result of execution of a request from
a contracting State in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government
may either return such property to the
requesting State or compensate that State by
disposal of such property on mutually agreed
terms that would take into account deduction
for reasonable expenses incurred in investiga-
tion, prosecution or judicial proceedings
leading to the return or disposal of confiscated
property.”.
12. In the principal Act, in the Schedule,—
(i) in Part A,—
(a) in Paragraph 1, after section 121A
and the entry relating thereto, the following
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 38.
Amendment
of section 60.
Amendment
of schedule.

51
sections and the entries shall be inserted,
namely:—
Section Description of offence
“489A Counterfeiting currency notes or bank notes.
489B Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency
notes or bank notes.”;
(b) in Paragraph 2, for sections, 15, 18 and 20 and the entries
relating thereto, the following sections and the entries shall be
substituted, namely:—
Section Description of offence
“15 Contravention in relation to poppy straw.
16 Contravention in relation to coca plant and coca
leaves.
17 Contravention in relation to prepared opium.
18 Contravention in relation to opium poppy and
opium.
19 Embezzlement of opium by cultivator.
20 Contravention in relation to cannabis plant and
cannabis.
21 Contravention in relation to manufactured drugs
and preparations.”;
(c) after Paragraph 2, the following Paragraphs shall be inserted,
namely:—
PARAGRAPH 3
OFFENCES UNDER THE E XPLOSIVE S UBSTANCES A CT, 1908
Section Description of offence
3 Causing explosion likely to endanger life or
property.

52
Section Description of offence
4 Attempt to cause explosion, or for making or
keeping explosives with intent to endanger life or
property.
5 Making or possessing explosives under suspicious
circumstances.
PARAGRAPH 4
OFFENCES UNDER THE U NLAWFUL A CTIVITIES (P REVENTION) A CT, 1967
Section Description of offence
10 read with Penalty for being member of an unlawful
section 3 association, etc.
11 read with Penalty for dealing with funds of an unlawful
sections 3 association.
and 7
13 read with Punishment for unlawful activities.
section 3
16 read with Punishment for terrorist act.
section 15
17 Punishment for raising fund for terrorist act.
18 Punishment for conspiracy, etc.
19 Punishment for harbouring, etc.
20 Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or
organisation.
21 Punishment for holding proceeds of terrorism.
38 Offence relating to membership of a terrorist
organisation.

53
Section Description of offence
39 Offence relating to support given to a terrorist
organisation.
40 Offence of raising fund for a terrorist
organisation.”;
(ii) in Part B,—
(a) for paragraph 1, the following paragraph shall be
substituted, namely:—
“PARAGRAPH 1
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
Section Description of offence
120B Criminal conspiracy.
255 Counterfeiting Government stamp.
257 Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting
Government stamp.
258 Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.
259 Having possession of counterfeit Government
stamp.
260 Using as genuine a Government stamp known to
be counterfeit.
302 Murder.
304 Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting
to murder.
307 Attempt to murder.

54
Section Description of offence
308 Attempt to commit culpable homicide.
327 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to
constrain to an illegal act.
329 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort
property, or to constrain to an illegal act.
364A Kidnapping for ransom, etc.
384 to 389 Offences relating to extortion.
392 to 402 Offences relating to robbery and dacoity.
411 Dishonestly receiving stolen property.
412 Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the
commission of a dacoity.
413 Habitually dealing in stolen property.
414 Assisting in concealment of stolen property.
467 Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.
471 Using as genuine a forged document or electronic
record.
472 and 473 Making or processing counterfeit seal, etc., with
intent to commit forgery.
475 and 476 Counterfeiting device or mark.
481 Using a false property mark.
482 Punishment for using a false property mark.
483 Counterfeiting a property mark used by another.
484 Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant.

55
Section Description of offence
485 Making or possession of any instrument for
counterfeiting a property mark.
486 Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property
mark.
487 Making a false mark upon any receptacle
containing goods.
488 Punishment for making use of any such false
mark.”.
(b) in Paragraph 3, before section 51 read with section 17A
and the entry relating thereto, the following section and the entry shall
be inserted namely:–
Section Description of offence
“51 read with section 9 Hunting of wild animals.”;
(c) in Paragraph 5,  after section 10 and the entry relating
thereto, the following section and the entry shall be inserted, namely:–
Section Description of offence
“13 Criminal misconduct by a public servant.”;
(d) after Paragraph 5, the following Paragraphs shall be
inserted, namely:–
“PARAGRAPH 6
OFFENCES UNDER THE E XPLOSIVES A CT, 1884
Section Description of offence
9-B Punishment for certain offences.
9-C Offences by Companies.

56
PARAGRAPH 7
OFFENCES UNDER THE A NTIQUITIES AND A RTS T REASURES A CT, 1972
Section Description of offence
25 read with Contravention of export trade in antiquities and
section 3. art treasures.
28 Offences by Companies.
PARAGRAPH 8
OFFENCES UNDER THE S ECURITIES AND E XCHANGE B OARD OF I NDIA A CT,
1992
Section Description of offence
12A read Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive de-
with vices, insider trading and substantial acquisition
section 24 of securities or control.
PARAGRAPH 9
OFFENCES UNDER THE C USTOMS A CT, 1962
Section Description of offence
135 Evasion of duty or prohibitions.
PARAGRAPH 10
OFFENCES UNDER THE B ONDED L ABOUR S YSTEM (A BOLITION) A CT, 1976
Section Description of offence
16 Punishment for enforcement of bonded labour.
18 Punishment for extracting bonded labour under
the bonded labour system.
20 Abetment to be an offence.

57
PARAGRAPH 11
OFFENCES UNDER THE C HILD L ABOUR (P ROHIBITION AND R EGULATION)
ACT, 1986
Section Description of offence
14 Punishment for employment of any child to work
in contravention of the provisions of section 3.
PARAGRAPH 12
OFFENCES UNDER THE T RANSPLANTATION OF H UMAN O RGANS A CT, 1994
Section Description of offence
18 Punishment for removal of human organ without
authority.
19 Punishment for commercial dealings in human
organs.
20 Punishment for contravention of any other
provision of this Act.
PARAGRAPH 13
OFFENCES UNDER THE J UVENILE J USTICE (C ARE AND P ROTECTION OF
CHILDREN) A CT, 2000
Section Description of offence
23 Punishment for cruelty to juvenile or child.
24 Employment of juvenile or child for begging.
25 Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic
drug of psychotropic substance to juvenile or
child.
26 Exploitation of juvenile or child employee.

58
PARAGRAPH 14
OFFENCES UNDER THE E MIGRATION A CT, 1983
Section Description of offence
24 Offences and penalties.
PARAGRAPH 15
OFFENCES UNDER THE P ASSPORTS A CT, 1967
Section Description of offence
12 Offences and penalties.
PARAGRAPH 16
OFFENCES UNDER THE F OREIGNERS A CT, 1946
Section Description of offence
14 Penalty for contravention of provisions of the Act,
etc.
14B Penalty for using forged passport.
14C Penalty for abetment.
PARAGRAPH 17
OFFENCES UNDER THE C OPYRIGHT A CT, 1957
Section Description of offence
63 Offence of infringement of copyright or other
rights conferred by this Act.
63A Enhanced penalty on second and subsequent
convictions.

59
Section Description of offence
63B Knowing use of infringing copy of computer
programme.
68A Penalty for contravention of section 52A.
PARAGRAPH 18
OFFENCES UNDER THE T RADE M ARKS A CT, 1999
Section Description of offence
103 Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade
descriptions, etc.
104 Penalty for selling goods or providing services to
which false trademark or false trade description
is applied.
105 Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent
conviction.
107 Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as
registered.
120 Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out
of India.
PARAGRAPH 19
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY A CT, 2000
Section Description of offence
72 Penalty for breach of confidentiality and privacy.
75 Act to apply for offence or contravention commit-
ted outside India.

60
PARAGRAPH 20
OFFENCES UNDER THE B IOLOGICAL D IVERSITY A CT, 2002
Section Description of offence
55 read with Penalties for contravention of section 6, etc.
6
PARAGRAPH 21
OFFENCES UNDER THE P ROTECTION OF P LANT V ARIETIES AND F ARMERS’
RIGHTS A CT, 2001
Section Description of offence
70 read with 68 Penalty for applying false denomination,
etc.
71 read with 68 Penalty for selling varieties to which false
denomination is applied.
72 read with 68 Penalty for falsely representing a variety as
registered.
73 read with 68 Penalty for subsequent offence.
PARAGRAPH 22
OFFENCES UNDER T HE E NVIRONMENT P ROTECTION A CT, 1986
Section Description of offence
15 read with Penalty for discharging environmental pollutants.
7
15 read with Penalty for handling hazardous substance.
8

61
PARAGRAPH 23
OFFENCES UNDER THE W ATER (P REVENTION AND
CONTROL OF P OLLUTION A CT, 1974)
Section Description of offence
41(2) Penalty for pollution of stream or well.
43 Penalty for contravention of provisions of section
24.
PARAGRAPH 24
OFFENCES UNDER THE A IR (P REVENTION AND C ONTROL OF P OLLUTION)
ACT, 1981
Section Description of offence
37 Failure to comply with the provisions for
operating industrial plant.
PARAGRAPH 25
OFFENCES UNDER THE S UPPRESSION OF U NLAWFUL A CT AGAINST
SAFETY OF M ARITIME N AVIGATION AND F IXED P LATFORMS ON
CONTINENTAL S HELF A CT, 2002
Section Description of offence
3 Offences against ship, fixed platform, cargo of a
ship, maritime navigational facilities, etc.”
(iii) after Part B, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART C
An offence which is the offence of cross border implications and
is specified in,–
(1) Part A; or
(2) Part B without any monetary threshold; or
(3) the offences against property under Chapter XVII of the
Indian Penal Code.”.

62
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 was brought into
force in 2005 to prevent money-laundering and to provide for
confiscation of property derived from, or involved in, money-
laundering and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The Act also addressed the international obligations under the Political
Declaration and Global Programme of Action adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations to prevent money-laundering. The Act
was amended in 2005 to remove the difficulties in implementation of
the Act.
2. The Prevention of Money-laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2008
seeks to bring certain financial institutions like Full Fledged Money
Changers, Money Transfer Service Providers such as Western Union
and International Payment Gateways including VISA and Master Card
within the reporting regime of the Act. The Bill incorporates provisions
to combat financing of terrorism and it introduces a new category of
offences which have cross-border implications. The Bill seeks to amend
the Act, to provide, inter alia , to–
(a) include institutions like Full Fledged Money Changers and
Money Transfer Service Providers and to bring the business
activities such as casinos under the reporting regime of the
Act;
(b) make provisions for the ‘offences with cross border
implications’ and to add new Part C in the Schedule to the
Act for such offences;
(c) ensure that the investigating agency can attach any property
and search a person only after completing investigation and
also to enhance the period of provisional attachment of
property from 90 days to 150 days;
(d) empower the Enforcement Directorate to search the premises
immediately after the offence is committed and the police

63
has filed a report under section 157 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973;
(e) increase the age of retirement of Chairperson and Members
of the Adjudicating Authority from 62 years to 65 years;
(f) provide mandatory consultation with the Chief Justice of
India before removal of the Chairperson or a Member of the
Appellate Tribunal;
(g) enable the Central Government to return the confiscated
property to the requesting country in order to implement the
provisions of the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption; and
(h) expand the scope of the Act by adding certain offences in
Part A and Part B of the Schedule to the Act.
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
 N
EW D ELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 9th July, 2008.

64
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to notify,
from time-to-time, an activity for playing games of chance for cash or
kind as ‘designated business or profession’ for the purpose of bringing
them into the reporting regime under the Act.
2. The matters in respect of which notification may be issued are
generally matters of details and administrative procedure. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

65
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE P REVENTION OF M ONEY-LAUNDERING A CT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
*****
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(1) “financial institution” means a finan-
cial institution as defined in clause (c) of section
45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and
includes a chit fund company, a co-operative
bank, a housing finance institution and a non-
banking financial company;
(q) “non-banking financial company” shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934;
*****
CHAPTER III
A
TTACHMENT, A DJUDICATION AND C ONFISCATION
5. (1) Where the Director, or any other
officer not below the rank of Deputy Director
authorised by him for the purpose of this
section, has reason to believe (the reason for
such belief to be recorded in writing), on the
basis of material in his possession, that—
(a) any person is in possession of any
proceeds of crime;
(b) such person has been charged of
having committed a scheduled offence; and
(c) such proceeds of crime are likely to be
concealed, transferred or dealt with in any
manner which may result in frustrating
any proceedings relating to confiscation of
such proceeds of crime under this Chapter,
2 of 1934.
Definitions.
Attachment
of property
involved in
money-
laundering.

66
he may, by order in writing, provisionally
attach such property for a period not exceeding
ninety days from the date of the order, in the
manner provided in the Second Schedule to the
Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Director or the
other officer so authorised by him, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to be an officer under
sub-rule (e) of rule 1 of that Schedule:
Provided that no such order of attachment
shall be made unless, in relation to an offence
under—
(i) Paragraph 1 of Part A and Part B of
the Schedule, a report has been forwarded to
a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973; or
(ii) Paragraph 2 of Part A of the Schedule,
a police report or a complaint has been filed
for taking cognizance of an offence by the
Special Court constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 36 of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
*****
6. (1) The Central Government shall, by
notification, appoint one or more Adjudicating
Authorities to exercise jurisdiction, powers and
authority conferred by or under this Act.
*****
(8) The Chairperson and every Member
shall hold office as such for a term of five years
from the date on which he enters upon his
office;
Provided that no Chairperson or other
member shall hold office as such after he has
attained the age of sixty-two years.
*****
43 of 1961.
2 of 1974.
61 of 1985.
Adjudicating
Authorities,
composition,
powers, etc.

67
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS OF BANKING COMPANIES, FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS AND INTERMEDIARIES
12. (1) ** * * *
(2) The records referred to in sub-section
(1) shall be maintained for a period of ten years
from the date of cessation of the transactions
between the clients and the banking company
or financial institution or intermediary, as the
case may be.
*****
17. (1) Where the Director, on the basis of
information in his possession, has reason to
believe (the reason for such belief to be
recorded in writing) that any person—
*****
Provided that no search shall be con-
ducted unless, in relation to an offence under—
(a) Paragraph 1 of Part A and Part B of
the Schedule, a report has been forwarded to
a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973; or
(b) Paragraph 2 of Part A of the Schedule,
a police report or a complaint has been filed
for taking cognizance of an offence by the
Special Court constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 36 of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
*****
18. (1) ** * * *
 (9) The authority shall record the statement of
the person searched under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (5) in respect of the records or
proceeds of crime found or seized in the course
of the search:
Banking
companies,
financial
institutions
and
intermediaries
to maintain
records.
Search and
seizure.
Search of
persons.
2 of 1974.
61 of 1985.

68
Provided that no search of any person
shall be made unless, in relation to an offence
under—
(a) Paragraph 1 of Part A or Paragraph
1 or Paragraph 2 or Paragraph 3 or Paragraph
4 or Paragraph 5 of Part B of the Schedule, a
report has been forwarded to a Magistrate
under section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973; or
(b) Paragraph 2 of Part A of the Schedule,
a police report or a complaint has been filed
for taking cognizance of an offence by the
Special Court constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 36 of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
*****
28. (1) ** * * *
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Member unless he—
(a) is or has been a Judge of a High Court;
or
*****
38. If the Members of a Bench consisting
of two Members differ in opinion on any point,
they shall state the point or points on which
they differ, and make a reference to the
Chairperson who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the other
Members of the Appellate Tribunal and such
point or points shall be decided according to
the opinion of the majority of the Members of
the Appellate Tribunal who have heard the
case, including those who first heard it.
*****
2 of 1974.
61 of 1985.
Qualifications
for appoint-
ment.
Decision
to be by
majority.

69
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(y)]
PART A
** * * * *
PARAGRAPH 2
OFFENCES UNDER THE N ARCOTIC D RUGS AND P SYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES A CT, 1985
Section Description of Offence
15 Contravention in relation to poppy straw.
18 Contravention in relation to opium poppy
and opium.
20 Contravention in relation to cannabis plants
cannabis.
** * * * *
PART B
PARAGRAPH 1
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
Section Description of Offence
1  2
302 Murder.
304 Culpable homicide not amounting to mur-
der, if act by which the death is caused is
done with the intention of causing death.
307 Attempt to murder.
308 Attempt to commit culpable homicide.

70
1  2
327 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property,
or a valuable security, or to constrain to do
anything which is illegal or which may
facilitate the commission of the offence.
329 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort
property, or a valuable security, or to
constrain to do anything which is illegal or
which may facilitate the commission of the
offence.
364A Kidnapping for ransom, etc.
384 to 389 Offences relating to extortion.
392 to 402 Offences relating to robbery and dacoity.
467 Forgery of a valuable security, will or
authority to make or transfer any valuable
security, or to receive any money, etc.
489A Counterfeiting currency notes or bank notes.
489B Using a genuine, forged or counterfeit
currency notes or bank notes.
** * * * *

71
RAJYA SABHA
________
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.
________
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)

72
RAJYA SABHA
ERRATA
TO
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2008
(To be/As Introduced in the Rajya Sabha)
Sl. Page Line(s) For Read
No. No. No(s).
1. 5 11 relatiang relating
2. 6 38 Arts Art
3. 9 27 Protection (Protection)
4. 10 8 Supression Suppression

73
EIGHTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2008-09)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-
LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2008
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)

C.O.F. No. 80
Price : Rs. 78.00
© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
I. Background .................................................................................... 1
II. Clauses 2(1) (da) and 2(1) (rb) – Definitions of Authorised
Person and Payment System operator.................................... 6
III. Clause 2 (ja) – Designated Business or Profession............ 12
IV. Clause 2 (ra) – Offences of Cross Border Implications.... 14
V. Other Scheduled Offences......................................................... 19
VI. Clauses 6 and 7–Amendment of Section 17 and Section 18–
Powers of Search and Seizure.................................................. 22
VII. Clause 9 – Removal of Chairperson and Member of Appellate
Tribunal.......................................................................................... 25
VIII. Adoption of international standards of Financial Action
Task Force (FATF)....................................................................... 29
APPENDICES
PAGE
I. Minutes of the sittings held on 15, 16, 17 and
18 December, 2008..............................................................
II. The Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment)
Bill, 2008..................................................................................
33
45

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2008-2009)
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
12. Shri R. Prabhu
13. Shri K.S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Lakshman Seth
16. Shri A.R. Shaheen
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
19. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
20. Shri Ramakrishna Badiga*
21. Vacant#
(iii)
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 26.8.2008.
#Vacant w.e.f. 14.11.2008 on nomination of Shri Brajesh Pathak to Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Raashid Alvi
23. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
24. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
25. Shri Mahendra Mohan
26. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
27. Shri Vijay J. Darda
28. Shri S. Anbalagan
29. Shri Moinul Hassan
30. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary Gr-II

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Eightieth Report on the Prevention of Money-Laundering
(Amendment) Bill, 2008.
2. The Prevention of Money-Laundering (Amendment) Bill,
2008,  introduced in Rajya Sabha on 17 October, 2008 was referred to
the Committee on 31 October, 2008 for examination and report thereon,
by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha as desired by Chairman, Rajya
Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background notes on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI), the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI),
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Federation of Indian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) and PHD Chamber of Commerce
and Industry (PHDCCI).
5. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) at their sitting held on 15 December, 2008.  The Committee
at their sitting held on 16 December, 2008 took evidence of the
representatives of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
(ICAI), the Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) and
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI).
The Committee also took evidence of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI) and Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), at their
sitting held on 17 December, 2008.

 N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
18 December , 2008 Chairman,
27 Agrahayana , 1930  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the report at their
sitting held on 18 December, 2008.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
and the representatives of RBI, SEBI and IBA for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information
which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to ICAI, ICSI,
FICCI, ASSOCHAM and PHDCCI for furnishing Memoranda and to
the representatives of ICAI, ICSI and FICCI for appearing before the
Committee and placing their views.
9. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
(vi)

STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCEFINANCEFINANCEFINANCEFINANCE
(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHAFOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
8080808080
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-
LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2008
EIGHTIETH REPORTEIGHTIETH REPORTEIGHTIETH REPORTEIGHTIETH REPORTEIGHTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”