49
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs]
FORTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 ( Saka)

FORTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-07)
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

COF No. 49
Price : Rs. 31.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ...................... 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................. 16
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 18
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which Final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 21
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 11th December, 2006 .......................................... 22
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2006-2007) of the Ministry of
Company Affairs ....................................................... 24
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2006-2007)
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
*12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006 vice Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
25. Shri Yashwant Sinha
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance (2006-2007)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf present this Forty-Ninth Report on action taken by
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report
of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Company Affairs.
2. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
22 May, 2006. The Government furnished the written replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations on 29 August, 2006. The
draft action taken report was considered and adopted by the Committee
at their sitting held on 11 December, 2006.
3. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
11 December, 2006 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
1. This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
their Fortieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Company Affairs, which was presented
to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 May 2006.
2. The Report contained fifteen recommendations. Action taken
notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analysed
and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1 (Para No. 21), 2 (Para No. 22),
3 (Para No. 23), 4 (Para No. 32), 5 (Para No. 33), 6 (Para
No. 34), 7 (Para No. 48), 9 (Para No. 50), 11 (Para No. 52),
12 (Para No. 53) and 13 (Para Nos. 65-66)
(Total 11) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 8 (Para No. 49), 14 (Para No. 67)
(Total 2) (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 10 (Para No. 51), 15 (Para No.
80)
(Total 2) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
Nil
 (Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
VANISHING COMPANIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 51)
4. The Committee found that the definition of vanishing companies
was ambiguous thereby leaving loopholes in the law. From the
information furnished to them, they noted that one of the criteria,
which stated that ‘no correspondence had been received by the
Exchange from the company for a long time’, was interpreted by the
Task Forces concerned to imply a period between 2 to 3 years of
absence of correspondence between the exchange and the company.
The Committee felt that any company which had duped its investors,
could continue to operate and avoid being classified as ‘vanishing’
just by sending a piece of correspondence, at intervals of 2-3 years.
They, therefore, felt that the criteria for identifying a company as
vanished/vanishing needed streamlining and called upon the
Government to have a re-look at the definition, so that all such
companies, having the slightest intention of duping investors of their
hard earned money, could be classified as ‘vanishing or potentially
vanishing companies’.
5. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under:
“The issue of a clearer definition of a Vanishing Company and the
criteria for identifying a company as vanished/vanishing was
placed before the Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC)
in its meeting held on 26.07.2006. The Committee decided to amend
one of the criteria by substituting the words ‘for a long time’ with
‘a period of two years’  for identifying the company as a vanishing
company. This would take care of the said ambiguity.
The criteria for identifying a company as vanished now stands
revised as under:
(i) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchange/ROC
respectively for a period of 2 years;
(ii) No correspondence has been received by the Exchange from
the company for a period of two years; and
(iii) No of fice of the company is located at the mentioned
registered office address at the time of Stock Exchange
inspection.

3
All the conditions laid down have to be met for treating a company
as vanishing and companies satisfying one or more but not all
conditions are not to be considered as vanishing.”
6. The Committee note that their recommendation pointing out
the ambiguity in the definition of a vanishing company has been
partially considered by the Government and they had in their reply
stated that revised criteria under which all the following three
conditions are required to be met for treating a company as
‘vanished’:—
(i) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchanges/ROCs
respectively for a period of 2 years;
(ii) No correspondence has been received by the Exchange
from the company for a period of two years; and
(iii) No office of the company is located at the mentioned
registered office address at the time of Stock Exchange
inspection.
7. However, the Committee regret to point out that their central
concern has not yet been addressed adequately. The Committee find
no substantial change in the revised criteria except that the words
‘for a long time’ under (ii) above have been substituted with the
words for ‘a period of 2 years’. In their view, a company which
satisfies the first and the third condition, and is actually vanished,
can manage to fool the system and avoid being classified as
vanishing, just by sending a piece of correspondence at intervals of
two years.
8. The Committee, therefore, feel that if any company fails to
satisfy any one of the three conditions, then it should be treated as
a ‘vanishing’ company. They recommend that the Government should
revise the criteria accordingly for identifying a company as ‘vanished’.
LIQUIDATION OF COMPANIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 80)
9. The Committee noted that the J.J. Irani Committee had already
taken up the issue of exit or liquidation of companies in detail in
view of the inordinate delays and lengthy procedure for companies to
exit. The Committee also noted from the reply of the Government
referring to the observation in a World Bank Report that the time

4
taken for a companies to exit was between 2—3 years in China,
Malaysia and Thailand whereas it was about 10 years in India. They
further noted that the Government had attributed this delay to the
lengthy nature of judicial process. The Committee were of the view
that it was essential to provide a sound framework for winding up
and liquidation of companies. In this connection, the Committee
recommended that in the extant legal provisions, the Government
should strive to work in such a time-bound manner that, excluding
the time taken for obtaining the approval of the High Court, all other
formalities could be completed with a period of 2-3 years. Moreover,
the Committee hoped that efforts by the Government to get the NCLT
Second Amendment Act, 2002 passed at the earliest in their favour by
the Supreme Court, would pave way for its establishment ultimately.
This, the Committee hoped would help in reducing time for getting
required judicial approval for exit of companies. Overall, the Committee
opined that simplifying the existing liquidation process and speeding
up the winding up of sick companies having no chance of
revival would be steps in the right direction. Besides, the modified
framework should seek to preserve the estate and maximize the value
of assets of the existing company so that those could be redeployed
suitably.
10. The Government in their action taken reply have stated as
under:
“With a view to deal with some of the issues arising out of
reconstruction/liquidation/winding up, the Companies Act, 1956
was amended through Companies (Amendment) Act, 2002 and the
consequential establishment of the National Company Law Tribunal
and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. It was also
provided that the functions of rehabilitation of companies (at
present done by BIFR and AAIFR) and liquidation/winding up of
companies (which is being done by High Courts) would be brought
under the purview of the National Company Law Tribunal and
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 is to be repealed.
However, due to legal challenge, which is now with Hon’ble
Supreme Court, the National Company Law Tribunal and National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal could not be established. The
new provisions also could not be notified.
The Ministry of Company Affairs is taking note of the observation
of Committee for speedy conduct of winding up process and
enabling the maximization of the value of assets under liquidation.

5
The entire framework relating to rehabilitation/liquidation/winding
up is being revised as a part of the exercise of reviewing the
Companies Act.
A revised comprehensive Bill which, inter-alia will address this
problem is under preparation and will be introduced in Parliament
after due approval.”
11. The Committee had in their recommendation desired that the
Ministry of Company Affairs should in the extant legal provisions,
strive to work in such a time bound manner so that, excluding the
time taken for obtaining the approval of the High Court, all other
formalities in respect of exit or liquidation of companies are
completed within a period of 2-3 years. The Committee had also
hoped that efforts by Government to get the NCLT Second
Amendment Act, 2002 passed, at the earliest, in their favour by the
Supreme Court, would pave way for its establishment ultimately.
12. The Committee are however dismayed to note that the
Ministry have not given a convincing reply indicating a road-map
for completing formalities regarding exit of companies in a time-
bound manner. The Government have merely stated that they are
taking note of the observation of the Committee for speedy conduct
of winding up process and enabling the maximization of the value
of assets under liquidation. The Committee also find that the reply
is silent on the efforts made by the Government to get the judgment
in the court case delivered early with regard to the setting up of
NCLT and NCLAT under Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2002.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
make vigorous efforts to see that the court case in regard to the
setting up of NCLT and NCLAT, which is pending before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court is decided expeditiously and adequate provisions
are made under the relevant provisions of the NCLT Act so that the
liquidation of a company is completed within a period of 2-3 years.

6
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 21)
It is widely known that the Companies Act, in its present form, is
quite unwieldy and complicated. In this connection, reducing the
number of sections/provisions alone will not help in simplifying,
rationalizing and modernizing the law. What is needed is that the
new law must provide a flexible framework for proper growth of
companies, have dynamic orientation and take into account the new
developments that have taken place in the corporate world. The
Committee recall in this regard, their earlier recommendation as
contained in the 5th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) wherein
they have urged the Government to expedite the matter relating the
comprehensive Review of the Companies Act, 1956. From the response
of the Government, they gather the impression that the Competition
Bill amending provisions of Companies Act may be Tabled on the
floor of the House shortly. They expect that this long awaited piece of
legislation will soon see that light of the day and many provisions of
the Companies Act needing reforms, as per the requirements of modern
day corporate governance practices as well as investors protection,
may be amended suitably. The Committee would also find it equally
necessary to ensure the use of simple and understandable language as
compared to the existing complicated structure of provisions,
explanations and multiple cross references in the Companies Act.
Moreover, Company law should not be viewed in isolation and must
be in harmony with other economic legislations. In this connection,
the Committee note that the Expert Committee to advise the
Government of new Company Law, under the Chairmanship of
Shri J.J. Irani, have already submitted their Report on 31st May, 2005
and subsequently the Government is in the process of consultation
and approval on the recommendations of the same.
Reply of the Government
A fresh comprehensive draft Companies Bill, 2006 is being drafted.
Once the Draft Bill is ready, it would be introduced in the Parliament
after obtaining the requisite approvals.

7
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 22)
In the course of examination of Budget Proposals for the year
2006-07, another issue concerning Independent Directors of Companies
came up before the Committee. As the existing Companies Act is silent
on this issue, the Committee note that this requirement was prescribed
by SEBI (Securities and Exchange Board of India) as one of the listing
conditions. The Committee feel that absence of a relevant provision in
the Companies Act has contributed in further ambiguity in so far as
the responsibilities of Independent Directors are concerned.
Reply of the Government
The matter relating to duties, role and liabilities of Directors
(including Independent Director) are being examined as a part of the
comprehensive review of the Companies Act, 1956. A comprehensive
legislation in this regard is under preparation and shall be brought
before the Parliament with due approvals.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 23)
The Committee further note that the Government have introduced
a limited amendment to the Companies Act to enable ‘smooth
implementation of MCA-21 e-governance project’. This project aims at
providing clarity and security and enabling the digitization of support
documents submitted by the companies. The Committee also note that
once operational at all locations, this system would provide facilities
for all services delivered through the offices of Registrars of Companies
on-line and facilitate completion of all transactions from the comfort
of homes/offices of stakeholders. In this regard, the Committee endorse
the view that there is an urgent need for such e-governance project
taking into account the internationally accepted best practices in the
ever evolving corporate world, and hope that the operationalisation of
the project would be done expeditiously . They also desire to be kept
apprised of the concrete measures taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
The MCA-21 e-Governance Project has been rolled out throughout
India except in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, where connectivity
issue is being sorted out with the help of Ministry of
Telecommunication. It is likely to become operational before mid-
September, 2006. At present all the RoC office services including Name
Availability, Company Registration, Viewing of documents, Filing of
event based documents etc. are available on line anywhere anytime in
a 24x7 mode.

8
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 32)
The Committee note that SFIO has been functioning since October,
2003 as a multi disciplinary administrative organization attached to
the Ministry of Company Affairs to investigate complex corporate
frauds and enable adequate infrastructure and funds to carry out
investigation into alleged fraud under the existing legal framework.
The Committee note that till now 31 cases have been referred to the
SFIO for investigation. Out of these, SFIO has already submitted
inspection reports in 11 cases and out of these instructions for
prosecutions have already been issued in respect of nine companies.
From the replies furnished by the Government, the Committee note
that in most of the cases the investigation of SFIO is sub-judice. The
Committee are dismayed to learned that despite being in existence for
more than two years, certain crucial posts e.g. Additional/Joint
Director/Deputy Director (Admn.), Sr. ADs/ADs etc. are lying vacant
in SFIO. Although the Government is stated to be in the process of
filling up the posts, the Committee are not sure as to how much time
will it take before these posts are actually filled. The Committee feel
that with the passing of time, more and more cases will be referred
to the SFIO, with the result that its work will be increased enormously.
Keeping this in view, they recommend that apart from filling the vacant
posts immediately, additional posts in various categories may be created
so that the cases referred to SFIO are disposed of expeditiously and
the purpose for which it came into existence is fulfilled. Since SFIO,
conceived as a professional units requiring specialized skill and multi
disciplinary approach, is attended to investigate corporate frauds, the
personnel for the prestigious office may be drawn from finance, income
tax, SEBI, CBI etc.
Reply of the Government
Out of 12 posts of additional/Joint directors, sanctioned for head
office of SFIO 11 officers are already in position. Applications received
for one vacant post have been sent to the UPSC for making the
selection.
The post of Additional Director for Mumbai office and Deputy
Director (Admn.) at Delhi Office have since been filled up.
Out of 29 posts of Senior Assistant Director/Assistant Directors
25 posts are already filled up. Selection for one more post is under
approval of the competent authority. Action for filling up the remaining
three posts had been initiated long back. However, due to inadequate

9
response, the concerned Departments/Organizations have been
requested again to sponsor suitable willing officers.
The SFIO at present has officers from the following disciplines:
(i) Taxation
(ii) Customs and Central Excise
(iii) Police
(iv) Company Law
(v) Forensic Audit
(vi) Capital Market (SEBI)
(vii) Financial Sector (Banking)
(viii) Audit
(ix) Criminal Investigation
(x) Intelligence
(xi) Information Technology
(xii) Foreign Exchange Regulation
An Expert Committee was constituted on 23.22.2006 to advise the
Government on issues concerning SFIO and a separate legislation for
it. Creation of additional posts and strengthening of the organization
will be undertaken after the Committee finalizes its report. The
Committee is likely to submit its report within next three months.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 33)
The Committee also feel that officers of SFIO should be suitably
trained for this purpose. They also recommend that, in this regard, the
training and investigation mechanism of SFIO should be of international
standard yet keeping in mind the trends and peculiarities of the Indian
Corporate World.
Reply of the Government
Training to some officers of SFIO on investigation of financial fraud,
bank fraud etc. has been imparted in the CBI Academy. One nomination
has also been made for overseas training in Stock Market Regulation.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 34)
The Committee further take note of the fact that in pursuance of
J.J. Irani Committee recommendation, an expert Committee namely

10
Vepa Kamesam Committee has been constituted to access the need for
and details of a separate statute to govern the constitution and
functioning of the SFIO. In this regard, they feel that there is a need
to strengthen SFIO with adequate powers to act as a nodal agency in
unveiling intricate and complex corporate frauds, in coordination with
other agencies/organizations at the Centre and State levels and,
therefore, recommend that a separate Statute to regulate and guide the
functioning of SFIO may be framed.
Reply of the Government
On the basis of experience gained till date, the Ministry is
examining measures for strengthening of SFIO. The Expert Committee
referred to in para 32 above is also examining the statutory provisions
necessary to make SFIO more effective, including through a separate
statute to govern the constitution and functioning of SFIO.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 48)
The Committee note that the Government have so far traced back
about 115 vanishing companies. However, it remains to be seen whether
the investors duped by these companies, will ultimately get some relief.
The Committee are convinced that the issue of vanishing companies is
inextricably linked with the issue of ‘Vanishing funds’, which first of
all implies that the investors who have been lured into investing in a
company that has vanished must get back his/her legitimate dues.
They, therefore, feel that the matter of vanishing companies does not
only rest with just tracing out the vanishing companies and their
inspection of books of accounts etc., but equal attention should be
paid to the prosecution mechanism so that the investors could get
their money back. Equally important is to keep a watch on the
vanishing companies so that they do not resurface in a different name
to dupe the investors again. The Committee feel that utmost vigilance
is required to prevent efforts by a ‘vanishing company’ or a defaulting
company to restart its operations in another name or disguise.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has noted the observations and the concerns of the
Committee. It is submitted that there is no provision in the Companies
Act, 1956 for refunding money collected by the companies through
public issue except through the liquidation process. The whole scheme
of winding up proceedings is based on the principle that on realization
of assets of the company, its debts and liabilities should, subject to
preferential payments as per provisions or Sections 529A and 530 of

11
the Companies Act, 1956, first be paid in full. The shareholders of the
company may get their claim out of surplus in pursuant to the Court
order. The suggestions received with regard to protecting the interest
of the investors are being examined in the Ministry from the point of
view of providing a legal framework for safeguarding investors’
interests.
It is submitted that some of the companies, which tapped the
capital market and collected funds form the public through public
issue of shares/debentures defaulted in their commitments made to
them while mobilising funds. A Coordination and Monitoring
Committee (CMC), Co-chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Company
Affairs (MCA) and Chairman, SEBI has been set up to take stringent
action against unscrupulous promoters who raised money from
investors and misused them. Following steps have been taken/are being
taken by the Ministry against the vanishing companies and its
promoters/directors under the relevant provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956 in order to protect the interest of the investors:—
• Disgorgement proceedings were initiated in two cases, on
test check basis, under Sections 397/398/402/408 read with
Section 406 of the Companies Act, 1956 before the Hon’ble
Company Law Board (CLB) to disgorge the properties/
monies fraudulently obtained by promoters/directors of
these two vanishing companies. In one case, the Petition
filed by the Ministry (Central Government) in respect of
M/s. Nuline Glassware (India) Ltd. has been dismissed by
the CLB and an appeal has been filed before the Hon’ble
High Court, Gujarat against the said dismissal order of the
CLB. In another case i.e. M/s. AVI Industries Ltd., the final
arguments were heard and the judgment is reserved.
•P rosecutions have been filed through the Registrar of
Companies (RoC) under Sections 62/63, 68 and 628 of the
Companies Act, 1956 against vanishing companies and their
promoters/directors for misstatement in prospectus/
fraudulently inducing persons to invest money/false
statement made in the offer documents etc. The cases are
pending in the Courts.
• FIRs have also been filed against such companies and their
promoters/directors for the offences punishable under
Sections 420, 406, 403, 415, 418 & 424 of the Indian Penal
Code (IPC).

12
• The details of Vanishing Companies and their promoters/
directors had been published in the Newspapers to facilitate
investors to come forward and lodge their complaints against
these companies in order to help the Police authorities in
their investigation and prosecution launched against them
in the Courts.
• The concerned Task Forces are reviewing the working of
Vanishing Companies, which had been deleted from the list,
very closely with a view to keep a close watch so that such
companies do not indulge in fraudulent activities again.
• The Ministry has also implemented an e-Governance project
under which the identity of directors has been built in
through the introduction of a Director Identification Number
(DIN) to facilitate effective legal action against the directors
of such companies under the law, keeping in view the
possibility of fraud by companies and the phenomenon of
companies that raised funds from the public and vanished
thereafter.
• For bringing awareness amongst the investors, details of
the Vanishing Companies and their promoters/directors have
been placed on the Website of the Ministry
(www.mca.gov.in). Further, a new Website
www.watchoutinvestors.com has been created by Prime
Investors Protection Association and League, with the
financial assistance from the Investor Education and
Protection Fund, to help the investors to protect themselves
from unscrupulous promoters, companies and entities. This
website is a national web-based registry covering entities
including companies, intermediaries and, wherever available,
persons associated with such entities, who have been
indicted for an economic default and/or for non-compliance
of laws/guidelines. It enables investors to do a free, fast
and user-friendly search on such entities/persons before
making any new investments and for continuously reviewing
their existing portfolio vis-a-vis such entities. This website
also marks a step on the part of the Ministry in promoting
investor protection through various means including investor
awareness and education.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 50)
The Committee feel that the auditors/auditing firms who either
fail in their duties to audit the companies/properly on knowingly

13
shut their eyes to any impending misfortune for the investors should
also be held equally responsible. The Committee desire that the
Government should, within the extant provisions of the law, try to
pinpoint erring auditors and their firms equally responsible, otherwise
the very idea of the auditors acting as whistleblowers would be
defeated. The Committee find that the Government are toothless in
this regard as they gather the impression, from the replies of the
Government, that all they can do is to ask CAG to exercise due caution
while appointing the ‘guilty’ firms as statutory auditors for conducting
the audit of public sector companies, while they are free to operate in
the private sector. The Committee, in this regard, would like to see
the ‘guilty’ auditors/auditing firms to be treated as accomplices in the
eyes of the Government.
Reply of the Government
Action can be taken for professional and other misconduct against
an erring Chartered Accountant under the provisions of the Chartered
Accountants Act, 1949. The Parliament has passed the Chartered
Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2006 in March, 2006 which, inter-alia,
provides that action for professional misconduct can be taken against
those Chartered Accountants who do not exercise due diligence or are
grossly negligent in the conduct of their professional duties. Stricter
penalties have also been provided through the Amendment Act. In
accordance with the revised provisions, a penalty of fine upto Rs. 5.00
lakh can also be imposed in addition to existing penalties of reprimand
or removal of name from the register of membership for a specified
period or permanently in the case of proved mis-conduct by a member.
These measures are expected to ensure higher level of accountability
for the Chartered Accountants.
Apart from above, the Ministry is also examining the feasibility of
taking appropriate action against the Chartered Accountants (CAs)
associated with the public issue of securities made by Vanishing
Companies involving larger size issues. Prosecutions have already been
launched by the concerned Registrar of Companies against the auditors
of M/s. Western India Industries Ltd., M/s. Kiev Finance Ltd., and
M/s. Vini Metaspin Steels Ltd. for contravention of provisions of
Companies Act, 1956.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 52)
In this regard, the Committee also note the recommendations of
the Samir Biswas Committee that the coordination mechanism may
involve Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in

14
addition to Ministry of Company Affairs and SEBI. The Committee
feel that the present mechanism may be extended to also incorporate
representative of Department of Economic Affairs, as they are primarily
responsible to oversee the implementation of Government’s policies in
regard to regulation of Capital Market.
Reply of the Government
The Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) has taken
note of the suggestion for involving a representative of Department of
Economic affairs, Ministry of Finance, in addition to the Ministry of
Company Affairs and SEBI, and decided in its meeting held on
26.07.2006 to request the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance, to depute their representative to be a Member of the CMC.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 53)
The Committee note the government’s efforts to prepare a database
of all Directors of the companies under the system of allotment of
DIN (Director Identification Number) under the MCA-21 e-governance
project and urge the Government to expedite completion of the same.
The Committee also note the Government decision to take up a
technical scrutiny of Balance Sheets of all such companies, which come
out with IPOs, so as to monitor the utilization of funds raised from
the public. The Committee while appreciating the Government’s
decision, desire that the Government may fix a suitable time limit in
this direction so that the investors in the secondary market may also
be benefited.
Reply of the Government
The system of allotment of DIN has already been introduced under
the MCA-21 e-Governance project. More than 2.25 lakh Directors have
already been allotted the DIN. Rules under the provisions of the
amended Act are in the process of being issued. This exercise is
expected to be completed nationwide by the end of December, 2006.
The Ministry has taken note of the observation of the Committee
on conducting technical scrutiny with the help of the MCA-21 database.
The modalities are being worked out on lines of the observation made
by the Committee.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 65, 66)
The Committee note that the utilization of the proceeds of the
funds under IEPF have shown an inconsistent trend. The percentage

15
of expenditure in 2002-03 was 59.4%, in 2003-04 it was 94.52%. Again
in 2004-05 it plunged to 54.46% and in 2005-06 it was 86.72%. While
taking note of the Government’s efforts for a more effective utilization
of the fund available under IEPF, the Committee still feel that such
efforts are not adequate enough. The Committee feel that the
government have not been able to utilize the amount of fund available
to their credit. This calls for restructuring of schemes under IEPF. The
Committee also take note of the J.J. Irani Committee‘s recommendations
in this regard and express agreement over their suggestion that the
structure and administration of the fund should be revamped and
schemes should be made more comprehensive and their scope
expanded to enable flow of current information to the investors about
their rights.
Besides, in view of the spurt in various scams related to capital
market in the last few years, the Committee feel that the time has
come to utilize the IEPF on the education of small investors, who are
more gullible due to lack of proper information.
Reply of the Government
The Committee on IEPF has been reconstituted with experts drawn
from various fields namely, capital market, economics, finance, banking
and media so as to provide a broad based pool of experts on the
Committee. It is proposed to engage a professional agency, which will
advise the committee and help in preparing a comprehensive Action
Plan indicating a complete basket of various activities including a media
plan. This would also include plans for spread of financial literacy so
as to empower the investor.
Further, in order to protect the interest of the investors, the
suggestions given by the Irani Committee are being considered with a
view to strengthen the legislative framework. MCA-21 e-Governance
initiative has been launched with a view to bring transparency and
certainty in the delivery of services to the stakeholders and empower
the investors by providing access to the public information about the
companies.

16
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 49)
The Committee also recommend that special care should be taken
at the time of registration of a company as this marks its arrival and
possibility of raising Capital. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that Government should be more alert during the process of registering
the companies so as to assess their potential viability to survive in the
competitive environment and benefit their investors.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. However, it
may be submitted that a company is required to file a prospectus
with SEBI before going in for a public issue with the intent of tapping
Capital Market. The requisite scrutiny of the antecedents of a company
is carried out by SEBI while approving its prospectus. This exercise
cannot be taken up at the time of registration of a company.
Notwithstanding the above, the Ministry has introduced a concept of
a unique Director Identification Number (DIN) under the e-Governance
programme. This feature will be helpful in tracking the Directors of
the company at all times.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 67)
The Committee note that the government do not support the idea
of either assigning the funds under IEPF created under the Companies
Act, 1956 to SEBI or placing the funds under the Central Monitoring
Committee jointly chaired by the Ministry of SEBI on the ground that
since IEPF has been created by the government after expropriating the
moneys from the budget allocated to it, which belong to investors by
exercising its sovereign right through Statute. Moreover, SEBI is already
represented in IEPF committees. The Committee are, however, of the
view that the broad issues on which complaints from the aggrieved
investors are being received relate to refund claims of investors, shares/
debenture certificate, dividend amount, interests etc. which are generally
looked after by SEBI. They further feel that since SEBI is the primary

17
market regulator and cases of unscrupulous persons duping investors
is also one of its concerns, it would, perhaps, be appropriate if SEBI
is given a bigger role not only in preparation and approval of schemes
relating to IEPF but also in the approval for disbursement of funds.
The Committee hope that the Government will consider the concern
expressed by them and will administer the Investor Education and
Protection Fund (IEPF) in coordination with SEBI.
Reply of the Government
The Committee on IEPF takes all the decisions relating to
administration of the Fund. Further, financial assistance to various
organizations/associations/Institutes etc. are disbursed only after the
approval of the Sub-Committee/Committee on IEPF. Executive Director,
Securities and Exchange Board of India, is a member of the Committee
on IEPF. Thus, SEBI is already associated in the administration of the
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF). Moreover, SEBI has its
own sources of funds for this purpose.
It is further submitted that the investors concerns are not limited
to the listed companies alone which constitute less than 1.5% of the
total number of companies registered under the Companies Act, 1956.
As regards Ministry‘s efforts and future plans in this direction, attention
is invited to the reply Paras 65 & 66.

18
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 51)
The Committee also find that even the definition of vanishing
companies is ambiguous thereby leaving loopholes in the law. From
the information furnished to them, they note that one of the criteria
which states that ‘no correspondence has been received by the Exchange
from the company for a long time’, is interpreted by the Task Forces
concerned to imply a period between 2 to 3 years of absence of
correspondence between the exchange and the company. The Committee
feel that any company which has duped its investors, can continue to
operate and avoid being classified as ‘vanishing’ just by sending a
piece of correspondence, at intervals of 2-3 years. They, therefore, felt
that the criteria for identifying a company as vanished/vanishing needs
streamlining and call upon the Government to have a re-look at the
definition, so that all such companies, having the slightest intention of
duping investors of their hard earned money, could be classified as
‘vanishing or potentially vanishing companies’.
Reply of the Government
The issue of a clearer definition of a Vanishing Company and the
criteria for identifying a company as vanished/vanishing was placed
before the Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) in its
meeting held on 26.07.2006. The Committee decided to amend one of
the criteria by substituting the words ‘for a long time’ with ‘a period of
two years’  for identifying the company as a vanishing company. This
would take care of the said ambiguity.
The criteria for identifying a company as vanished now stands
revised as under:
(i) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchange/ROC
respectively for a period of 2 years;
(ii) No correspondence has been received by the Exchange from
the company for a period of two years; and

19
(iii) No of fice of the company is located at the mentioned
registered office address at the time of Stock Exchange
inspection.
All the conditions laid down have to be met for treating a company
as vanishing and companies satisfying one or more but not all
conditions are not to be considered as vanishing.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 80)
The Committee note that the J.J Irani Committee have already
taken up the issue of exit or liquidation of companies in detail in
view of the inordinate delays and lengthy procedure for companies to
exit. The Committee also note from the reply of the Government
referring to the observation in a World Bank Report that the time
taken for a companies to exit is between 2-3 years in China. Malaysia
and Thailand whereas it is about 10 years in India. They further note
that the Government have attributed this delay to the lengthy nature
of judicial process. The Committee are or the view that it is essential
to provide a sound framework for winding up and liquidation of
companies. In this connection, the Committee recommends that in the
extant legal provisions, the Government should strive work in such a
time-bound manner that, excluding the time taken for obtaining the
approval of the High Court, all other formalities could be completed
within a period of 2-3 years. Moreover, the Committee hope that efforts
by the Government to get the NCLT second Amendment Act, 2002
passed at the earliest in their favour by the Supreme Court, would
pave way for its establishment ultimately. This, the Committee hope
will help in reducing time for getting required judicial approval for
exit of companies, overall, the Committee opine that simplifying the
existing liquidation process and speeding up the winding up of sick
companies having no chance of revival would be steps in the right
direction. Besides the modified framework should seek to preserve the
estate and maximize the value of assets of the existing company so
that those could be redeployed suitably.
Reply of the Government
With a view to deal with some of the issues arising out of
reconstruction/liquidation/winding up, the Companies Act, 1956 was
amended through Companies (Amendment) Act, 2002 and the
consequential establishment of the National Company Law Tribunal
and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. It was also provided
that the functions of rehabilitation of companies (at present done by
BIFR and AAIFR) and liquidation/winding up of companies (which is

20
being done by High Courts) would be brought under the purview of
the National Company Law Tribunal and National Company Law
Appellate Tribunal. Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
1985 is to be repealed. However, due to legal challenge, which is now
with Hon’ble Supreme Court, the National Company Law Tribunal
and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal could not be
established. The new provisions also could not be notified.
The Ministry of Company Affairs is taking note of the observation
of Committee for speedy conduct of winding up process and enabling
the maximization of the value of assets under liquidation.
The entire framework relating to rehabilitation/liquidation/winding
up is being revised as a part of the exercise of reviewing the Companies
Act.
A revised comprehensive Bill which, inter-alia will address this
problem is under preparation and will be introduced in Parliament
after due approval.

21
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December, 2006 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

22
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11th December, 2006
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
8. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Mahendra Mohan
11. Shri Chittabarta Majumdar
Secretariat
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
5. Shrimati Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***

23
5. *** *** ***
6. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft report on action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 40th Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of
Ministry of Company Affairs and adopted the same without any
modification/amendment.
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of suggestions received from the Members and also make
consequential changes arising out of factual verification and present
the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

24
APPENDIX
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTIETH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007) OF THE MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
Total    % of
Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 15
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 11 73.33
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 to
7, 9, 11, 12 & 13)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which 2 13.33
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 8 & 14)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 2 13.34
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 10 & 15)
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect Nil 00.00
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
(Nil)