7 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
 
 
           FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
   
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Third  Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for 
Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry of Planning] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry of Planning] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22  December, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI   
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
CHAPTER I       Report 
 
CHAPTER II      Recommendations/observations which have been  
                          accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III     Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
                          do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
                          replies  
 
CHAPTER IV     Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
                           replies of the Government have not been accepted  
                           by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V      Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
                          final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 20 December, 2004                
  
  
APPENDIX 
Analysis of the action taken by government on the recommendations  
contained in the Third  Report of the Standing Committee on Finance  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the  
Ministry of  Planning    
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2004-2005    
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat 
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato 
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
11. Shri Rupchand Pal 
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
14. Shri K.S. Rao 
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
16. Shri Lakshman Seth 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri Ajit Singh 
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Murli Deora 
23. Shri R.P. Goenka 
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha 
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar 
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Sh. P.D.T. Achary  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. (Smt.) P.K. Sandhu - Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. R.K. Jain   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Sh. R.C. Kakkar  - Under Secretary  
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf present this Seventh Report on action 
taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report of the 
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry 
of  Planning. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/ laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 
August, 2004.  The government furnished the replies indicating ac tion taken on all the 
recommendations on 22 November, 2004.  The Draft Action Taken Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Finance at their sitting held on 20 
December, 2004. 
 
3. An analysis of action taken by  Government on recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth L ok Sabha) of the Committee is given in the 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI;                                                           MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI  
20 December, 2004                                                                              CHAIRMAN,                           
29 Agrahayana 1926 (SAKA)                        STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action 
taken by the Government on the reco mmendations contained in their Third 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on De mands for Grants (2004-2005) of 
Ministry of Planning which was pr esented to Lok Sabha on 20 August, 
2004. 
 
2. The Report contained Six recommendations.  Action Taken 
Notes have been received from the Go vernment in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the R eport. These have been categorised 
as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3 (Para Nos. 33 to 35),4 & 6 
           (Chapter II- Total 3 ) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Sl. No. 5 
(Chapter III-Total  1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. Nos. 1 & 3 (Para No. 36)  
         (Chapter IV-Total 2) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. No.  Nil 
(Chapter V-Total Nil) 
 
3.    The Committee desire th at replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapte r I should be furnished to the 
Committee expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 

 
GDP – Indicator of Growth Performance of the Economy  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 15 & 16) 
 
 
5.  The Committee had found that the overall performance of the 
economy had seriously suffered during the first year (2002-03) of the Tenth 
Plan and the Gross Domestic Product (G DP) grown at a rate of around 4.0 
percent as compared to 5.8 percent in 2001-02 as agai nst the projected 
rate of 8 percent as envisaged in the Tenth Plan.  The Committee were 
given to understand that t he main reason for slow growth during the first 
year of the Tenth Plan was due to poor monsoon that resulted in negative 
growth rate for the agriculture sector  resulting in decline in the overall 
growth rate.  However, growth performance of the econom y in the second 
year of the Tenth Plan (2003-04) as released by Central Statistical 
Organisation (CSO) was 8.3 percent.  The Committee had expressed their 
apprehension that since during the first year of the Tenth Plan there had 
been a slippage in average growth rate, it  might not be possible to achieve 
the target of 8 percent during the remaining three years unless the growth 
rate was accelerated to more than 8 percent. 
 
6.       The Committee had therefor e desired the Ministry to apprise the 
actual growth rate (sector-wise) achi eved during the first two years of the 
Tenth Plan and the corrective measur es taken/proposed to be taken to 
accelerate the growth ra te during the remaining th ree years of the Plan.  
They had expressed the view that unl ess policy measures and institutional 
changes as envisaged in the 10th Plan were implemented expeditiously, the 
targeted growth rate of 8 percent coul d not be achieved.  They were given 
to understand that in order to achieve this ambitious target, the domestic 
savings must have been at the leve l of about 26 % but the Ministry 
(Planning Commission) were lagging behind in this regard.  They, 
therefore, recommended that the Planni ng Commission should have come 
out with a policy which might have suggested the ways to boost the 

domestic savings.  If the target in re spect of savings was achieved there 
was no reason why the investment rate would not pick up which in turn 
would help in achieving the growth rate  target.   They also desired that 
Planning Commission might carry out periodical monitoring and keep a 
close look at the situation.  The Committee, also, recommended that 
Planning Commission should have taken initiatives to  encourage public 
investments in rural infrastructure and social sectors and given directions to 
Ministries/Departments to make effective and efficient use of the available 
resources in each sector of the economy and also take action towards 
improving governance and enh ancing the efficiency of the delivery system 
in order to achieve steady acceleration in growth performance. 
 
7.   The Government in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“Planning Commission agrees with view of the Committee 
that due to slippage in the average ra te of growth in the first two 
years, it might not be possible to achieve the target of 8 percent 
for the Tenth Plan.  The Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan, 
expected to be completed this year, will address the issue relating 
to growth rate in the remaining three years of the Tenth Plan.” 
 
 “The Planning Commission, at the time of Annual Plans, carries 
out periodical monitoring of the sa vings and investment rates of 
the economy.  The reco mmendations regarding the 
encouragement to public investment  in different sectors of the 
economy and improving governance and enhanc ing efficiency of 
the delivery system will be made in the Mid-term Appraisal to the 
Tenth Five Year Plan.  The Appraisal is expected to be completed 
this year.” 

 
8.   The Committee take note th at Government have conceded 
the fact that due to slippage in the average growth rate in the first two 
years of Tenth Plan, the target of 8% for the Tenth Plan might not be 
possible to achieve.  The Committ ee, however, have been informed 
that mid-term appraisal of Tenth Plan will address all the issues 
relating to growth rate in the remaining three years of Tenth Plan 
including steps for encouragement of  public investment in different 
sectors of the economy and impr oving governance and enhancing 
efficiency of the delivery system which is expected to be completed 
this year. They, therefore, desire that the Government should 
earnestly take positive steps so that the mid-term appraisal is 
completed this year (2004).  The Committee be intimated completion-
report by 31 January, 2005. 
 
 
National Commission on Population (NCP) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para Nos. 33, 34, 35 & 36) 
 
9. The Committee noted that the National  Commission on Population (NCP), 
was set up on 11 th May, 2000 under the Chairmans hip of Prime Minister and 
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission as Vice-Chairman along-with 125 
members and permanent invitees primarily to review , monitor and give directions 
for the implementation of the policies and programmes relating to population 
stabilization set out in the National Popul ation Policy.  They considered that the 
National Commission had a major role to play in respect of stabilization of 
population in the country. 
 
10.    In their action taken reply the Government have stated as under: 
 
“The National Commission on Population fully agree with 
the observation of the Standing Fi nance Committee that it has a 
major role to play in respect of stabilization of population in the 
country.”   
 

11. They noted with serious concern that  eight States namely, UP, Bihar, MP, 
Rajasthan, Orissa, Uttaranchal, Jhark hand and Chattisgarh c ontributed 45% of 
the population in the country and thus we re reckoned as high fertility States, the 
Government had set up a Empowering Action Group (EAG) to deal with the 
population problem in these States.  They were given to understand that EAG 
mechanism was to work as single window clearance system for approving 
schemes to address the demographic problems in these States.  They also noted 
that National Population Policy 2000 had set out an ambitiou s target of reducing 
fertility rate and attaining the level of 2.1 percent by 2010.  This target could be 
achieved only if the special concerted efforts were put in place by these States. 
 
12.    The Government in their reply have stated as under : 
 
“ The Empowered Action Group is already functioning within the 
Department of Family Welfare to focus on population control programme in 
the eight EAG States and the most ambitious target of the National 
Population Policy is to achieve the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) of 2.1 by 2010. 
The Commission, in accordance with its terms of reference is taking special 
efforts to oversee and review t he policies and programmes of the 
Department of Family Welf are. With a view to involve the high fertility and 
other states, the Commission has also given grants-in-aid to them to 
formulate state specific population stabi lization programme in consultation 
with the Commission.  This is being followed up vigorously. “  
 
13.   They also desired that States  performance with regar d to Population 
Stabilisation Programme (PSP) might be in cluded as one of the cr iteria to draw 
central aid by them and such assistance might be denied to non performing 
States.  In their view, this would inspir e the States to participate in the population 
stabilization programme. 
 
14.   The Government have stated as under: 
 
“The National Commission on Popu lation fully agree with the 
observation of the Standing Finance Committee that State’s 
performance with regard to Popula tion Stabilization Programme may 
be included as one of the criteria to draw central aid by them and such 
assistance may be denied to non performing States as it will inspire the 
States to participate in the populat ion stabilization. This has been 
noted for compliance.”  
 

 
15.    From the figures made available to them, t he Committee were given to 
understand that the funds a llocated for the National Commission on Population 
remained under utilized.  The non availabi lity of required number of officers and 
staff had been cited as the main reason fo r the under utilization of funds during 
2001-02 and 2002-03.  The under utilizati on of funds during 2003-04 was owing 
to postponement of the ma in conference of National  Commission on Population, 
foreign and domestic travels owing to other important work  and non release of 
instalments for research studies etc.   The Committee recommended that the 
budgetary allocations as far as possible should have been made realistic and 
adequate staff must might have been put in place so that NCP becomes fully 
functional in true sense.  The Committee also desired that more efforts should 
have been taken to review demographic scenario at national and state level 
making population stabilization a peoples ’ programme.  While human resources 
needed to be developed fully, the Stand ing Committee underscored the need to 
control population in our country. 
 
16.     In their action taken reply the Government have stated as under : 
 
 “It is true that the Commission has not been able to utilize its 
budget allocations fully during the pr evious years mainly owing to 
shortage of officers and staff, pos tponement of the main conference 
and domestic and foreign travels and non-release of installments to 
research institutions.   The budgetary projections are now being 
made with utmost care and the vacant posts ar e under the process 
of filling up. The observations of the  Committee have been noted for 
compliance and required steps are being taken to minimize the 
incidence of underutiliz ation of funds.  The Committee’s suggestion 
for putting more efforts  to review demograph ic scenario at national 
and state level has also been not ed for compliance and necessary 
steps are being initiated in this direction including the development 
of human resources.” 
 
 
17. The Committee take note that the Government have 
accepted the recommendations of the Committee that States 
performance with regard to Population Stabilisation Programme 
be included as one of the criteria to draw central aid by them and 

such aid would be denied to non- performing States.  They are of 
the view that Government should have furnished the modalities 
and time-frame to implement the Population Stabilisation 
Programme.  Hence, they want that Government should draw a 
road-map indicating the modaliti es and time-frame as early as 
possible and inform them from time to time.  
The Committee further note that Government have admitted 
that there was under utilisation of  budgetary   allocations during 
the previous years due to various reasons pointed out by them in 
their recommendation.  They are not satisfied by the Government 
reply with regard to fillin g up of vacant posts, review of 
demographic scenario at nationa l and state level including the 
development of human resources.   They expected that the 
Government would come out with concrete proposals on these 
vital issues but it has given only casual and stereotyped reply.  
Hence, they reiterate their ear lier recommendation and want the 
Government to indicate specific measures taken in respect of 
their recommendation at the earliest.  
  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee note with serious concern that a high level of fiscal deficit 
continues to be an area of concern for t he policy planners which is mostly due to 
decline in tax to GDP ratio and significant  increase in the revenue expenditure of 
the Government both at Centre and States levels.  They note that fiscal position 
of States is somewhat ala rming and unless drastic meas ures are taken to arrest 
the mismatch between the cash flows, t he position would become worse.  Many 
State Governments resort to massive borrowings to meet their expenditure which 
push them in a debt trap.  They are given to understand that in order to reduce 
burden of States with regard to interest payment, the Central Government has 
introduced a Debt Swap scheme for the States which enables the State 
Governments to retire their high interest bearing loans and swap with low interest 
bearing loans.   They note with satisfac tion that this scheme has given much 
relief to the State Governments but at the sa me time are of the view that it is not 
sufficient and more has to be done. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Planning Commission shares the serious concern expressed by the 
Committee regarding high level of fiscal deficit and decli ne in tax-GDP ratio and 
this has got adequately reflected in the Tenth Plan document.  However, this 
issue is in the domain of Ministry of Finance. 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th  November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 27) 
 
 The Committee view the situation very seriously and desire that the 
Planning Commission should give directions to the State Governments to keep 
the non plan revenue expenditure and their borrowings under tight control to 
enable greater flow of finances for strengthening the process of fiscal 
consolidation.  States should also be persuaded to maintain strict fiscal disclipline 
by improving their own resources thr ough appropriate fiscal reforms enlisted in 
the Medium Term Fiscal Reforms (MTFR). The Committee would also like to 

know the monitorable fiscal reforms drawn by the State Governments for 
improving their financial position in the medium term. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The above recommendation is accept ed for compliance.  During Annual 
Plan discussions, through various rounds of persuasive reasoning, States are 
being told to keep Non-Pl an Revenue Expenditure and borrowings under a tight 
reign.   Medium Term Fiscal Refo rm (MTFR) programme drawn up by State 
Governments for improving their financ ial position in the medium term are 
implemented under the overal l coordination of the Mini stry of Finance (MOF).  
MOF is also directly monitoring progress in implementation of  monitorable fiscal 
reforms drawn up by State Governments. 
 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 33) 
 
 The Committee note that the National Commission on Population (NCP), 
was set up on 11 th May, 2000 under the Chairmans hip of Prime Minister and 
Deputy Chairman, Planni ng Commission as Vice -Chairman alongwith 125 
members and permanent invitees primarily to review , monitor and give directions 
for the implementation of the policies and programmes relating to population 
stabilization set out in the National Popula tion Policy.  They consider that the 
National Commission has a major role to play in respect of stabilization of 
population in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Commission on Population fully agree with the observation 
of the Standing Finance Committ ee that it has a major role to play in respect of 
stabilization of population in the country.   
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 34) 
 
 They note with serious concern that eight States namely, UP, Bihar, MP, 
Rajasthan, Orissa, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand and Chattisgarh contribute 45% of the 
population in the country and thus are reckoned as high fertility states, the 
Government has set up a Empowering Action Group (EAG) to deal with the 

population problem in these States.  They are given to understand that EAG 
mechanism is to work as single window clearance system for approving schemes 
to address the demographic problems in these States.  They also note that 
National Population Policy 2000 has set out an ambitious target of reducing 
fertility rate and attaining the level of 2. 1 percent by 2010.  This target can be 
achieved only if the special concerted efforts are put in place by these States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Empowered Action Group is already functioning within the Department 
of Family Welfare to focus on populati on control programme in the eight EAG 
States and the most ambitious target of  the National Popul ation Policy is to 
achieve the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) of 2.1 by 2010. The Commission, in 
accordance with its terms of reference is  taking special efforts to oversee and 
review the policies and programmes of the Department of Family Welfare. With a 
view to involve the high fertility and other  states, the Commission has also given 
grants-in-aid to them to formulate st ate specific population stabilization 
programme in consultation with the Commi ssion.  This is being followed up 
vigorously.   
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 35) 
 
 They also desire that States performance with regard to Population 
Stabilisation Programme (PSP) may be in cluded as one of the cr iteria to draw 
central aid by them and such assist ance may be denied to non performing 
States.  In their view, this will inspire the States to participate in the population 
stabilization programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Commission on Populatio n fully agree with the observation of 
the Standing Finance Committee that State’s performance with regard to 
Population Stabilization Programme may be included as one of the criteria to 
draw central aid by them and such assi stance may be denied to non performing 
States as it will inspire the States to participate in the popul ation stabilization. 
This has been noted for compliance.  
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th  November, 2004 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 46) 
 
 The Committee note that the “Modernisa tion of Office System” is divided 
into parts viz. (i) Renovation and alterati on (ii) Information Technology.  They are 
of the view that these parts create lot of confusion as bo th the parts as stated do 
not co-relate with each other at the time  of implementation of the programme.  
They find that the governm ent has explained their intent for raising these 
demands but they feel that better cla ssification could have been made by the 
Government.  At the same time they al so want the Government to ensure that 
expenditure on IT is fully utilized and does not remain unspent.  They feel that IT 
spendings may be closely monitored by t he government as this is an area which 
can provide essential impetus to the technology upgradation programme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is stated that the Pl an Scheme “Modernisation of Office Systems” aims 
at making the planning process, namely, plan formulation, implementation, follow 
up and evaluation more efficient and effective through improvement in 
information technology and provision of m odern offices and equipment facilities. 
Thus, both the “renovation and alteration” and “information technology” are the 
two integral parts of the Scheme. Prior to  introduction by the Ministry of Finance 
of a new head “Information Technology” at  the detailed head level, i.e., the fifth 
level of classification in the Detailed Demands for Grant s, expenditure on 
purchase of “IT” related equipments like latest model of computers, printers, 
scanners, projectors, laptop computers, useful softwar es was booked under this 
Scheme. The purpose for introducing th is new budgetary and accounting head 
was to facilitate the monito ring of expenditure incurred by various Ministries on 
“Information Technology”. However, as t he new head is at the fifth level of 
classification, it cannot stand alone an d has to be clubbed with any of the sub 
heads denoting identical nature of the schem e. Nor can “IT” serve as the Object 
Head that is the sixth and the final un it level under which all expenditure 
projections must necessarily be shown in the Detailed Demands for Grants as 
per the Government of I ndia’s Delegation of Financia l Powers Rules. Further, 
there is no other Plan Scheme handled by the Planning Commission with which 
the head “Information Technology” can be clubbed. Thus, the Plan Scheme 
“MoOS” is the only appropriate Scheme to accommodate this head. The Office of 
Controller General of Accounts, on advice, has also opined that as ‘Information 
Technology’ is a subcomponent of the scheme ‘Modernisation of Office Systems’ 

the present classification of showing it  at detailed head level below the scheme 
appears to be correct. 
Besides General Administration, “Spat ial Data Infrastructure for Multi-
Layered Geographical Information System (GIS) for Planning” and “Computer 
Aided Digital Mapping Project for Metro Cities” are the two IT schemes 
envisaged to be implemented by NIC on be half of the Planning Commission.  An 
outlay of Rs.25.00 crore and Rs.14.00 cr ore has been approved for these two 
schemes respectively for the Annual Plan 2004-05, and Rs. 11.00 crore for the 
General Administration. Secretary, Planning Commission has taken a series of 
meetings with various organizations engaged in generating spatial data required 
for this purpose including the Registrar General of India, Survey of India, 
Geological Survey of India, Forest Surv ey of India, National Remote Sensing 
Agency etc. The recommendations of the Committee towards ensuring full 
utilization of funds have been noted. The progress of implementation of the 
schemes would be monitored closely and all steps necessary to ensure full 
utilization of funds allocated for the schemes would be taken by the Commission. 
 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 58) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Pl anning Commission is operating a Plan 
Scheme, namely, Expertise for Planning process – Payment for Professional and 
Special Services (PPSS).  Under this Sc heme, the services of experts including 
the retired Government officials are engaged by the Planning Commission on full 
time or part time basis for undertaking sp ecific studies of complex nature which 
are of current interest to the Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation is noted. 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 59) 
 
 From the figures made available to  them, the Committee are constrained 
to find that there is a wide gap between actual utilization of funds meant for 
“Expertise for Planning Process” parti cularly during 2001-02 under plan.  The 

Committee are not inclined to accept the view poi nt of the Minist ry that it was 
difficult to assess the type or number of st udies requiring the services of experts, 
which were going to be undertaken during a particular year.  They are of the view 
that the Planning Commission should have learnt from the past experience and 
should have made realistic projections. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Due to discontinuance of “Agro Climatic  Regional Planning Unit (ARPU)” 
w.e.f. 01.04.2002, the concerned agencies were not able to fully utilize the 
amounts earlier released to them in the previous years and hence, there was a 
short fall in their demands for rel ease of additional funds during 2001-02. 
Besides, certain unutilized amount releas ed to the implementing agencies for 
ARPU during the previous years was also  received back from these agencies in 
the year 2001-2002 and the subsequent two years, which brought the net Actuals 
to less than BE/RE. But for these Rece ipts, the actual expenditure during the 
years 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 would have been as per the original Estimates. 
However, the observations of the Committee have been noted and efforts will be 
made to make the Budget Estimates as re alistic as possible in order to reduce 
the gap between Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and the Actuals 
 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 60) 
 
 As regards, the steep rise in the budgetary allocation for the year 2004-05, 
the Committee are given to understand t hat higher provisions have been made a 
meet a number of studies which are likely to be assigned to outside 
experts/institutes for pr eparation of mid-term appraisal of the Tenth Plan, 
compilation of State Development Reports  (SDRs) for all the 35 States/UTs 
during 2004-05.  In view of the very fact  that the amount allocated has remained 
underutilized in the past several years, the Committee are of  the opinion that 
there should be timely utilizat ion of funds so as to complete preparations of Mid 
term appraisal and State SDRs in time. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation of the Standing Committee on Finance has been noted for 
compliance, and necessary efforts will be made in this regard.  
The Mid Term Appraisal (MTA) of the Tenth Five Year Plan is only 
one time activity during the Five Year per iod.  In order to induct alternative 
perspectives; new ideas and non-Governmental inputs into MTA of Tenth 

Plan, it was decided to constitute Consultative Groups in various sectors. In 
view of the fact that the expenses of organizing meetings and TA/DA of 
non official members of these Groups  were to be borne by the Planning 
Commission, a higher provision was kept for the purpose under sub head 
O A & E of the Scheme. In view of the recent development that these 
Consultative Groups have been dissolved, the provision under this sub 
head is accordingly, proposed to be r educed substantially at RE (2004-05) 
level. 
 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th  November, 2004 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 60) 
 
   The Committee, therefore, recomm end that budgetary exer cise should be 
undertaken keeping in view the actual requirement so that the gap between 
Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and ac tuals get minimized and they desire 
that two separate heads may be given to differentiate t he two, one for “Payment 
for Professionals” and other for “Special Services”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation of the Standing Committee on Finance has been noted 
for future guidance and compliance and efforts will be made in future (i.e. from 
2005-2006 and onwards) to make the Budget Estimates as realistic as possible 
in order to reduce the gap between Bud get Estimates, Revised Estimates and 
the Actuals.  
 
 It is stated that in terms of Governm ent of India’s Order (2) below Rule 8 
of the Delegation of Financia l Powers Rules, 1978, in the Detailed Demands for 
Grants, all detailed demands  should end with object head. The Ministry of 
Finance prepares the list of object heads to  be used in the Demands for Grant 
and also makes additions therein. As  the object head “28 – Payments for 
professional and special services” is a si ngle approved object head, it cannot be 
divided further into two parts, as desired by the Committee.  
 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th  November, 2004 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 50) 
 
 The Committee regret to observe that there had alwa ys been substantial 
under-utilization of budgetary provision un der the head ‘Grants-in-Aid’ meant for 
Institute of Applied Manpow er Research (IAMR).   The Committee are also 
unable to understand why there was a delay in completion of construction of 
Office-cum-Residential Complex at Na rela since 2001-02 and why the scheme 
for development of infrastructure at new  campus could not be approved well in 
time in order to avoid t he under utilization of funds.  Huge allocations have been 
made at BE stage, revised at RE stage and surrendered at the end of the year 
since 2001.  The Committee are of the view that no serious efforts are being 
made by the Planning Commission to proj ect realistic demands.  The Committee 
desire that Government should make endeav our to project realistic budgetary 
allocations and every effort should be made to ensure that amount allocated for a 
particular purpose is spent thereon and does  not remain unspent.  They want 
that IAMR may be directed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) The Construction work of Office-cu m-Residential Complex of Narela was 
awarded to Central Public Works Depar tment (CPWD) in November, 1999 with 
schedule of completion of the work in May,  2001 i.e. 18 months from the date of 
award of the contract.  The construc tion was taken up by CPWD on deposit 
works basis and the work was comple ted through sub-cont ractor engaged by 
CPWD.  Funds were reimbursed periodi cally depending upon the progress of 
work.  However, the progress of work of sub-contractor was also slow and entire 
work could not be completed in time.   Thus, the construction works got delayed.  
One block of the buildi ng was inaugurated by De puty Chairman, Planning 
Commission in October, 2001. 
 
 The Infrastructure Development Proj ect is dependant on completion of the 
construction of Office-cum-Residential Comp lex.  As the construction of Office-
cum-Residential Complex pr oject got delayed, it became premature to approve 
the infrastructure Development Project and resulting in under-utilisation of funds. 

 
(b) (i) The projection of Budget Estimate  (BE) was made considering factors like 
completion of construction of Office-cum-R esidential Complex at Narela     and 
requirements of its additional infrastruc ture during 2001-02 fo r Rs.15.00 crore.  
The progress of construction of Office-c um-Residential Complex at Narela was 
slow than desired thereby Infrastructure Development Project at Narela could not 
be approved in 2001-02.  T he financial requirement for completion of 
construction work and barest minimum for infrastructure requirement for Narela 
campus was considered in RE 2001-02 at Rs .5.00 crore.  Thus, the utilization of 
funds during 2001-02 was made for Rs.432.09 lakh. 
(ii) The BE 2002-03 was pr ojected for Rs.7.50 crore considering completion 
of construction of Office-cum-Residential Complex at Narela  and requirement of 
its infrastructure.  The construction work of the project had been completed by 
CPWD and balance amount for the project was released.  The Infrastructure 
Development Project was thoroughly revi ewed but the project could not be 
approved.  Thus, the outlay had been reduced in RE 2002-03 and an amount of 
Rs.172.31 lakh was utilized. 
(iii) The BE 2003-04 was proj ected considering requirem ent of infrastructure 
for Narela Campus.  The Infrastructure Development Project initially proposed for 
Rs.14.57 crore which had bee n reviewed and realisti c assessment made.  The 
SFC had approved Rs.410.57 lakh for requirement of infrastructure at Narela.  At 
the RE stage, outlay had be en reduced to Rs.140.00 la kh and allocation was 
made for Rs.105.00 lakh.  Hence, allocated outlay is utilized during 2003-04. 
(iv) For the requirement of infrastructu re in Narela, an allocation of Rs.7.00 
crore has been made.  The surrender of ex cess, if any, will be considered in RE 
2004-05. 
c) Projection of BE under Plan Expenditure depends  upon number of 
schemes likely to be implemented but the releas e of fund from Planning 
Commission purely depends upon the progr ess of work on different plan 
schemes.  Similarly, IAMR is impl ementing the schemes through CPWD and 
progress of work achieved by CPWD is t he prime factor for ut ilization of fund.  
IAMR has been advised to make realistic estimates at the time of preparing their 
BE and strictly adhere to the schedule of completion or schedule of achievement 
of utilize allocated fund within the financial year. 
d) Taking into consideration of the observations of the 3 rd Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance, Director (IAMR) has been advised that with 
effect from the next financial year ( 2005-06), every requirem ent of Plan funds 
from Budget be supported by – 
- Milestones whose achievement will determine utilization of funds. 
- Dates for the milestones. 

- Projection of time-phasing of f unds used during the year linked  
 with the milestone dates. 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee find that the overal l performance of the economy has 
seriously suffered during the first year (2002-03) of the Tenth Plan and the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) grew at a rate of around 4.0 percent as compared to 
5.8 percent in 2001-02 as against the projected rate of 8 percent as envisaged in 
the Tenth Plan.  The Committee are given to understand that the main reason for 
slow growth during the first year of the Tenth Plan was due to poor monsoon that 
resulted in negative growth rate for the agri culture sector resulting in decline in 
the overall growth rate.  However, gr owth performance of the economy in the 
second year of the Tenth Plan (2003-04) as released by Central Statistical 
Organisation (CSO) is 8.3 percent.  The Committee express their apprehension 
that since during the first year of the Tenth Plan t here has been a slippage in 
average growth rate, it might not be possibl e to achieve the target of 8 percent 
during the remaining three years unless the growth rate is accelerated to more 
than 8 percent. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Planning Commission agrees with vi ew of the Committee that due to 
slippage in the average rate of growth in  the first two years, it might not be 
possible to achieve the target of 8 per cent for the Tenth Plan.  The Mid-Term 
Appraisal of the Tenth Plan, expected to  be completed this year, will address the 
issue relating to growth rate in the remaining three years of the Tenth Plan. 
 
Planning Commission   O.M. No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated18thNovember, 2004 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual growth rate (sector-
wise) achieved during the first two years of the Tenth Plan and the corrective 
measures taken/proposed to be taken to accelerate the growth rate during the 
remaining three years of the Plan.  They are of the view that unless policy 
measures and institutional changes as envisaged in the 10
th Plan are 

implemented expeditiously the targeted growth rate of 8 percent can not be 
achieved.  They are given to understand t hat in order to achieve this ambitious 
target, the domestic savings must be at the level of about 26 % but we are 
lagging behind in this r egard.  They, therefore, recommend that the Planning 
Commission should come out with a polic y which may suggest the ways to boost 
domestic savings.  If the target in respect of savings is achieved there is no 
reason why the investment rate will not pick up which in turn will help in achieving 
the growth rate target.   They also w ant that Planning Commission may carry out 
periodical monitoring and k eep a close look at the si tuation.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that  Planning Commission should take initiatives to 
encourage public investments in rural infr astructure and social sectors and give 
directions to Ministries/Departments to make effective and efficient use of the 
available resources in each sector of the economy and also take action towards 
improving governance and enhancing the e fficiency of the delivery system in 
order to achieve steady acceleration in growth performance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Planning Commission, at the ti me of Annual Plans, carries out 
periodical monitoring of the savings and in vestment rates of the economy.  The 
recommendations regarding the encouragement to public investment in different 
sectors of the economy and improving governance a nd enhancing efficiency of 
the delivery system will be made in the Mid-term Appraisal to the Tenth Five Year 
Plan.  The Appraisal is expected to be completed this year. 
 
Planning Commission OM No. 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 36) 
 
 From the figures made available to  them, the Committee are given to 
understand that the funds a llocated for the National Commission on Population 
remained under utilized.  The non availabi lity of required number of officers and 
staff has been cited as the main reason fo r the under utilization of funds during 
2001-02 and 2002-03.  The under utilizati on of funds during 2003-04 was owing 
to postponement of the ma in conference of National  Commission on Population, 
foreign and domestic travels owing to other important work  and non release of 
instalments for research studies et c.  The Committee recommend that the 
budgetary allocations as far as possibl e should be made re alistically and 
adequate staff must be put in place so that  NCP becomes fully functional in true 
sense.  The Committee also desire that more efforts should be taken to review 
demographic scenario at national and stat e level making population stabilization 
a peoples’ programme.  While human re sources need to be developed fully, the 
Standing Committee underscore the need to control population in our country. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is true that the Commission has  not been able to ut ilize its budget 
allocations fully during the previous years mainly owing to shortage of officers 
and staff, postponement of the main confer ence and domestic and foreign travels 
and non-release of installments to res earch institutions.   The budgetary 
projections are now being made with utmost care and t he vacant posts are under 
the process of filling up. The observations of the  Committee have been noted for 
compliance and required steps are being ta ken to minimize the incidence of 
underutilization of funds.  The Committee’s suggestion for putting more efforts  to 
review demographic scenario at  national and state level has also been noted for 
compliance and necessary steps are being init iated in this direction including the 
development of human resources. 
 
 
Planning Commission OM No 25/15/2004-OM&C dated 18th November, 2004 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                                                           MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B. C. KHANDURI  
20 December, 2004                                                                              CHAIRMAN,                           
29 Agrahayana 1926 (SAKA)                               STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Minutes of the Tenth sitting of Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 20 December, 2004 from 1530 to 1600 hrs.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Maj. Gen (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Das Gupta 
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt 
4. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil 
6. Shri K. S. Rao 
7. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
9. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
11. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri. P.D.T. Achary  -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -   Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar -   Under Secretary 
 
  2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
3. XX   XX   XX   XX.  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft action taken report on the Demands 
for Grants (2004-2005) of the Minist ry of Planning. The Committee then adopted the same with changes 
suggested by some of the Members as shown in Annexure. 
5. XX   XX   XX   XX.  
6. XX   XX   XX   XX.  
7. XX   XX   XX   XX.    
8. The Committee then authorised the Chairm an to finalise the Reports in the light of 
amendments suggested and also to make verbal and other consequential changes and present the same 
to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

ANNEXURE 
 
Amendments/modifications in the draft Action taken Report on Seventh Report 
 
Para 17, in the beginning,  before “The Committee note that Government”  insert 
the following:  
 
“The Committee take note that the Government have accepted the 
recommendations of the Committee that States performance with 
regard to Population Stabilisation Programme be included as one of 
the criteria to draw central aid by them and such aid would be denied 
to non-performing States.  They ar e of the view that Government 
should have furnished the modalities and time-frame to implement the 
Population Stabilisation Programme .  Hence, they want that 
Government should draw a road ma p indicating the modalities and 
time-frame as early as possible and inform them from time to time.”
 

 
APPENDIX 
 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
  
                        Total    % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations                      6                              
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which                        
have been accepted by the Government     
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2,                                         3                     50% 
3 (para nos. 33 to 35), 4 & 6] 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the      
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view      
of the Government’s replies 
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5]                            1            16.67%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect               2            33.33%  
of which replies of the Government have     
not been accepted by the Committee 
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 & 3 (para no. 36)] 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect           Nil                           --  
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited [Nil] 
 
 
 
 