77
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2008-2009)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Seventy-first Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs]
SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 ( Saka)

SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Seventy-first Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


COF No. 77
Price : Rs. 47.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................ 10
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................. 17
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee ......................... 18
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which  final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................ 20
A
NNEXURE
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held
on 11 December, 2008 ............................................. 23
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
Seventy-first Report of the Standing Committee
on Finance on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs................... 40

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2008-2009)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
12. Shri R. Prabhu
13. Shri K.S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Lakshman Seth
16. Shri A.R. Shaheen
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
19. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
20. Shri Ramakrishna Badiga*
21. Vacant
#
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 26.8.2008.
#V acant w.e.f. 14.11.2008 on nomination of Shri Brajesh Pathak to Rajya Sabha.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Raashid Alvi
23. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
24. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
25. Shri Mahendra Mohan
26. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
27. Shri Vijay J. Darda
28. Shri S. Anbalagan
29. Shri Moinul Hassan
30. Shri K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Seventy-seventh Report on action taken by Government
on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-first Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009)
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
2. The Seventy-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
16 April, 2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. Replies
indicating action taken on all the recommendations contained in the
Report were furnished by the Government on 12 September, 2008.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 11 December, 2008.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventy-first Report of the
Committee is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
11 December, 2008 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action
taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in their Seventy-first Report on Demands for Grants
(2008-2009) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, which was laid in
Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008 and presented to Lok Sabha on
16 April, 2008.
2. The report contained 10 recommendations. Action Taken Notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
Recommendations contained in the report. These have been categorized
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 & 10
(Total 6) (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Nil  (Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 7
(Total 1) (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 4, 8 and 9
(Total 3) (Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the comments
contained in Chapters I & V should be furnished to them
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.

2
A. Streamlining prosecution mechanism
Recommendation (No. 4)
5. In view of the increasing number of cases of prosecution against
companies year after year, the Committee expressed agreement with
the views of the Vaish Committee, 2005 on formulating a suitable
framework/in house structure for speeding up the process of
prosecution and introducing a “Company Law simplified Settlement
Scheme” on the lines of a similar Scheme launched in 2000, which
had evoked encouraging response. The Committee hoped that required
proposals in this regard would be initiated without further delay.
6. The Government in their action taken reply, stated inter-alia as
under:—
“At present, the Government is in the process of comprehensive
revision of the Companies Act, 1956 through a Companies Bill.
Proposals for effective and efficient disposal of prosecution/other
action taken in response to violations of the provisions of the Bill
or to enable better compliance are also a part of the revision
proposed and are expected to provide a better framework once
enacted.
The possibility of introducing a new Company Law Simplified
Settlement Scheme (CLSSS) needs to be viewed in the light of the
compliance requirements of different classes of companies and the
imperative of imposing adequate and effective punishment for
violation of the Law for which data was being collected. It was
the intention to enable a regime that provides adequate signals in
favour of compliance while firmly dealing with non-compliance/
violation of Law.”
7. The Committee are constrained to note the apathy of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs to the recommendations of the Vaish
Committee, 2005 for formulating a suitable framework/in-house
structure for speeding up the process of prosecution against
companies in default. The Committee reiterate that a suitable in-
house structure is imperative to speed up the process of prosecution
of defaulting companies. The Committee expect the Government to
address this issue urgently on the basis of factual data on the number
of prosecution cases pending and desire a detailed action taken note
thereon. The Committee also stress that the process of collection of
data for deciding on introducing a new Company Law Simplified
Settlement Scheme (CLSSS) be completed expeditiously. The

3
Committee desire to be apprised of the initiatives taken and progress
made in this direction within a timeframe of one month.
B. Identification of Vanishing Companies
Recommendation (No. 6)
8. As per the revised criteria for identification of vanishing
companies, in case of listed companies failing to file returns with the
stock exchanges, the SEBI was expected to explore the possibility of
initiating proceedings against the companies in default in consultation
with stock exchanges. As the matter had a bearing on identifying
potential vanishing companies, which would help in securing the
interest of the investors, the Committee had desired to be apprised of
the initiatives taken in this direction and their effectiveness in
identifying and initiating action against errant companies.
9. The Government, in their action taken reply, stated inter-alia as
follow:—
“…The default period of two years in filing the statutory returns
was a very long period for a company likely to indulge in any
mischief or fraudulent activities, which would come to the notice
of the Registrar of companies through the Balance Sheet and
Annual Return filed subsequent to completion of the relevant
financial year. On the other hand, the listed companies are required
to file quarterly returns with Stock Exchanges. Hence, SEBI is in
a better position to identify the potential of any fraud at an earlier
stage. Accordingly, SEBI has been requested to examine the action
to be taken against such companies in the event of non-filing of
two successive quarterly returns. SEBI is also in discussion with
Stock exchanges to explore the possibility of generation of alerts
by them which can be of use to the Ministry. However, SEBI has
not filed their Action Taken Report with MCA so far.”
10. The Committee take a serious view of the indifference on
the part of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) to the
Committee’s recommendation. It appears that the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs have not bothered to obtain SEBI’s reply and have
derived satisfaction by stating that “SEBI has not filed their Action
Taken Report with Ministry of Corporate Affairs so far”. This, the
Committee feel, is an unacceptable response and desire the SEBI to
furnish their action taken report in the matter at once. As Ministry
of Corporate Affairs is the nodal Ministry administering both listed
and unlisted corporate entities, the Committee expect the Ministry

4
of Corporate Affairs to play a pro-active role in identification of
vanishing companies on the basis of the revised criteria. The
Committee, therefore, stress that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
should obtain desired inputs from SEBI on regular basis and evolve
appropriate initiatives for identifying and prosecuting errant
companies failing to file the mandatory returns with the stock
exchanges. The Committee expect the Government to urgently take
positive initiatives in this direction and desire to be apprised of the
details of the same within fifteen days of submission of this Report
to Parliament.
C. Prosecution of Vanishing Companies
Recommendation (No. 7)
11. The Committee felt that precious little seemed to have been
done in prosecuting the companies which raised approximately Rs.
793.31 crore through IPO’s during the period 1992-1998. The Ministry
had informed that the detailed information on the status of the
prosecution action will be compiled on the basis of the review of each
of the cases by the Regional Task Forces on vanishing companies. The
Committee desired that the review process be completed expeditiously
and appropriate initiatives be taken for early conclusion of the
prosecution process against the companies involved. The Committee
also wished, inter-alia, to be apprised of the progress and outcome of
the prosecution action against vanishing companies identified during
the period 2001-05.
12. The Government, in their action taken reply, stated inter-alia as
follows:—
“It is stated that the prosecution cases have been launched against
all the vanishing companies and its promoters/directors under
various sections of the Companies Act, 1956 including those
pertaining to mis-statement in the Prospectus, false inducement of
persons to invest money and for non-filing of statutory returns.
FIRs have also been filed against the promoters/directors of such
companies with the jurisdictional police station under the provisions
of Indian Penal Code.
It is submitted that under the Companies Act, 1956, the
jurisdictional Registrar of Companies has the authority to file the
prosecution cases before various Courts and file FIRs with the
jurisdictional police station under the provisions of Indian Penal
Code. After the stage of filing of complaints or registering an FIR,

5
the action is to be taken by the respective court/police station
only. While the required legal representation caused to be
undertaken by the ROC before the Courts as and when the cases
are listed for hearing, the matter is also regularly pursued with
the local police authority through the Regional Task Force. For
any of the matter to be taken to its logical conclusion, the ROC
has a substantive external dependency on other organizations.
It may however be appreciated that the instrument of setting up
of the CMC and its functioning have been successful in effectively
controlling the phenomenon of vanishing companies. It has been
observed that after the CMC started functioning, the number of
vanishing companies has reduced significantly and for the period
1998-2001 only 08 companies have been taken to be vanishing
while the number of companies which vanished after this period
is NIL. The Ministry however is making all efforts to ensure that
the complaints filed against the vanishing companies and its
promoters/directors are taken to their logical conclusion at different
forums.”
13. The reply of the Government is silent in regard to the status
of the review process of the cases against companies, which raised
approximately Rs. 793.31 crore through IPOs during 1992-1998. The
Ministry of Corporate Affairs had informed the Committee that
detailed information on the status of prosecution against the errant
companies would be furnished on the basis of the review of each of
the cases by the Regional Task Forces (RTFs) on vanishing companies.
The Committee are constrained to infer from the Ministry’s silence
that there seemed to be no progress in this regard during the last
six months. The Committee desire that there should be no further
loss of time in this regard and it should be ensured that the review
process is completed within a time frame and the Committee be
informed of the status of prosecution. The information desired by
the Committee regarding the progress and outcome of the prosecution
action against vanishing companies identified during the period, 2001-
05 has also not been furnished by the Ministry so far. The Committee
take exception to the lackadaisical attitude of the Government in
acting on their recommendation and desire to be provided with a
detailed action taken note within one month.
D. Utilisation of IPOs proceeds
Recommendation (No. 8)
14. Considering the fact that identifying instances of misutilisation
of IPO proceeds by companies helps in serving the interest of investors

6
and initiating appropriate action against errant or partial errant
companies, the Committee recommended that the exercise of technical
scrutiny of balance sheets of companies that came out with IPOs from
2001 onwards be completed expeditiously. The Committee also desired
that an expert group be set up in consultation with SEBI to evolve a
detailed mechanism to effectively evaluate and monitor the utilisation
of IPO proceeds so as to identify and take remedial steps against the
fraudulent companies.
15. The Government in their action taken reply stated inter-alia:—
“As regards setting up of an expert group, it is submitted that
companies are required to file information annually in the form of
Balance Sheet and Annual Return under the Companies Act, 1956
subsequent to completion of the relevant financial year. The same
companies are also required to file quarterly financial returns with
the respective Stock Exchanges. Therefore, current financial data
would be available with SEBI. In addition, listed companies who
come out with IPOs are subject to extensive regulatory supervision
by SEBI with regard to their actions in the capital market.
Further, keeping in view of the framework for investor protection
under SEBI Act, 1992, SEBI has been requested to review the
existing system of monitoring of utilization of IPO proceeds through
constitution of an Expert Group in which Ministry of Corporate
Affairs will be a nominee.”
16. The Committee had recommended that the exercise of
technical scrutiny of balance sheets of Companies that came out
with IPOs from 2001 onwards be completed expeditiously. The
Ministry of Corporate Affairs have not furnished any information
regarding the current status in this regard. Similarly, nothing has
been mentioned as to what was the response of SEBI to Ministry of
Corporate Affairs’ request to review the system of monitoring of
utilization of IPO proceeds through constitution of an Expert Group.
The Committee desire that the Government should take up these
matters in right earnest and due seriousness. The Committee also
desire to be apprised of the progress made in this direction within
a time frame of one month.
E. Investor Education & Protection Fund (IEPF)
Recommendation (No. 9)
17. The Committee had regretted among other things, to observe
the under utilisation of budget outlays in respect of Investor Education
and Protection Fund, which ranged from 36 percent to 49 percent

7
during the years 2004-05 to 2007-08. The Committee were not convinced
of the reasons adduced therefor and desired the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs to chalk out a strategy to ensure full utilisation of funds to
give impetus to efforts for education and protection of small investors.
18. The Government, in their action taken reply stated inter-alia:—
“Regarding, chalking out a strategy by giving impetus to efforts
for education and protection of small investors and thereby
ensuring full utilisation of funds, the Ministry is working with
DAVP , in framing a comprehensive media campaign strategy with
the help of electronic and print media. As such, action has been
initiated for making the media campaigns more focused and
effective.”
19. The Committee feel that unduly long time has been taken in
framing media campaign strategy in regard to investor education.
The Committee had pointed out gross underutilization of funds under
the IEPF, which ranged from 36 percent to 49 percent during 2004-
05 to 2007-08. The Committee stress that the campaign of investor
education should not be delayed any further and the Committee be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
F. Financial Assistance under IEPF
Recommendation (No. 10)
20. The Committee were anguished that the financial assistance
provided under IEPF has remained mostly confined to Northern Region
with Rs. 3.24 crore allocated as on 15-02-2008 to NGOs based at New
Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommended that a departmental
enquiry be conducted regarding the funds allocation to NGOs/VOs
for undertaking investor education activities. The Committee wished
to be apprised of the outcome of the enquiry within three months.
The Committee also desired that efforts be made to promote
establishment of investor fora in all places and intensify efforts for
protection and welfare of investors, by appropriate awareness
campaigns and assistance to various organizations.
21. The Government, in their action taken reply, stated inter alia
that even though the Ministry has a limited role in evaluation of
applications/proposals submitted by the organisations, which are
evaluated/vetted by an independent expert agency – Indian Institute
of Capital Market (established by UTI) – a Group has been constituted
for examining the procedure of evaluation/vetting of proposals for
allocation of funds.

8
22. In this regard, in action taken note further stated:—
“In compliance with the directions of the Standing Committee on
Finance, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs constituted a Group to
look into the funds allocated to NGOs/VOS for undertaking
Investors Education Activities.”
23. The recommendations made by the Group on the basis of the
review of the procedure adopted for the evaluation of applications for
registration of NGOs/ VOs and for grant of financial assistance, whose
report has been appended to the action taken note, are as follows:
“(i) The existing procedures have been well laid out which
ensure evaluation of the applications on the basis of technical
expertise of the institute engaged for the purpose. However,
the institute may be asked to assist such new NGOs/VOs
who were approved for registration but were not granted
any financial assistance in view of inappropriate proposals
framed by them or lack of infrastructure to take up the
scale of operations/programmes which were proposed by
them, to frame smaller programmes so as to ensure increased
participation and awareness;
(ii) The IICM was having 114 number of proposals pending
with it, as on May 17, 2008. The institute may be asked to
expedite the vetting of proposals and send their
recommendations on such reports at the earliest;
(iii) The IICM may be asked to focus on such NGOs/VOs whose
applications have been recommended for rejection for
reasons other than ‘not having the capability for
implementing the programmes’ and arrange for repeated
trainings to the office bearers as well as arrange for a panel
of speakers and experts for such organisations to enable
them to successfully implement the proposed programmes
on investor education and awareness;
(iv) The Ministry of Corporate Affairs to play a proactive role
in involving larger number of NGOs/VOs through Media
Campaigns so as to encourage them to participate and
contribute in increasing investor awareness and education.”
24. The Committee appreciate that as recommended by the
Committee, the question of allocation of funds to NGOs/VOs for
undertaking investors education activities has been gone into by a
separate group constituted by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The

9
Group has concluded that there appeared to be no scope for
influencing the laid out procedure and consequently no bias in favour
of NGOs stationed at New Delhi. The recommendations of the
Group, inter alia , include assisting new NGOs/VOs in formulating
Investors Education Programmes, expediting the vetting of proposals
pending with the Indian Institute of Capital Market (IICM), the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs playing a pro-active role in involving
larger number of NGOs/VOs in investor awareness and education
activities etc. The Committee desire that these recommendations
should be implemented in right earnest to ensure that there is no
regional disparity in allocation of funds under the IEPF programme.

10
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The budget outlays and expenditure of the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs reveal substantial variations in the budget estimates (BE) and
actual expenditure (AE) year after year. While the budget outlay of
the Ministry at the stage of BE in 2005-06 was Rs. 116.27 crore the
actual expenditure was Rs. 75.18 crore. Likewise, for the year 2006-07
as against the originally budgeted expenditure of Rs. 145 crore, the
actual expenditure (AE) was only Rs. 122.19 crore, and the budgeted
expenditure of Rs. 75 crore incurred upto December, 2007 for the year
2007-08 is less than 50% of the total outlay for the year. Under
utilization of the budgeted outlays of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
has been, pronounced in regard to the programme of modernization
and computerisation and for the Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs
(IICA). The Ministry of Corporate Affairs also generated revenue to
the tune of Rs. 728.22 crore, Rs. 1037.98 crore and Rs. 1123.89 crore
through statutory fees during the years 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08
(upto February, 2008). Specific issues concerning the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs are discussed in the subsequent sections of this report.
Reply of the Government
The major reasons for underutilization of the funds under the
Object Heads ‘Modernisation and Computerisation Networking’ and
‘Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs’ are as under:
(a) Modernisation and Computerisation Networking
The position of Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual
Expenditure under the Object Head ‘Modernisation and
Computerisation Networking’ (MCN) for last three years was as
follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Actual expenditure
2005-06 60.0000 28.1310 16.6958
2006-07 70.8370 39.1500 29.2637
2007-08 64.2760 55.5700 48.3607

11
The Budget provision under the Object Head ‘MCN’ is meant for
the MCA-21 e-Governance project which seeks to provide easy and
secure on-line access to all the MCA services including filing and
registration. The total outlay of the project is estimated to be Rs. 341.21
crore spread over six years. The implementation of the Project started
with the signing of the Contract with M/s TCS Ltd. on March 1, 2005.
The Project was launched at all locations in a phased manner from
18.2.2006 to 4.9.2006. The Government mandated e-filing of all
documents from 16.9.2006. As per the contract, the Equated Quarterly
Instalments (EQI) are to be released to M/s TCS only after completion
of deliverables duly certified as per the prescribed system. The project
encompasses a large number of parameters and is being monitored by
an Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, MCA
with Secretary, Statistics & Programme Implementation, Secretary, DIT
and AS&FA, MCA as Members.
The Budget provision for the Scheme is being made every year on
the basis of the targets and objectives envisaged. However, the Ministry
did not release full payments to the Operator as a conscious decision
as certain parts of the deliverables were not completed and the
certification of the same was yet to be achieved inspite of a few rounds
of testing of the software by STQC engaged for this purpose. The
Ministry has been very conscious not to compromise on the quality of
the software and hence the certification with closure of all the
outstanding items was insisted upon. Deliberate decisions have
therefore, been taken in favour of expediency of the quality of the
programme rather than utilization of the Budget only. In these
circumstances, only that amount was released to M/s TCS whatever
became due strictly in accordance of the contract. The Project was
being regularly monitored by the Ministry and at the time of RE, only
that amount was projected which could have been actually utilized.
However, keeping in view the state of completion/certification of
deliverables, it was not possible to release the entire Budget kept under
RE, which resulted in the savings.
The entire sequence of activities in implementation of MCA-21
Programme and corresponding expenditure over the last three years
need to be appreciated in the light of the fact that MCA-21 is an
ambitious and innovative project, inevitably involving great deal of
uncertainties in navigating through previously unchartered waters and
introduction/acceptance/operation of technology in a countrywide scale.
It is a matter of great satisfaction that despite the enormity of the

12
project involving large number of parameters and cropping up of
several unforeseen technical problems, the project has been implemented
very successfully through proper planning and monitoring. In fact, the
delayed expenditure is a result of the efforts of the Ministry to adhere
to strict project monitoring, efforts to achieve highest quality standards
and following the canons of financial propriety.
(b) Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA)
The proposal to establish an Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs
(IICA) to provide policy research and knowledge support to the
Ministry and to serve as a ‘think tank’ and implementation arm for
various initiatives of the Ministry, was included in the Eleventh Five
Year Plan at a total estimated cost of Rs. 211 crore. This is the first
Plan Scheme of the Ministry for which an outlay of Rs. 47 crore was
kept as BE 2007-08. The approval of the Cabinet has been accorded to
the Scheme only on 1.5.2008. Hence, no expenditure could be incurred
on this Plan Scheme during 2007-08.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
MRTPC – Salary Expenditure
The Committee note that MRTP Commission is proposed to be
wound up in 2009-10. Consequently no action has been taken to fill
up the vacant posts. The Committee are, therefore, surprised that
budget outlays are continued to be made even for vacant posts,
resulting in substantial mismatch between the Budget Estimates,
Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure. The Committee are not
happy with this fiscal imprudence and desire the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs to ensure the allocation of funds only for the anticipated
requirement relating to the posts being operated upon.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has noted the observations of Standing Committee
for compliance. Ministry will take a conscious view in respect of the
basic requirements of MRTPC and will accordingly make provisions in
the Revised Estimate.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]

13
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs
Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) is proposed to be set
up during the Eleventh Plan period to provide policy research and
knowledge support to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on an on-
going basis and serve as think tank and implementation arm for
initiatives of the Ministry. The Committee are surprised to note that
though CCEA approval was still awaited, an outlay of Rs. 40 crores
was made in 2007-08 which was subsequently revised for inexplicable
reasons to Rs. 46 crore at RE stage. For the year 2008-09, the Ministry
has understandably scaled down the outlay to Rs. 30 crore, as there
was no likelihood of any other expenditure except the release of funds
towards the cost of land amounting to Rs. 25 crore. The Committee
would like the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to pursue the matter
vigorously with CCEA for early clearance of the proposal and ensure
that IICA is set up expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The establishment of IICA was approved by the Cabinet on
01.05.2008. The Ministry has initiated action in various steps required
for the establishment. In this regard, a sum of Rs. 29 crore has been
paid to HSIIDC towards cost of acquisition of land at Manesar,
Gurgaon.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
Company Law Board (CLB)
The Committee had, in their report on the Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for the previous year (2007-08)
expressed the need for filling up the vacant positions in the Company
Law Board so as to address the problem of increasing number of
cases before the Board. According to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
presently four of the nine posts in the Company Law Board are vacant,
while the number of cases pending has risen from 205 in 2005-06 to
731 in 2007-08. The Committee expect that, as assured by the Ministry,
necessary action will be taken in a time bound manner within three
months for filling up the vacant posts in the Company Law Board.
The Committee also wish to be apprised of the progress in this
regard.

14
Reply of the Government
Based on the circular issued on March 18, 2008, the Ministry has
completed the process of selection of Members of the Company Law
Board. The process was completed through three meetings of the
Selection Committee. The process of appointment of the selected
members is being taken up with the Appointments Committee of the
Cabinet.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
Identification of Vanishing Companies
The Committee appreciate the fact that as recommended in their
report on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the previous
year, 2007-08, the criteria for identification of vanishing companies have
been reviewed and streamlined. The revised criteria for identification
of vanishing companies include the additional aspects of failure on
the part of listed companies to file returns with the stock exchanges,
and non-traceability of Directors of companies. As per the revised
criteria for identification of vanishing companies, in case of listed
companies failing to file returns with the stock exchanges, the SEBI is
expected to explore the possibility of initiating proceedings against the
companies in default in consultation with stock exchanges. As the
matter has a bearing on identifying potential vanishing companies,
which would help in securing the interest of the investors, the
Committee wish to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this direction
and their effectiveness in identifying and initiating action against errant
companies.
Reply of the Government
As per the revised criteria for identification of vanishing companies,
a company which failed to file returns with Registrar of Companies/
Stock Exchange for a period of two years will be considered for
inclusion in the list of vanishing companies subject to compliance with
other criteria. The default period of two years in filing the statutory
returns was a very long period for a company likely to indulge in any
mischief or fraudulent activities, which would come to the notice of
the Registrar of companies through the Balance Sheet and Annual
Return filed subsequent to completion of the relevant financial year.
On the other hand, the listed companies are required to file quarterly
returns with Stock Exchanges. Hence, SEBI is in a better position to

15
identify the potential of any fraud at an earlier stage. Accordingly,
SEBI has been requested to examine the action to be taken against
such companies in the event of non-filing of two successive quarterly
returns. SEBI is also in discussion with Stock exchanges to explore the
possibility of generation of alerts by them which can be of use to the
Ministry. However, SEBI has not filed their Action Taken Report with
MCA so far.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee are also anguished that the financial assistance
provided under IEPF has remained mostly confined to Northern Region
with Rs. 3.24 crore allocated as on 15-02-2008 to NGOs based at
New Delhi. There appears to be concentration of investors’ fora only
in some places. For instances, out of 69 registered NGOs/VOs, 9 are
from Delhi, 4 from Madurai and only one from Mumbai. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that a departmental enquiry be
conducted regarding the funds allocation to NGOs/VOs for undertaking
investor education activities. The Committee wish to be apprised of
the outcome of the enquiry within three months. The Committee also
desire that efforts be made to promote establishment of investor fora
in all places and intensify efforts for protection and welfare of investors,
by appropriate awareness campaigns and assistance to various
organisations.
Reply of the Government
The NGOs/VOs from 15 States/UTs are registered with IEPF.
Further, out of the 69 organisations registered with IEPF,
20 organisations have never forwarded any proposal for taking up
activities under IEPF. Also, there are few organisations that are regularly
sending proposals and taking activities for promotion of investor
welfare.
Even though the Ministry has a limited role in evaluation of
applications/proposals submitted by the organisations, which are
evaluated/vetted by an independent expert agency – Indian Institute
of Capital Market (established by UTI) – a Group has been constituted
for examining the procedure of evaluation/vetting of proposals for
allocation of funds. The report of the Group would be submitted to
the Committee in due course.
The awareness campaigns are taken up by various investors for a
registered with IEPF, the ICAI and ICSI and other educational/research

16
institutions under the aegis of IEPF. Such campaigns are also taken up
through DAVP and Prasar Bharati in the Print and Audio/Visual Media.
However, to give proper impetus to reach out to the investors in far-
flung areas, assistance has been sought from DAVP , who has the
requisite technical expertise, in framing a comprehensive media
campaign strategy.
In compliance with the directions of the Standing Committee on
Finance, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs constituted a Group to look
into the funds allocated to NGOs/VOs for undertaking Investors
Education Activities. A copy of the Report of the Group is enclosed as
Annexure-I.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]

17
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—NIL—

18
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
Prosecution of Vanishing Companies
The Committee had, in their report on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, inter-alia, emphasized
on taking appropriate initiatives in ensuring early prosecution of the
companies, which raised approximately Rs. 793.31 crore through IPOs
during the period, 1992-1998 and have been identified to have vanished.
While precious little seems to have been done in prosecuting the
companies, the Ministry have informed that the detailed information
on the status of the prosecution action will be compiled on the basis
of the review of each of the cases by the Regional Task Forces on
vanishing companies. The Committee desire that the review process
be completed expeditiously and appropriate initiatives be taken for
early conclusion of the prosecution process against the companies
involved. The Committee also wish to be apprised of the progress and
outcome of the prosecution action against vanishing companies
identified during the period 2001-05. The Committee further desire
that a detailed investigation should be carried out to identify the
reasons for the companies registered at Hyderabad during 1998-2007
getting vanished.
Reply of the Government
It is stated that the prosecution cases have been launched against
all the vanishing companies and its promoters/directors under various
sections of the Companies Act, 1956 including those pertaining to mis-
statement in the Prospectus, false inducement of persons to invest
money and for non-filing of statutory returns. FIRs have also been
filed against the promoters/directors of such companies with the
jurisdictional police station under the provisions of Indian Penal Code.
It is submitted that under the Companies Act, 1956, the
jurisdictional Registrar of Companies has the authority to file the
prosecution cases before various courts and file FIRs with the
jurisdictional police station under the provisions of Indian Penal Code.

19
After the stage of filing of complaints or registering an FIR, the action
is to be taken by the respective court/police station only. While the
required legal representation caused to be undertaken by the ROC
before the courts as and when the cases are listed for hearing, the
matter is also regularly pursued with the local police authority through
the Regional Task Force. For any of the matter to be taken to its
logical conclusion, the ROC has a substantive external dependency on
other organizations.
It may however be appreciated that the instrument of setting up
of the CMC and its functioning have been successful in effectively
controlling the phenomenon of vanishing companies. It has been
observed that after the CMC started functioning, the number of
vanishing companies has reduced significantly and for the period 1998-
2001 only 08 companies have been taken to be vanishing while the
number of companies which vanished after this period is NIL. The
Ministry however is making all efforts to ensure that the complaints
filed against the vanishing companies and its promoters/directors are
taken to their logical conclusion at different forums.
As far as the recommendations concerning the companies registered
at Hyderabad and identified as Vanishing is concerned, it is stated
that these companies had been incorporated during the period of a
boom in the software sector where a large number of IT Enabled
Service companies had come up in Hyderabad which was promoted
as a favourite destination for IT Sector. Some of these companies, even
after accessing the capital market could not sustain their business and
had subsequently closed down. However, FIRs have been filed against
these companies for offences punishable under various Sections of the
Indian Penal Code and the cases are being pursued regularly by the
Regional Task Force.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]

20
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
Streamlining prosecution mechanism
It has been observed that the cases of prosecution against the
companies has risen from 39,899 at the end of 2001-02 to 45,705 at the
end of 2005-06. Considering that relevant data for subsequent years
are readily available, the Committee are inclined to believe that there
is lack of seriousness and efforts on the prosecution process. The
Committee are in agreement with the views of the Vaish Committee
for the desirability of a suitable framework in house structure to speed
up the process of prosecution and introduction of a “Company Law
simplified Settlement Scheme” on the lines of a similar Scheme
launched in 2000, which evoked encouraging response. The Committee
hope that required proposals in this regard will be initiated without
further delay.
Reply of the Government
As on 31st March, 2007, the total number of prosecutions pending
all over India was 47797 as compared to the 45,705 prosecutions
pending as on 31st March, 2006. The total number of cases disposed
off increased from 8484 to 8509 from 31.3.06 to 31.03.07. The increase
in the number of prosecutions is also due to implementation of MCA-
21, e-Governance System which has enabled better compliance
monitoring.
At present, the Government is in the process of comprehensive
revision of the Companies Act, 1956 through a Companies Bill.
Proposals for effective and efficient disposal of prosecution/other action
taken in response to violations of the provisions of the Bill or to
enable better compliance are also a part of the revision proposed and
are expected to provide a better framework once enacted.
The possibility of introducing a new Company Law Simplified
Settlement Scheme (CLSSS) needs to be viewed in the light of the
compliance requirements of different classes of companies and the
imperative of imposing adequate and effective punishment for violation
of the Law for which data is being collected. It is the intention to

21
enable a regime that provides adequate signals in favour of compliance
while firmly dealing with non-compliance/violation of Law.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
Utilisation of IPOs proceeds
The Committee concur with the view of the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs, that ‘mis-utilisation of IPO proceed in the first few years is an
early warning towards a potential vanishing company’. Considering
the fact that identifying instances of mis-utilisation of IPO proceeds by
companies help in securing the interest of investors and initiating
appropriate action against errant or potential errant companies, the
Committee recommend that the exercise of technical scrutiny of balance
sheets of companies that came out with IPOs from 2001 onwards be
completed expeditiously. The Committee also desire that an expert
group in consultation with SEBI be set up to evolve a detailed
mechanism to effectively evaluate and monitor the utilisation of IPO
proceeds as to identify and take remedial steps against the fraudulent
companies.
Reply of the Government
As regards setting up of an expert group, it is submitted that
companies are required to file information annually in the form of
Balance Sheet and Annual Return under the Companies Act, 1956
subsequent to completion of the relevant financial year. The same
companies are also required to file quarterly financial returns with the
respective Stock Exchanges. Therefore, current financial data would be
available with SEBI. In addition, listed companies who come out with
IPOs are subject to extensive regulatory supervision by SEBI with regard
to their actions in the capital market.
Further, keeping in view of the framework for investor protection
under SEBI Act, 1992, SEBI has been requested to review the existing
system of monitoring of utilization of IPO proceeds through constitution
of an Expert Group in which Ministry of Corporate Affairs will be a
nominee.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF)
The Committee are not convinced of the reasons advanced by the
Ministry for not transferring the IEPF to SEBI, as had been
recommended by the JPC on Securities Scam. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the matter should be looked into afresh. The Committee

22
also regret to observe the under-utilisation of budget outlays in respect
of Investor Education and Protection Fund, which ranged from
36 percent to 49 percent during the years 2004-05 to 2007-08. The
Committee are not convinced by the reasons adduced therefor and
desire the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to chalk out a strategy to
ensure full utilisation of funds to give impetus to efforts for education
and protection of small investors.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry reiterates that as per the intent of the provisions of
Section 205 C of the Companies Act, 1956 inserted by Act 21 of 1999,
the Investor Education and Protection Fund has to be maintained for
the purpose of undertaking activities for education and awareness of
investors. As such, the onerous responsibility has been cast upon the
Government to take up activities relating to promotion of investors’
welfare. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs not only administers the
corporate entities which are listed in the stock exchanges but also
those corporate entities which are unlisted. Many of the unlisted
corporate entities are very big public companies which invite public
deposits and/or issue bonds/debentures. Thus, the jurisdiction of the
Ministry envelops the capital market.
The SEBI, however, is concerned with the administration of listed
companies only. As such, the jurisdiction of the SEBI is limited to
bourses only.
Since the accruals to the Fund are from various resources such as
unpaid and unclaimed deposits/interest/debentures/bonds, etc. which
are common to unlisted companies, the administration of the Fund by
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has been in line with the intention
of the legislation.
Regarding, chalking out a strategy by giving impetus to efforts for
education and protection of small investors and thereby ensuring full
utilisation of funds, the Ministry is working with DAVP , in framing a
comprehensive media campaign strategy with the help of electronic
and print media. As such, action has been initiated for making the
media campaigns more focused and effective.
[No. G-20018/7/2008-BGT]
   N EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
11 December, 2008 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

23
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11th December, 2008 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu
Rajya Sabha
8.  Shri Mahendra Mohan
9.  Shri Vijay J. Darda
10.  Shri Moinul Hassan
11. Shri K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
12.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Director
3. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ram Kumar — Deputy Secretary–II
   Suryanarayanan
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

24
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft Reports for
consideration :-
(i) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 67th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and
Disinvestment);
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 68th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue).
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 69th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Planning.
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 70th Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 71st Report on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
The Committee adopted the Report at (iii) above without any
amendment and the Reports at (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) with modifications
as shown in the Annexure-A.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
5. The Committee decided to defer consideration of the two draft
Reports on (i) ‘Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector’; and
(ii) ‘Counterfeit Currency Notes in Circulation’, to a subsequent sitting.
The Committee then adjourned.

25
ANNEXURE-A
(a) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 67th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment);
** ** **
** ** **
 (b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 68th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue).
** ** **
** ** **
 (c) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 70th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
** ** **
** ** **
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report
on the 71st Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
Para Line Amendments/Modifications
12 3
71 1 For
“The Committee would await details of the
progress made in this connection and the
decision of the Government on introducing the
new ‘Settlement Scheme’ for companies on the
lines of the scheme launched earlier”
Substitute
“The Committee desire to be apprised of the
initiatives taken and progress made in this
direction within a time frame of one month”.
10

26
12 3
10 5 After
“so far”.
Add
“This, the Committee feel, is an unacceptable
response and desire the SEBI to furnish their
action taken report in the matter at once”
10 13 For
“The Committee would await information on
the initiatives taken in this direction”
Substitute
“The Committee expect the Government to
urgently take positive initiatives in this direction
and desire to be apprised of the details of the
same within fifteen days of submission of this
Report to Parliament”.
13 Last For
“The Committee would await the same”.
Substitute
“The Committee take exception to the
lackadiasical attitude of the Government in
acting on their recommendation and desire to
be provided with a detailed action taken note
within one month”
16 Last For
“The Committee would await information in
this regard”.
Substitute
“The Committee desire that the Government
take up these matters in right earnest and due
seriousness. The Committee also desire to be
apprised of the progress made in this direction
within a time frame of one month”.

27
ANNEXURE I
REPORT OF THE GROUP ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO NGOs
UNDER INVESTOR EDUCATION AND PROTECTION FUND
The Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants had
observed that the financial assistance provided under Investor Education
and Protection Fund (IEPF) appeared to be confined to the investors’
fora based in Northern Region, particularly, to NGOs based at
New Delhi with Rs. 3.24 crore allocated as on 15.02.2008 to such NGOs.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that a departmental enquiry
be conducted regarding the funds allocation to NGOs/VOs for
undertaking investor education activities. The Committee wished to be
apprised of the outcome of the enquiry within three months.
Accordingly, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs constituted
a Group headed by Additional Secretary consisting of Director and
Deputy Secretary as members of the Group.
The Group held its first meeting on June 4, 2008 followed by
another three meetings in the months of June and July 2008 and
examined, in detail, the provision relating to the establishment of IEPF,
the rules framed for administration of the Fund, the procedure being
followed for the registration and grant of financial assistance to the
NGOs/VOs and the cases where substantial grant has been provided
to the NGOs during the last five years ended March 31, 2008. The
Group also invited representatives of a few stakeholders and discussed
the procedure relating to registration and utilisation of financial
assistance under the IEPF.
The following paragraphs bring out the observations of the Group:
1. Introduction:
1.1 Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) has been set-up
under Section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956 by way of the
Companies (Amendment) Act. 1999.
1.2 As per the Act, the following amounts which have remained
unclaimed and unpaid for a period of seven years from the date they
became due for payment shall be credited to the IEPF:
(a) Unpaid dividend accounts of the companies;
(b) The application moneys received and due for refund;

28
(c) Matured deposits;
(d) matured debentures;
(e) The interest accrued in the amounts referred to in clauses
(a) to (d);
(f) Grants and donations by the Central Govt., State Govt.,
companies or any other institutions; and
(g) The interest or other income received out of the investments
made from the Fund.
1.3 The Fund has been established with a view to support the
activities relating to investor education, awareness and protection.
Following are the objectives/activities of the Fund:
• Educating investors about market operations;
• Equipping investors to analyze information to take informed
decisions;
• Making investors aware about market volatilities;
• Empowering the investors by making them aware of their
rights and responsibilities under various laws;
• Continuously disseminating information about unscrupulous
elements and unfair practices in securities market;
•B roadening the investors’ base by encouraging new investors
to participate in securities market; and
•P romoting research and investor surveys to create a
knowledge base that facilitate informed policy decisions.
1.4 The Act provides for setting up of a Committee for taking
decisions regarding spending moneys out of the Fund for carrying out
the objects as mentioned above.
1.5 For the purpose of administration of IEPF, the Investor
Education and Protection Fund (awareness and protection of investors)
Rules 2001 were notified on 1st October 2001 (copy placed as
Annex. I). These Rules, inter alia , contain provisions relating to
constitution and functions of the Committee, activities relating to
investors’ education, awareness and protection to be undertaken with
the recommendation of the Committee, conditions for utilisation of
Funds by the Committee, proforma for applications for registration of
associations, institutions or organisations and also for seeking financial
assistance under IEPF, etc.

29
1.6 The present Committee has been constituted of member who
are experts in various fields of Capital Market, Accountancy, Taxation,
Media, Management Consultancy, etc. Presently, following are the
members of the Committee on IEPF, which has been constituted for a
period of 2 years and its tenure is going to end on 19.06.2008:
Committee on IEPF
Secretary, Chairman
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Additional Secy. & Fin. Adviser, Member
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Dr. Nithish Sengupta Member
Shri R.K. Pandey Member
Shri S.R. Bansal Member
Executive Director, RBI Member
Shri Dilip Cherian Member
Shri Chinubhai R. Shah Member
Executive Director, SEBI Member
Shri Mohan Guruswamy Member
Shri B.D. Narang Member
Joint Secretary, Convenor
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1.7 The Committee is supported by a Sub-Committee on IEPF
which has been constituted from among the members of the Committee
in order to facilitate efficient and speedy discharge of its functions.
Secretarial assistance is provided to the Committee and Sub-Committee
by the Ministry. Presently , following are the members of the
Sub-Committee on IEPF:
Sub-Committee
Addl. Secy. & Fin. Adviser, Chairman
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Shri R.K. Pandey Member
Shri S.R. Bansal Member
Shri Dilip Cherian Member
Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Corporate Affairs Convenor

30
2. Procedure for registration and providing financial assistance
2.1 The Ministry has laid out a well-defined procedure for
processing the applications received for registration and providing
financial assistance under IEPF. All applications in the prescribed format
for registration under IEPF, i.e., Form 3 are received by the Ministry
for processing as also the proposals for carrying out programmes on
investors’ education and awareness, in the prescribed Form No. 4.
2.2 As per the criteria, the applications received in the prescribed
Form 3 should conform to the following criteria/guidelines:—
• Any entity that has a viable project proposal on investor
education and protection shall be eligible for registration.
• The entities already engaged in activities relating to investor
awareness, education and protection and proposing to take
up investors programmes, organizing seminars, symposia
etc. shall undertake projects for investor protection including
research activities.
• The entities shall be registered under the Societies
Registration Act or formed as Trusts or incorporated
companies.
• Entities shall, unless specific exemption has been made in
this regard by the IEPF Committee, be in existence for a
minimum period of 2 years prior to its date of application
for registration.
• Entities shall have a minimum of 20 members and a proven
record of at least 2 years.
• Entities shall have rules, regulations and/or by-laws for its
governance and management. These rules, regulations and/
or by-laws shall be in conformity with the conditions of
registration.
• The entity shall be managed by a governing board/
management committee.
• No profit-making entity shall be eligible for registration for
the purposes of financial assistance from the fund.
Notwithstanding the above, the IEPF Committee can give a
project to any organization.
• The amount of grant assistance given from IEPF shall be
subject to an audit by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to
ensure its proper utilization.
• While considering proposals, the IEPF Committee shall take
into account the audited accounts and the annual reports of
the last three years of the entity seeking assistance from
IEPF.

31
2.3 The applications as well as the proposals have to be evaluated/
vetted with respect to the genuineness of the claims enumerated in
the applications received as well as to ascertain the capacity and
capability of the organisation to organise and conduct such
programmes.
2.4 However, since the Ministry neither has the requisite expertise
nor the resources required for evaluation of the applications for
registration and proposals for financial assistance, it has engaged the
services of an institute, viz., the Indian Institute of Capital Market
(IICM). The Institute was established in the year 1990 by Unit Trust of
India and has been engaged in:—
• Educating and developing professionals for the securities
industry in India and other developing countries.
• Dissemination of information about Indian and International
capital markets by creating a comprehensive body of
knowledge.
• Contribution to the orderly and healthy development of
securities markets by bringing expertise to bear on structural
and policy issues concerning the securities industry.
• Functioning as a centre for creating investor awareness
through research and training.
•P roviding specialised consultancy related to the securities
industry.
2.5 The Institute evaluates the applications and proposals through
its team of field assistants who visit the premises of the applicant
organisations, conduct verification of particulars mentioned and give
report to the Institute. The Institute, in turn, examines the reports
regarding acceptance or rejection of application. This verification is
known as ‘Pre-sanction Scrutiny’. Further, the Institute also conducts
‘Training of Trainers (TOT)’ programmes for the organisations who
apply for registration. After evaluation of the trainees, the Institute
submits its composite recommendations to the Ministry. These
recommendations are then placed before the Sub-committee for its
consideration, on case to case basis. The Sub-committee after
considering the recommendations of the Institute and taking into
cognizance the views of the members, accords approval or rejects the
application, as the case may be and accordingly, the letter conveying
the decision regarding granting of registration/financial assistance or
rejection is conveyed to the applicant organisation.

32
2.6 Similarly, the Institute has also been engaged to conduct
verification of accounts pertaining to the utilisation of financial
assistance released to an organisation under IEPF. This verification is
known as ‘Post-sanction Scrutiny’. The accounts submitted by an
organisation to whom financial assistance had been granted under IEPF,
are audited by an auditor appointed by the institute who submits its
audit report to the Institute. The Institute, based on the observations
contained in the Auditors’ Report, submits its post-sanction scrutiny
report to the IEPF Secretariat of the Ministry. The Secretariat, on the
basis of this report processes the case for final settlement of accounts.
3. Regional Distribution of organisations registered with IEPF
3.1 Following is the regional distribution of the organisations/
associations registered with IEPF as on 31.03.2008:—
Sr. Region No. of organisations Financial assistance
No. registered till date provided (Rs. in lakh)
1. All India 03 279.96
2. Northern 13 59.57
3. Eastern 15 5.37
4. Western 13 51.13
5. Southern 25 22.36
Total 69 418.39
3.2 It would be seen from above that IEPF has granted more than
67% of the total financial assistance over the last five years to the two
NGOs, viz.,  PIPAL and MIDAS [reference Para Nos. 5.2.1 and
5.2.2 infra] and the Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI).
The ICSI is an All India body which has been conducting programmes
on investor education and awareness throughout the country through
its regional chapters (reference Para No. 5.2.3 infra). The NGOs—PIPAL
& MIDAS, on the other hand, have implemented two very important
projects which have ‘All Indian’ reach and utility. Further, among the
NGOs registered in the Northern Region, the Society for Capital Market
Research and Development (SCMRD) has implemented two research
projects (reference Para No. 5.2.5 infra) which have pan-Indian utility
and as such its contribution is not restricted to the Northern Region
only.

33
3.3 The status regarding financial assistance in the regions also
indicates that the receipt of proposals for financial assistance from
NGOs registered does not necessarily correlate to the number of
associations registered. This is evident from the table, the Northern
and Western Region account for carrying out more programmes under
IEPF as compared to Southern and Eastern Region where there are
more NGOs registered under IEPF.
4. Utilisation of the Budgetary Allocation
4.1 The details of the budget and the expenditure incurred during
the previous years are as under:—
(Amount in Rupees)
Financial Year Budget Expenditure
2004-05 3,00,00,000 1,63,37,684
2005-06 3,00,00,000 1,93,30,279
2006-07 5,00,00,000 2,61,54,871
2007-08 5,00,00,000 3,41,82,044
4.2 The Group observed that there has been healthy increasing
trend in the expenditure incurred over the last four years indicating
increased level of activities undertaken under the aegis of IEPF.
However, efforts need to be made to ensure full utilisation of budget.
5. Review of NGOs given financial assistance
5.1 For the purpose of scrutiny of cases where financial assistance
under IEPF was extended, following were the NGOs/ VOs who were
registered and given financial assistance for an amount of Rs. 20 lakh
or more over the period of last six years:—
(a) Prime Investors Protection Association and League,
New Delhi
(b) MIDAS Touch Investor Association, New Delhi
(c) Institute of Company Secretaries of India, New Delhi
(d) Society for Capital Market Research & Development,
New Delhi.
(e) Investors’ Grievance Forum, Mumbai, Maharashtra

34
5.2 The Group discussed and analysed the grant of financial
assistance of more than Rs. 20 lakh under IEPF which are located in
Northern Region and following was observed with regard to the ‘value
for money’ created in such cases:—
5.2.1 Prime Investor Protection and Association League (PIPAL)
5.2.1.1 PIPAL is a company incorporated on December 2, 2003
under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 with the main objective
of implementing the project involving creation of a website for investor
education and protection under the name “watchoutinvestors.com”.
5.2.1.2 The Company had proposed a project named
‘watchoutinvestors.com’ which intended to serve as an internet based
user friendly, quick search facility leading to details of the selected
entity/person who have been indicted by a regulator for an economic
default and/or for non-compliance of laws/guidelines and/or who
are no longer in the specified activity.
5.2.1.3 The Group observed that this project was the first-of-a-kind
initiative to help the investors by providing very useful details so as
to protect them from unscrupulous entities/persons which have been
indicted for any economic offence. As the project was wholly in line
with the objectives of the IEPF, the Committee on IEPF had approved
the project with a total cost of Rs. 110 lakh. The website was launched
on November 9, 2004 and at present contained information about
60,000 companies and 28,000 persons indicted for any economic offence.
5.2.2 MIDAS Touch Investors Association (MIDAS)
5.2.2.1 MIDAS Touch Investors Association is a society registered
under The Societies Act with registered office at Pearey Lal Bhavan,
2, Bahadurshah Zafar Marg, New Delhi. It is registered, as an investor
protection group, with the investor Education & Protection Fund,
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India, and Securities
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
5.2.2.2 The MIDAS had proposed to launch an internet-based, free
of charge, grievance redressal facility—Investor Helpline—which was
intended to provide the investors with an easy and reliable platform
to register their grievances which would then be processed by the
Helpline for proper redressal.
5.2.2.3 The Helpline project, again first-of-its-kind, has been
implemented by MIDAS with total project cost of Rs. 99,04,000/-

35
provided under Investor Education & Protection Fund, Ministry of
Corporate Affairs, Government of India. The helpline was launched
on September 8, 2006 by the Hon’ble Minister for Corporate Affairs.
The Group discussed the performance of the website and observed
that at present the redressal rate has been an impressive 39 per cent.
5.2.3. Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI)
5.2.3.1 The ICSI is incorporated on 1.1.1981, under the Company
Secretaries Act, 1980 and has been involved with following activities:
•P roviding oral/postal coaching and training enabling
students to qualify as Company Secretaries;
•O rganises professional development programmes in
collaboration with chambers of Commerce, Ministry of
Corporate Affairs, Department of Public Enterprises and
other professional bodies;
• Conducts various seminars, training programmes and
workshops from time to time all over India on subjects of
financial and corporate affairs.
5.2.3.2 The Group observed that the institute has been actively
partnering with the Ministry in conducting Investor Awareness and
Education Programmes, Seminars, Workshops, Research Activities and
Publication of material on investor related issues, under the aegis of
IEPF through its various chapters located all across the country. The
greatest benefit derived by the participants of such programmes has
been the services of the professionals of the institutes who provide
them with expert financial knowledge and assistance in the field of
investment.
5.2.3.3 Recently, the Institute was associated with observing
September 2007 as ‘Investor Awareness Month’ under which
programmes on investor awareness and education were conducted at
25 locations across the country.
5.2.4 Investors’ Grievance Forum
5.2.4.1 Investors Grievance Forum (IGF) is a Society registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1980-474/1994 GBBSD, Mumbai, on
05.05.1994. The objective of the IGF is protection and safeguarding the
rights of small investors in capital/financial market through continued
education and awareness and redressal of their grievances through
regulatory or government bodies.

36
5.2.4.2 The Forum has been active in conducting ‘Investor Melas’
in various cities across the country wherein the participants have been
provided with literature on financial literacy , tips on safe investments,
grievance redressal mechanism & process and taking up grievances
with the concerned corporate entities for redressal. Further, the Forum
had also published monthly news bulletin containing literature on
investor awareness and education relating issues and had also designed
a website for the assistance of investors.
5.2.4.3 The Group observed that the Forum had been granted
financial assistance in 2004-05 and 2005-06 for the above mentioned
initiatives, for a total amount of Rs. 23.05 lakh, for which post-sanction
scrutiny had been satisfactorily completed by the IICM and the accounts
have also been settled.
5.3.5 Society for Capital Market Research and Development
5.2.5.1 Society for Capital market Research and Development is a
society registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860, Delhi
(Registration No. S/20422 dated 04.10.1989). The Society was established
with the aim of conducting research on capital market related problems
and through such research, helping in the development of capital
market and strengthening the protection of investors.
5.2.5.2 The Society had proposed conducting a Research Project on
‘Indian Household Investors’ which would enable a deeper
understanding of the investors’ concerns, needs, preferences, attitudes,
etc. and thus would not only be able to provide a key to effective
implementation of the IEPF’s objectives but would also provide a
resource for policy framing for capital market in India.
5.2.5.3 The Group observed that the Research Study which was
published in June 2005 brought out various problems of the Household
Investors, not only on account of deficient legal framework but also
on account of lack of awareness among the Indian Corporates regarding
good corporate governance practices.
5.2.5.4 The Group also observed that the Society had again
conducted a Research Project, namely ‘Empirical Examination of
Problems faced by Shareholders of Delisted Companies’ which explores
several aspects of delisting by analyzing the underlying reasons,
rationale, the related regulatory framework and the evaluation of the
effectiveness of the steps taken till now to address the problem.

37
5.2.5.5 The Group concluded that the financial assistance provided
to the Society in the years 2003-04 and 2005-06 for a total amount of
Rs. 26.63 lakh for the above mentioned research studies had provided
appropriate value-for-money in terms of making available pioneering
references on the issues pertaining to investors. It also observed with
concern that apart from the Society, no other NGO had proposed to
conduct research studies on the issues pertaining to investors till date.
5.3 Further, there were only four NGOs, who were granted financial
assistance of Rs. 5 lakh or more but less than Rs. 20 lakh. The Group
observed that these NGOs were from four different states i.e., from
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, New Delhi and Rajasthan.
5.4 The Group therefore concluded that given the limited role of
the Ministry in the process of registration and extending financial grant
to NGOs for which an expert institutional support (IICM) has been
engaged and the profile of NGOs who have been granted financial
assistance of Rs. 5 lakh or more, there appeared to be no scope for
influencing the laid out procedure and consequently no bias in favour
of NGOs stationed at New Delhi.
6. Operationalisation of Investor Education and Protection Fund
6.1 Section 205C, providing for establishing of the Investor
Education and Protection Fund was inserted in the Companies
Act, 1956 by way of Act 21 of 1999 (with r.e.f. 31.10.1998). As per the
provisions of the said Section (Para 1.2 supra), the Fund has been
established by the Government to be maintained as a separate Fund
and the amounts accruing under the Fund are supposed to be
re-invested so as to earn returns and such returns constitute a source
of revenues to the Fund.
6.2 However, by the procedure approved for the present, by the
Controller General of Accounts in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance, the amounts accruing to the Fund are following to the
Consolidated Fund of India (CFI). As such, the fund is not being
maintained under the Public Account by the Finance Ministry.
6.3 The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance
recommended in its 20th Report that the amounts under the Fund
should be reflected under the Public Account in the Union Budget
and should further be classified as interest bearing deposits. Further,
the C&AG, in their Performance Appraisal Audit of the Ministry has
observed that no separate Fund has been created as envisaged. In this
connection, the Chief Controller of Accounts also opined that

38
considering the nature and accrual of Fund, keeping this Fund in
Consolidated Fund of India does not go well with the Article 266(1)
of the Constitution of India and therefore, the Fund cannot form part
of Consolidated Fund of India.
6.4 Accordingly, the issue was taken up with the Ministry of
Finance/Ministry of Law to create a Fund under the Public Account
in the scope of Article 266(2) of the Constitution of India.
6.5 It may, however, be observed that the transfer of unclaimed
amounts by the Companies to the Fund is based on the principle that
‘undue enrichment of companies’ on account of funds not belonging
to them is not to be allowed. This is achieved, through the
expropriation by the Government of such sums of money for a defined
larger good, i.e., investor education and awareness. The IEPF is on the
same lines as in the case of Consumer Welfare Fund created by the
Central Government.
6.6 The Group while reviewing the above position concluded that
effectively, in terms of the existing procedure, the statutory duty on
this Ministry to operate a Fund as provided under Section 205C would
not be discharged.
7. Recommendations
7.1 The Group, on the basis of the review of the procedure adopted
for the evaluation of applications for registration of NGOs/VOs and
for grant of financial assistance, submitted following recommendations:—
(i) The existing procedures have been well laid out which
ensure evaluation of the applications on the basis of technical
expertise of the institute engaged for the purpose. However,
the institute may be asked to assists such new NGOs/VOs
who were approved for registration but were not granted
any financial assistance in view of inappropriate proposals
framed by them or lack of infrastructure to take up the
scale of operations/programmes which were proposed by
them, to frame smaller programmes so as to ensure increased
participation and awareness;
(ii) The IICM was having 114 number of proposals pending
with it, as on May 17, 2008. The institute may be asked to
expedite the vetting of proposals and send their
recommendations on such reports at the earliest;

39
(iii) The IICM may be asked to focus on such NGOs/VOs whose
applications have been recommended for rejection for
reasons other than ‘not having the capability for
implementing the programmes’ and arrange for repeated
trainings to the office bearers as well as arrange for a panel
of speakers and experts for such organisations to enable
them to successfully implement the proposed programmes
on ivestor education and awareness;
(iv) The Ministry of Corporate Affairs to play a proactive role
in involving larger number of NGOs/VOs through Media
Campaigns so as encourage them to participate and
contribute in increasing investor awareness and education.
1.7 The Group also observed that in order to coordinate the efforts
and activities undertaken by various agencies for investor education
and awareness, a decision was taken in the meeting taken by the Joint
Secretary (Capital Market), Ministry of Finance on April 13, 2007 to
create an institutional mechanism through an IEPF Sub-committee. The
Sub-committee was to comprise of nominees of each segment of
financial market.
7.3 The Ministry has informed the Department of Economic Affairs
that nominations have been received from the various agencies.
However, there is already a Committee in the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs to administer IEPF and it would, therefore, be more appropriate
to assign the responsibilities/ tasks proposed for the Committee so as
to avoid duplication. The representatives of other agencies/authorities
can either be included in the Committee or attend as special invitees.
7.4 Apparently, the Ministry has no objection in coordinating the
activities related to investor education, however, the Group opined
that the issue of creation of the IEPF as a separate Fund under the
Public Accounts be considered and approved in the Ministry of Finance.
This would correct the present position which is inconsistent with the
legislative mandate given u/s 205C of the Companies Act, 1956.
Simultaneously, it will also enable the Ministry to expand the activity
levels under Investor Education & Protection initiatives.
Sd- Sd- Sd-
(Savita Prabhakar) (Manoj Kumar Arora) (P .D. Sudhakar)
Deputy Secretary Director Additional Secretary

40
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTY- FIRST
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2008-2009) OF THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
 Total    % of
Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 10
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 6 60.00
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,
3, 5, 6 & 10)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Nil 00.00
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies
(Nil)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 1 10.00
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 7)
(v) (Recommendation/observation in respect 3 30.00
of which final reply of the Government
is still awaited
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 4, 8
and 9)