26
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE BANKING REGULATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 ( Saka)


TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE BANKING REGULATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 13.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

COF No. 26
Price : Rs. 32.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT ....................................................................................................... 1
NOTES OF D ISSENT .................................................................................... 28
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 14 July, 2005,
9 August, 2005, 10 August, 2005, 22 August, 2005, 30 September,
2005, 7 November, 2005 and 8 December, 2005 ........................... 30
APPENDIX
The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 ........................ 46
(i)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2005-2006
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

27. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
3. Shri A.M. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
4. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri T.G. Chandrashekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised to submit the Report on their behalf present this Twenty
Sixth Report on the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
2. The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005, introduced in
Lok Sabha on 13th May, 2005, was referred to the Committee on
17th May, 2005 for examination and report thereon, by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs), who also briefed them at their sitting
held on 14th July, 2005.
4. Written views/memoranda were received from Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII), Punjab National Bank, Oriental Bank of
Commerce, State Bank of India, HDFC Bank Ltd., ICICI Bank, Fixed
Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA), Indian
Banks’ Association, All India Bank Officers Confederation, National
Confederation of Bank Employees, Bank Employees Federation of India,
Corporation Bank Officers Organisation and State Bank of India
Officers’ Association (Patna Circle).
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 9 August, 2005 heard
the views of the representatives of ICICI Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank
of Commerce. At their sitting held on 10th August 2005, the Committee
heard the views of representatives of Punjab National Bank, Indian
Banks’ Association, Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives
Association and Confederation of Indian Industry.
6. On 22nd August, 2005 the Committee heard the views of the
representative of State Bank of India, Bank of India and HDFC Bank
Ltd.
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) on 30 September, 2005.
8. The Committee at their sitting held on 7 November, 2005
considered and approved the draft report except recommendation
(v)

No. 1 at Para Nos. 17 and 18 for want of some clarification from the
Ministry of Finance.
9. The Committee, at their sitting held on 8 November 2005,
approved recommendation No. 1 at Para Nos. 17 and 18 of report in
the light of the clarifications received from the Ministry.
10. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs),
representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Punjab
National Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce, State Bank of India, HDFC
Bank Ltd., ICICI Bank, Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives
Association (FIMMDA), Indian Banks’ Association, All India Bank
Officers Confederation, National Confederation of Bank Employees,
Bank Employees Federation of India, Corporation Bank Officers
Organisation and State Bank of India Officers’ Association (Patna Circle)
for their co-operation in placing before them their considered views
and perceptions on the provisions of the Bill and for furnishing written
notes and information that the Committee had desired in connection
with the examination of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill,
2005.
11. For facility of reference, recommendations/observations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Background
Prior to the enactment of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which
aims to consolidate the law relating to banking and to provide for the
nature of transactions which can be carried on by banks in India, the
provisions of law relating to banking companies formed a subsidiary
portion of the general law applicable to companies and were contained
in Part XA of the Indian Companies Act, 1913. These provisions were
first introduced in 1936, and underwent two subsequent modifications,
which proved inadequate and difficult to administer. Moreover, while
the primary objective of company law is to safeguard the interests of
the stock-holder, that of banking legislation should be the protection
of the interests of the depositor. It was therefore felt that a separate
legislation was necessary for the regulation of banking in India. With
this objective in view, a Bill to amend the law relating to Banking
Companies was introduced in the Legislative Assembly in November,
1944 and was passed on 10th March, 1949 as the Banking Companies
Act, 1949. By Section 11 of the Banking Laws (Application to
Cooperative Societies) Act, 1965, the nomenclature was changed to the
Banking  Regulation Act, 1949.
2. The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was introduced
in Lok Sabha on 13 May 2005 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on Finance by the Hon’ble Speaker on 17th May 2005 for
examination and report. Earlier a Bill to delete section 12(2) of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Bill, 2003 for removing the restrictions on voting rights was introduced
in the Lok Sabha on 21.4.2003, which was referred to and reported
upon by the Standing Committee on Finance. A more comprehensive
Bill viz. the Banking  Regulation (Amendment) and Miscellaneous
Provisions Bill, 2003 to amend the Banking Regulation Act was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 5th August, 2003, which was also
referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for examination
and report. Both these Bills lapsed due to dissolution of the
13th Lok Sabha.
3. The statement of ‘objects and reasons’ of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 stipulate as under:
(i) To ensure that the control of banks is in the hands of fit
and proper persons, persons who propose to acquire 5% or

2
more of the share capital of a bank should be required to
obtain prior approval from the Reserve Bank and the
Reserve Bank should have the necessary power to impose
such conditions as it deems necessary while granting such
approval. It is, therefore, proposed to remove the restriction
on voting rights concurrently with the stipulation of the
statutory requirement of prior approval for acquisition of
shares above the specified limit. The Reserve Bank should
also be able to specify acquisition of a minimum percentage
of shares in a banking company if it considers necessary.
(ii) It is necessary to confer more operational flexibility on the
Reserve Bank in the conduct of monetary policy. For this
purpose, the Reserve Bank should have the power to specify
Statutory Liquidity Ratio without any floor or ceiling as
also to specify any security as approved security for this
purpose.
(iii) The present restrictions on lending to directors and the
companies or firms in which the directors are interested is
posing a difficulty to banks in appointing competent
independent directors. It is, therefore, necessary to empower
the Reserve Bank to grant exemption to banking companies
in appropriate cases.
(iv) Taking advantage of the liberalised environment, banks are
engaging in multifarious activities through the medium of
associate enterprises. The Reserve Bank as the regulator of
banks should be aware of the financial impact of the
business of such enterprises on the financial position of
banking companies. The Reserve Bank should, therefore, be
empowered to call for information and returns from the
associate enterprises of banking companies also and inspect
the same, if necessary.
(v) The Reserve Bank has the power to remove any director or
other officers of a bank but that power is not sufficient if
the entire Board of directors of a bank is functioning in a
manner detrimental to the interests of depositors or the bank
itself. To deal with such a situation it is necessary that the
Reserve Bank has the power to supersede the Board of
directors of a bank and appoint an administrator to manage
the bank till alternate arrangements are made.
(vi) For a sound and healthy banking system, it is necessary to
ensure that only the cooperative societies that have been

3
licensed by the Reserve Bank carry on the business of
banking. To protect the interest of depositors, the primary
co-operative societies should therefore be given a timeframe
within which they have to either stop the business of
banking or fulfil all the requirements specified by the
Reserve Bank and obtain a licence to carry on the business
of banking. The Reserve Bank should have the power to
order a special audit of co-operative banks in public interest
for a more effective supervision of co-operative banks. The
proposed legislation aims to make the regulatory powers of
the Reserve Bank more effective.
4. To meet these objectives, the Bill seeks to carry out the following
amendments in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949:
(i) Amendment of section 5(a) of the Act, which defines the
expression “approved securities” as those securities, which
are issued by the Central Government or any State
Government or such other securities as may be specified by
the RBI from time to time.
(ii) Amendment of section 12 of the Act to enable banking
companies to issue preference shares subject to regulatory
guidelines by the RBI. The holders of preference shares
issued by any banking company shall not be entitled to
exercise voting right as specified in clause (b) of sub-section
(2) of section 87 of the Companies Act, 1956.
(iii) Amendment to remove the restrictions on voting rights
under sub-section (2) of section 12 concurrently with the
insertion of a new section 12B providing for RBI’s prior
approval for acquisition of shares or voting rights above
the specified limit.
(iv) Addition of a new section 12B to provide prior approval of
RBI for acquisition of 5% or more of shares or voting rights
in a banking company by any person and empowering RBI
to impose such conditions as it deems fit in this regard in
order to satisfy itself that the acquisition of shares of a
banking company is by a person considered fit and proper
and that the applicant continues to be fit and proper to
hold the shares or voting rights.
(v) Incorporation of a new sub section (6) in section 20 to enable
RBI to grant exemptions to any banking company from the

4
applicability of the provisions of section 20 with respect to
the restriction on entering into any commitment for granting
any loan or advance to any company of which any of the
directors of the banking company is a director, managing
agent, employee or guarantor or in which he holds
substantial interest.
(vi) Amendment of section 24 with a view to empower RBI to
specify statutory liquidity ratio without any floor.
(vii) Addition of a new section 29A may be added to empower
RBI to collect information and inspect associate enterprises
of banking company and appointment of administrator by
RBI till alternate arrangements are made.
(viii) Amendment of section 51 for extending the application of
new section 29A to SBI, Subsidiary banks, nationalised banks
and regional rural banks.
(ix) Amendment of the provisions of Section 56 of the Act to
provide for primary cooperative societies to carry on the
business of banking only after obtaining a license from RBI.
(x) To provide for special audit of cooperative banks at the
instance of RBI by extending applicability of section 30 to
them.
5. The Committee received written views/suggestions on the
various provisions of the Bill from (i) Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII), (ii) Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association
(FIMMDA), (iii) Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), (iv) Punjab National
Bank, (v) HDFC Bank Ltd., (vi) ICICI Bank, (vii) Oriental Bank of
Commerce (OBC), (viii) Bank of India and (ix) State Bank of India.
The Committee also had personal hearings of the views of the
representatives of these organisations. The Committee also received
written views/suggestions on the Bill from All India Bank Officers
Confederation, National Confederation of Bank Employees, Bank
Employees Federation of India, Corporation bank Officers Organisation
and State Bank of India Officers’ Association (Patna Circle).
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and the Reserve
Bank of India to further enlighten themselves on various aspects of
the proposed legislation.

5
7. Upon examining the various provisions of the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005, the Committee are generally in
agreement with the broad objectives envisaged. Enactment of this
legislation will bring forth far reaching changes in the functioning
of the banking sector in the country and will also significantly impact
the regulatory purview and role of the Reserve Bank.
8. In their deliberations with the representatives of various
organisations and the Ministry of Finance, certain provisions of the
Bill came to the notice of the Committee which they felt, could be
recast to serve the intended objectives better. Such of the provisions
and the recommendations and observations of the Committee thereon
are dealt with in the subsequent paragraphs.
Clause 3—Amendment of Section 12 (Regulation of Paid-up capital,
subscribed capital and authorized capital and voting rights of
Shareholders)
9. Clause 3 reads as under:
In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
(i) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(ii) that notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act,
1956 (1 of 1956), the capital of such banking company consists of—
(a) ordinary or equity shares, and
(b) preference shares issued in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the class of and the terms and
conditions subject to which, the preference shares may be issued:
Provided that no holder of the preference share issued by the
company shall be entitled to exercise the voting right specified in
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 87 of the Companies Act, 1956
(1 of 1956).”;
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted;
(iii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
10. The amendments proposed in Section 12 of the Banking
Regulation Act, inter-alia seek to (a) allow Banking Companies to raise
capital by way of issuing preference shares; and (b) remove the
restrictions presently applicable under sub-section (2) of Section 12 of
Banking Regulation Act as per which, ‘no person holding shares in a
banking company shall, in respect of any shares held by him, exercise

6
voting rights on poll in excess of ten percent of the total voting rights
of all the shareholders of the banking company. These proposals have
been generally welcome by the representatives of Scheduled
Commercial Banks as well as the Indian Banks Association.
(a) Preference Shares
11. The meaning of the expression, ‘Preference Share’ as proposed
to be included in section 12 of the Banking Regulation Act has been
informed to be the same as assigned to the term in Section 85 of the
Companies Act. However, as per the proposed amendment, voting
rights would not be available to holders of preference shares of Banking
Companies.
12. The representatives of the Ministry, in the course of a
presentation made before the Committee informed that ‘Preference
Shares would remain as preference shares and would normally not be
convertible unlike debentures’. It was also informed by the Ministry
in a written note that ‘it may be necessary to limit the amount of
preference shares that can be treated as regulatory capital of a Banking
Company, depending on the nature of such preference shares’.
13. As informed by the Ministry neither the Companies Act nor
the Banking Regulation Act contain any specific provision for
‘converting preference shares into equity shares as a matter of routine’.
Questioned whether the instrument of preference shares, which is
proposed to be added as a means for enabling Banks to raise capital
would be convertible, the Ministry, in a written response stated that
such conversion may be permitted under the following circumstances:
“(a) Wher e the preference shareholders apply for such conversion
and the banking company has passed necessary resolution
for seeking the approval of RBI to allow such conversion.
(b) RBI is satisfied that it is in the interest of the banking
company and the depositors to allow such conversion.
(c) If such conversion results in the acquisition of 5% or more
of the equity share capital or the voting rights (including
the equity share capital and the voting rights already held)
the procedure contemplated under the proposed section 12B
is complied with by the shareholders concern.
In case the original terms of issue themselves provide for
automatic conversion of preference shares into equity shares after
a certain period or on the happening of any event any person

7
seeking to acquire more than 5% of the share capital/voting rights
including the shares/voting rights already held shall have to
comply with the requirements of the proposed section 12B.”
14. Questioned specifically on whether it would be desirable to permit
conversion of preference shares and if so, the extent to which a banking
Company would be allowed to issue preference shares for Capital
adequacy requirements, the Ministry, in a written reply, inter alia stated:
“Conversion will not be automatic, but will be subject to Reserve
Bank’s approval. It is intended that this convertibility will be
allowed in very exceptional situations. RBI guidelines framed in
terms of these provisions, will be very specific to the extent to
which the banking company may issue preference shares.”
15. As for the practice followed internationally and the terms &
conditions on permitting issue of preference shares, the Ministry
informed:
“Some countries have placed limits on banks issuing perpetual
non-cumulative preference shares viz. a certain percentage of the
Tier I capital. For example, 50% in UK and 25% in USA.
Accordingly, appropriate limits may be stipulated by the Reserve
Bank while laying down the terms and conditions for the issue of
preference shares.”
16. The Ministry also inter alia informed as under in a post evidence
reply:
“Preference shares would be permitted in both categories (a)
perpetual or irredeemable, and (b) redeemable. The perpetual or
irredeemable shares would be redeemable or convertible subject to
RBI’s prior approval only.
It is not the intention to allow easy redemption or conversion of
such shares into equity shares. The conversion will not be automatic
and will be subject to Reserve Bank’s approval and will be allowed
in very exceptional situations in the interest of the banking
company and its depositors.
RBI guidelines to be framed in terms of the provisions of the
proposed amendment to section 12(1)(ii)(b) will be very specific as
regards the terms and conditions for issue of preference shares
including the conditions for the redemption or conversion to equity
of the perpetual preference shares and to the extent to which the
banking company may issue preference shares.”

8
17. From the information and clarifications furnished by the
Ministry, the Committee note that banks operating in the private
sector are proposed to be allowed to issue preference shares, both of
‘perpetual or irredeemable’ and ‘redeemable’ categories. Conversion
of preference shares into equity would be permissible only with the
specific approval of the Reserve Bank in exceptional situations,
keeping in view the interest of the Banking Company and of the
depositors.
18. The proposals of clause 3 of the Bill provide that the terms
and conditions subject to which a banking company may raise capital,
by way of issue of preference shares would also be specified by the
Reserve Bank. Further, the extent to which a banking company may
raise capital by way of issue of preference shares would be specified
by the Reserve Bank. The Committee while expressing the view that
permitting issue of preference shares would be beneficial to the
banks in raising the required capital to support the expected credit
growth, feel that it would also be preferable to indicate in clear
terms in the provisions, the fact that the extent or limit to which a
banking company may raise capital by way of issue of preference
shares—perpetual or irredeemable and redeemable—would be
specified by the Reserve bank. The Committee feel that this would
make the outlines of the policy measures relating to allowing banks
to raise preference capital clearer and would not, in any way, hinder
the flexibility required by the Reserve Bank in discharging its
regulatory functions. The Committee therefore, desire that the
Government may consider bringing in such changes in the proposed
provisions to also clearly indicate the fact that the extent to which
a banking company may issue preference shares of a particular
description would be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(b) Removal of restriction on voting rights
19. It is proposed to omit sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the
Principal Act which reads as under:
(2) No person holding shares in a banking company shall, in respect
of any shares held by him, exercise voting rights (on poll) [in excess
of (10 percent)] of the total voting rights of all the shareholders of the
banking company.
20. The proposal to remove the ceiling of 10% on the voting rights
of shareholders by way of omitting the relevant provision of the BR
Act viz. sub-section 2 of Section 12 applies only to the private sector
banks. The voting rights of share holders of public sectors banks are

9
governed by the relevant provisions of Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1970, Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1980, State Bank of
India Act, 1955 and State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
21. Giving the rationale behind the proposal to remove the
restrictions on voting rights, the Ministry, in a written note inter alia
informed:
“The rationale for removing voting rights by deleting Section 12(2)
is to give voting rights commensurate with the equity capital held
by the shareholders. This is in consonance with the principles of
Company Law. it is therefore, proposed to remove the restrictions
or voting rights concurrently with the stipulation of statutory
requirement of prior approval for acquisition of shares above the
specified limit.”
“In terms of para 56 of the schedule-I to the Companies Act, 1956,
it had been provided that subject to any class or classes of shares
(a) on show of hands, every member present in person shall have
one vote, and (b) on a poll, the voting rights of members shall be
as laid down in Section 87 i.e. in proportion to his share of the
paid-up equity capital of the company.”
22. Questioned on the reasons for placing a restriction of 10% on
voting rights as presently applicable under the Act, the Ministry, in a
written reply inter alia informed:
“The reasons for placing restrictions on voting rights arose primarily
from the concern that permitting proportionate voting rights to
the promoters may result in abuse by them such as problems of
credit concentration and credit diversion that had beset the banking
sector in the past, prior to nationalisation.”
23. On the factors that prompted the present move to do away
with the restrictions on voting rights altogether, the Committee were
informed:
“The present move for doing away with the restriction altogether
has to be viewed in the context of the RBI regulations on ownership
and governance issued on February 28, 2005 in consultation with
the Government and the proposal for removal of the restrictions
on voting rights being made simultaneously with the proposal for
obtaining prior approval of RBI for any acquisition of shares in a
bank of 5 per cent or more. Such approval as stated in the proposed

10
Section 12 B will only be given to fit and proper persons after
undertaking a process of due diligence. This is with the view that
the ownership is in the hands of fit and proper persons, who can
be trusted to judiciously exercise their voting rights in respect of
matters involving public funds, and elect fit and proper persons
to manage the affairs of a bank.”
24. When asked to specify whether the regulatory and supervisory
safeguards were sufficient to prevent misuse of the provisions relating
to withdrawal of the ceiling on voting rights, the Ministry, in a written
reply inter alia stated:
“Under the existing regulations issued by RBI on ownership and
governance in private sector banks, with a view to ensure that no
single entity or group of related entities has shareholding or control,
directly for indirectly, in any bank in excess of 10 per cent of the
paid up capital of the private sector bank, any higher level of
acquisition will be with the prior approval of RBI and in accordance
with the guidelines for grant of acknowledgement for acquisition
of shares. Banks including foreign banks having branch presence
in India/FIs should not acquire any fresh stake in a bank’s equity
if by such acquisition, the investing banks/Financial institutions
holding exceeds 5% of the investee bank’s equity capital. Currently,
in terms of the guidelines issued by RBI, acknowledgement of RBI
is required for acquisition or transfer of shares of 5 per cent and
above of the paid up capital of the private sector bank to ensure
the ‘fit and proper’ status of the significant shareholders.”
25. In addition to the safeguards mentioned above, the Ministry
also invited reference to the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act
which provide for checks and balances on the powers of the Board of
Directors, which inter alia include Section 10 BB which enables the
Reserve Bank to appoint the Chairman of the Board of Directors as a
Managing Director on whole time basis and Section 36AA which
provides Reserve Bank with the powers to remove from office any
Chairman, Directors, CEO of a banking company if it is satisfied that
the affairs of the banking company are being conducted in a manner
detriment to the interest of the depositors.
26. The Committee had in their 47th Report on the ‘Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2003’, which lapsed observed that the
proposal to remove sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 would inter alia enable ‘setting up of subsidiaries
of foreign banks and also pave way for consolidation process in Indian
private banks’.

11
27. The Committee note that placing a limitation on the exercise
of voting rights of share holders of private sector banks, which stands
at 10% at present, was necessitated owing to the likely problems of
credit concentration and credit diversion that had beset the banking
system prior to nationalization. The proposal of the present Bill to
do away with the restrictions and permit proportionate voting rights
to the promoters/shareholders is in consonance with the principles
of Company Law. While addressing the issue of impact of the
proposal to do away with the restrictions on voting rights as
contained in the earlier Bill that lapsed viz., the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2003, the Committee had, in the related report
(Forty-Seventh Report; Thirteenth Lok Sabha) inter-alia observed that
the move would pave way for a process of consolidation in Indian
private banks and also lead to setting up of subsidiaries of foreign
banks. The Committee reiterate the opinion expressed in the earlier
report that allowing proportionate voting rights to shareholders would
provide greater opportunities for investors. The Committee, however,
note that the main concerns relating to the proposals to do away
with the restrictions presently applicable on exercise of voting rights
centered on the possibility of concentration of power or shareholding
in the hands of a single entity or a conglomerate. The legal and
regulatory measures available, or proposed, to address such concerns,
as informed by the Ministry include, the move to incorporate Section
12B in the principal Act as per which acquisition of 5% or more of
shareholding in a banking company would require the prior approval
of Reserve Bank; the ceiling limits applicable on foreign holding in
banks; and mandatory requirement of acknowledgement of the
Reserve Bank for effecting any transfer of shareholding in excess of
5%. The Committee trust and hope that the Reserve Bank would
ensure that the legal and regulatory mechanism is adequate and
complied with strictly so that no scope is left for possible misuse of
the provisions relating to permitting proportionate voting rights to
shareholders.
Clause 4—Insertion of new section 12B (Regulation of Acquisition
of Shares of Voting rights)
28. Clause 4 which is proposed to insert new Section 12B reads as
under:
“After section 12A of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:
‘12B. Regulation of acquisition of shares or voting rights.—(1) No
person (hereinafter referred to as “the applicant”) shall, except with

12
the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, on an application being
made, acquire or agree to acquire, directly or indirectly, by himself
or acting in concert with any other person, shares of a banking
company or voting rights therein, which acquisition taken together
with shares and voting rights, if any, held by him or his relative
or associate enterprise or person acting in concert with him, makes
the applicant to hold five per cent or more of the paid-up share
capital of such banking company or entitles him to exercise five
per cent or more of the voting rights in such banking company.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—
(a) “relative” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in section
6 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(b) “associate enterprise” includes an enterprise which,—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary company or a joint
venture of the applicant; or
(ii) controls the composition of the Board of directors or other
body governing the applicant; or
(iii) exercises, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, significant
influence on the applicant in taking financial or policy decisions;
or
(iv) is able to obtain economic benefits from the activities of
the applicant.
(c) persons shall be deemed to be “acting in concert” who, for
a common objective or purpose of acquisition of shares or voting
rights in excess of the percentage mentioned in this sub-section,
pursuant to an agreement or understanding (formal or informal),
directly or indirectly co-operate by acquiring or agreeing to acquire
shares or voting rights in the banking company.
(2) An approval under sub-section (1) may be granted by the
Reserve Bank if it is satisfied that:
(a) in the public interest, or
(b) in the interest of banking policy; or
(c) to prevent the affairs of any banking company being
conducted in a manner detrimental or prejudicial to the interests
of the banking company; or

13
(d) in view of the emerging trends in banking and
international best practices; or
(e) in the interest of the banking and financial system in
India, the applicant is a fit and proper person to acquire shares
or voting rights:
Provided that the Reserve Bank may call for such information
from the applicant as it may deem necessary for considering the
application referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided further that the Reserve Bank may specify different
criteria for acquisition of shares or voting rights in different
percentages.
(3) Where the acquisition is by way of transfer of shares of a
banking company and the Reserve Bank is satisfied that such
transfer should not be permitted, it may, by order, direct that no
such share shall be transferred to the proposed transferee and may
further direct the banking company not to give effect to the transfer
of shares.
(4) The approval for acquisition of shares may be subject to
such conditions as the Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose,
including a condition that any further acquisition of shares shall
require prior approval of the Reserve Bank and that the applicant
continues to be a fit and proper person to hold the shares or
voting rights.
(5) Before issuing or allotting any share to any person or
registering the transfer of shares in the name of any person, the
banking company shall ensure that the requirements of sub-section
(1) are complied with by that person and where the acquisition is
with the approval of the Reserve Bank, the banking company shall
further ensure that the conditions imposed under sub-section (4),
if any, of such approval are fulfilled.
(6) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to have been granted, unless before the expiry of a period
of ninety days from the date on which the application was received
by the Reserve Bank, it communicates to the applicant that the
approval applied for has not been granted:
Provided that in computing the period of ninety days, the
period taken by the applicant for furnishing the information called
for by the Reserve Bank shall be excluded.

14
(7) The Reserve Bank may specify the minimum percentage of
shares to be acquired in a banking company if it considers that
the purpose for which the shares are proposed to be acquired by
the applicant warrants such minimum shareholding.”
29. The proposal to introduce Section 12(B) in the Banking
Regulation Act—as per which it would be mandatory for an applicant
seeking to acquire five percent or more of the paid up share capital
of a banking company to obtain the prior approval of RBI—is a
corollary to the move to ease the restriction of 10% currently applicable
on voting rights of shareholders in a Banking Company as proposed
under Clause 3 of the Bill.
30. Giving the rationale for incorporating Section 12(B) in the
Principal Act, a representative of the Ministry stated as follows during
evidence:
“The proposal is that the current restriction (of 10 percent on voting
rights) may be removed but for approval of shares beyond 5 per
cent, prior approval of the RBI would be required.”
31. On the reasons for seeking to vest the RBI with the power to
specify the minimum percentage of shares to be acquired by an
applicant in a Banking Company, if warranted, as proposed under
section 12B (7), the Ministry, in written response, informed as under:
“In case of restructuring of week banks, ensuring continued
commitment from the investor for a specified period of time is
considered necessary for achieving turn around and in the interest
of depositors, RBI could consider specifying minimum shareholding
to be acquired by the applicant in a banking company.”
32. When asked to specify the conditional ties subject to which
RBI may grant approval for acquisition of shares and the criteria for
determining ‘fit and proper’ person, who may , with the  approval of
RBI continue to hold the shares or voting rights in terms of the
proposed provisions of Clause 12 (B) (4), the Ministry in a written
reply, inter alia informed that the criteria for determining ‘fit and proper
status’ have been prescribed in the RBI Circular dated February 3,
2004. As informed by the Ministry, in determining whether the applicant
(including all entities connected with the applicant), is fit and proper
to hold the position of shareholder, RBI may take into account all
relevant factors, as appropriate, which include, but may not be limited
to the following:
• The applicant’s integrity, reputation and track record in
financial matters and compliance with tax laws.

15
• Whether the applicant has been the subject of any
proceedings of a serious disciplinary or criminal nature, or
has been notified of any such impending proceedings or of
any investigation which may lead to such proceedings.
• Whether the applicant has a record or evidence of previous
business conduct and activities where the applicant has been
convicted for an offence under any legislation designed to
protect members of the public from financial loss due to
dishonesty, incompetence or malpratice.
• Whether the applicant has achieved a satisfactory outcome
as a result of financial vetting. This will include any serious
financial  misconduct, bad loans or whether the applicant
was judged to be bankrupt.
• The source of funds for the acquisition.
• Where the applicant is a body corporate, its track record of
reputation for operating in a manner that is consistent with
the standards of good corporate governance, financial
strength and integrity in addition to the assessment of
individuals and other entities associated with the body
corporate as enumerated above.”
33. Elaborating the term ‘fit and pr oper’, further, a representative
of the Ministry deposed before the Committee as under:—
“Sir, actually for ‘fit’ and ‘proper’ a circular was issued by the RBI
on February 3, 2004. It basically lists the criteria for ‘fit’ and
‘proper’. It gives a long list about integrity, reputation, whether
there is a criminal action or source of funds for the acquisition etc.
It is very long list. So, these are the factors of ‘fit’ and ‘proper’
which will go into assessment of this. We are not separately
including it because we want the RBI to have the flexibility. In
case they want to add something to it later they can do so.”
34. As informed by the Ministry, in cases involving acquisition or
investment where an applicants shareholding would be taken to a
level of 10 percent up to 30 percent; and secondly, in excess of 30%,
the RBI will also take into account other factors, which may inter alia
include, source and stability of the funds for the acquisition and the
ability to access financial markets as a source of continuing financial
support for the bank; the business record and experience of the
applicant including any experience of acquisition of companies; and
whether the acquisition is in public interest etc.

16
35. In terms of the provisions of Clause 12 (B) (6) as proposed, an
application for acquiring five percent or more of shareholding inclusive
of voting rights is deemed to have been granted, unless the applicant
receives a communication from the RBI informing him otherwise within
a period of ninety days.
36. When pointed out that there would be deliberate delay on the
part of RBI to communicate within 90 days, the representative of the
Ministry stated during evidence:
“Now with computerisation and other information technology
advances, it will not be possible for any such employee because it
will be given on first-come-first serve basis.  The moment the
application is received, it will be entered somewhere and it will
be possible to supervise or monitor as to when that application
has been received so that nobody plays mischief by just keeping
it for 90 days.”
37. The representative of the Ministry also stated:
“…RBI will put in place the necessary administrative machinery
for ensuring that applications for permission to acquire more than
5 per cent of the share capital of banking are properly tracked and
dealt with in time. So, there is a certain accountability.”
38. The Committee note that the proposal to incorporate   Section
12 B in the Banking Regulation Act, as per which, acquisition of 5%
or more of shareholding in a banking company would require the
mandatory approval of Reserve Bank is of vital importance mainly
in view of the proposed move to remove the cap of 10% applicable
on exercise of voting rights by shareholders. In terms of the
provisions of Section 12 B, as proposed, acquisition of ‘5% or more
of the paid up share capital of a banking company’ by an ‘applicant’
would be permissible only with the prior approval of the Reserve
Bank. The Committee observe from the indicative list of criteria to
be followed in considering applications for acquisition of shares
under the proposed Section 12 B, that the Reserve Bank is inter alia
to take into consideration the applicants integrity, source of funds
etc. The Reserve Bank is also to follow additional criteria in
considering applications seeking to acquire higher percentages of
shares in a banking company.
39. The Committee underscore the importance of the proposed
provisions for obtaining prior approval/clearance for acquisition of
5% or more of shares in a banking company which is proposed to
be granted only to ‘fit and proper’ persons. The Committee desire

17
that the eligibility criteria to be followed by the Reserve Bank for
determining ‘fit and proper’ status of the persons is in line with
global best practices.
40. The Committee are, however, not in agreement with the
proposals of Section 12(B)(6), as per which approval for acquisition
of 5% or more shares in a Banking Company is deemed to have
been granted unless the applicant receives a communication from
the Reserve Bank informing him to the contrary within a period of
ninety days. On the viewpoint expressed by the Committee that the
provisions should, instead, clearly specify that the onus of either
accepting or rejecting an application within the stipulated period of
90 days and communicating the decision taken thereon should
directly rest with the Reserve Bank and the Secretary, Department
of Economic Affairs, expressed agreement. The Committee,
accordingly, recommend that Clause 12 (B) (6) be amended suitably
to specify in clear terms that the decision of either accepting or
rejecting an application for acquisition of shares under sub-section
(1) of Section 12 B will necessarily be taken and conveyed by the
Reserve Bank within the stipulated period of 90 days.
Clause 5—Amendment of Section 20 (Exemptions to lending to
Directors)
41. Clause 5 reads as under:
“In section 20 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(6) The Reserve Bank may, subject to such conditions as may be
specified, grant to any banking company exemption from the
provisions of this section in regard to any restriction on entering
into any commitment for granting any loan or advance to any
company referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section
(1).”
42. The provisions of Section 20 of the Banking Regulation Act
relating to ‘restriction on loans and advances’ as at present, inter alia
stipulate that no banking company shall:
(a) grant any loans or advances on the security of its own shares,
or—
(b) enter into any commitment for granting any loan or advance
to or on behalf of—
(i) any of its directors,

18
(ii) any firm in which any of its directors is interested as partner,
manager, employee or guarantor, or
(iii) any company [not being a subsidiary of the banking
company or 1956 a company registered under Section 25 of
the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or a Government
company] of which (or the subsidiary or the holding
company of which) any of the directors of the banking
company is a director, managing agent, manager, employee
or guarantor or in which he holds substantial interest, or
(iv) any individual in respect of whom any of its directors is a
partner or guarantor.
43. Giving the rationale for seeking to ease the restrictions currently
applicable on extending loans and advances, the Secretary, Department
of Economic Affairs informed as under during evidence:
“Currently, no company, no bank can lend to any of its directors.
This has led to certain problems and that is why this proposal is
there that RBI, if it considers fit, can give exemption to directors
so that lending to the directors is not a disqualification.”
44. The justification extended for seeking to ease the restrictions
presently applicable on extending loans and advances centered on the
difficulties faced by Banking Companies in getting competent and
independent directors on their Board. When this justification was
questioned during evidence, the representative of the Ministry of
Finance inter alia stated:
“It is a very valid observation which has been made. We will
certainly examine it. A view point had come forward and this
difficulty we certainly experience. But as has been observed, India
is a large country and we have a large number of qualified persons
who can certainly be considered to be Directors only if they are
not borrowers from the bank in particular for which they have
been concerned… all that was sought to be done was that the RBI
could look into the track record of these persons and even if they
are borrowers and they have a good credit rating and record with
no defaults with the bank, they could be considered. That power
we are just nearly seeking to have to the Reserve Bank. But we
will be guided by the useful suggestions of this august Committee.”
45. On the background to the proposal to enable RBI to grant
exemptions to the restrictions presently applicable under sub-clause (iii)

19
of Clause (b) of sub-section 2 of Section 20, on extending loans and
advances to Companies in which Directors of Banking Company have
interest, the Ministry in a written reply, inter alia stated:
“There is a trend towards increasing the number of independent
directors to ensure corporate governance. It is in this background
that the amendment was suggested and RBI will put in place,
safeguards on lines of global best practices in this area.”
46. The Ministry also informed that the ‘current restrictions (on
lending to Directors of Banking Companies) have not affected the Banks
and their Boards’ in their functioning.
47. While the current proposal of Clause 5 seeks to amend Section
20 of the BR Act, to enable RBI to grant exemptions to Banks to lend
to companies in which the Directors have an interest, the proposals
made vide the earlier Bill viz., Banking Regulation (Amendment) and
Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2003, which lapsed was to strengthen
the restrictions by extending such restrictions to ‘connected lending’
or lending to ‘related companies’ in which the Directors have an
interest. This was proposed earlier because ‘several instances of large
scale siphoning of funds of banks through the ‘connected lending’ had
taken place on account of which the financial position of the banks
had seriously deteriorated’. Questioned on the factors that led to the
re-thinking to initiate the current proposal, the Ministry, in a writer
reply, submitted as under:
“Loans to directors, relatives and companies or firms in which
directors are interested continue to be prohibited. The stand of
Reserve Bank regarding the need for restriction on lending to the
directors continues to be what it was earlier. The proposal is only
to enable the Reserve Bank to grant exemption to banks to lend
to companies when the independent director is common. It is
necessary to have this power with RBI as the restriction is coming
in the way of banks getting competent and professional
independent directors, as also restricting their lending to companies
for that reason.”
48. The Ministry further informed as under:
“Reserve Bank would not consider granting any such exemptions
where such directors are managing agent, manager, employee or
guarantor or in which he holds substantial interest in any
company.”

20
49. In terms of Clause 20 (B) (iii) of the Principal Act, as
applicable at present, a banking company is restricted from extending
loans or advances to any company of which any of its Directors
either holds the position of Director or is a ‘managing agent, manager,
employee or guarantor’ or holds substantial interest with the
proposed provisions under Clause 7 of the Bill, the Government
seeks to vest the Reserve Bank with the power to grant exemptions
from the restrictions applicable under Clause 20 (B) (iii) to allow
lending to companies in which the Directors may have interest. The
justification advanced for empowering the Reserve Bank to grant
exemptions from the restrictions, which has mainly centered on the
inability of ‘banking companies from getting competent Directors
on their Board’ lacks in rationale and does not convince the
Committee. Moreover, in terms of the proposals of the earlier Bill
which lapsed viz. the Banking Regulation (Amendment) and
Miscellaneous Provisions Bill, 2003, the restrictions applicable on
extending loans and advances in terms of the provisions of Clause
20 were sought to be strengthened in view of ‘instances of large
scale siphoning of funds’ which had adversely affected the financial
position of banks. The Ministry have, upon considering the proposals
of Clause 7 in the light of the observations made by the Committee
in the course of evidence informed that the exemptions to be granted
by the Reserve Bank would be confined to situations where the
Director of the Banking Company was common to that of the
Company seeking loans or advances.
50. The proposal made in the earlier Bill, which lapsed, was to
strengthen the restrictions by extending them to ‘connected lending’
and lending to any relative of Directors. By seeking to ease the
restrictions with the proposals of Clause 7, instead of strengthening
them as proposed only two years ago, the Government’s policy
direction has taken a complete turn, which the Committee do not
find to be tenable. Moreover, as admitted by the Ministry, the
provisions relating to restrictions on extending loans and advances
as presently applicable under the provisions of the Banking
Regulation Act, have, in no way, affected the Banks and their Boards
in their functioning. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that instead of pursuing the present proposal to ease the restrictions,
the Government should reintroduce the proposals made in the earlier
Bill of 2003, to specifically debar banks from granting any loan or
advance to relatives of Directors on their Boards and prohibit
“connected lending”.

21
Clause 6—Amendment of Section 24 (Statutory Liquidity Ratio)
51. Clause 6 reads as under:—
In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-section (2A), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2A) a scheduled bank, in addition to the average daily balance
which it is, or may be, required to maintain under Section 42 of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), and every other
banking company, in addition to the cash reserve which it is
required to maintain under section 18, shall maintain in India,
assets, the value of which shall not be less than such percentage
not exceeding forty per cent of the total of its demand and time
liabilities in India as on the last Friday of the second proceeding
fortnight as the Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify from time to time and such assets shall be
maintained, in such form and manner, as may be specified in such
notification.”
52. With a view to confer more operational flexibility on the Reserve
Bank in conducting the monetary policy, the amendment proposes to
enable the Bank to specify the SLR without any floor limit. The existing
limits on floor and ceiling on SLR, which presently stand  at 25% and
40% respectively are intended to act as a guidance to ‘RBI for exercising
discretion in fixing the percentage.’
53. Though the amendment to Section 24(2A) of the Principal Act,
as proposed under Clause 6 of the Bill stipulates that the upper ceiling
of SLR would be retained at 40%, the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Bill states that the Reserve Bank would have the power to
‘specify SLR without any floor or ceiling’. Questioned about the
legislative intent, that is whether the upper ceiling of 40% was also
sought to be done away with, the Ministry, in a written reply, informed
as under:
“The original proposal was to do away with the upper ceiling
also. The Bill was prepared accordingly. The Statement of Objects
and Reasons reflects the original intention and the Bill as originally
drafted. However, before the Bill was introduced in the Parliament,
it was felt that there is no need to remove the upper ceiling. As

22
such, the upper ceiling stipulated as at present namely 40% is
retained in the Bill. By oversight necessary changes have not been
carried out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons.”
54. On the factors that prompted the move to completely do away
with the upper ceiling of SLR as well and the subsequent rethinking
to retain the ceiling limit at 40%,  the Ministry , in a written reply,
informed as follows:
“it was initially proposed to do away with the upper ceiling of
SLR so as to give RBI full flexibility in prescribing such ratio from
a prudential point of view. However, in order that the pre-emption
of bank’s liabilities for investment in approved securities (mainly
Government securities) is limited, it was felt that it would be
desirable to have an upper bound—so that it will not be possible
to pre-empt more than 40% of bank’s liabilities for investment in
Government securities.”
55. The Committee note that the Government had initially sought
to do away with the lower as well as upper ceiling of SLR with a
view to confer ‘more operational flexibility on the Reserve Bank’ in
conducting the monetary policy. However, following an after thought,
it was decided to retain the upper bound of SLR, which stands at
40% to prevent ‘pre-emption of more than 40% of a bank’s liabilities
for investment in Government securities’. The Committee observe
that while the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill conveys
the original intention of the Government, that is, to do away with
the lower as well as upper ceiling of SLR, the provisions of Clause
6 of the Bill stipulate that the upper ceiling of SLR would be retained
at the level of 40%. As pointed out by the Ministry, by oversight,
changes were not carried out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons
to reflect the change in the Government’s policy proposals. This is
indicative of carelessness on the part of the Government in
formulating the provisions. The Committee desire the Government
to carry out necessary changes in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons of the Bill to clearly reflect the intention of the provisions,
that is, doing away with the floor limit on SLR and retaining the
upper bound of SLR at 40%.
Clause 7—Insertion of New Section 29A (Power in respect of
Associate Enterprises)
56. Clause 7 reads as under:—
After Section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘29A. Power in respect of associate enterprises.—(1) The Reserve
Bank may at any time direct a banking company to disclose in its

23
financial statements or furnish to it separately, within such time
and at such intervals as may be specified by the Reserve Bank,
such statements and information relating to the business or affairs
of any associate enterprise of the banking company as the Reserve
Bank may consider necessary or expedient to obtain for the purpose
of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the Reserve Bank may, at any
time, cause an inspection to be made of any associate enterprise
of a banking company and its books and account by one or more
of its officers or employees or other persons.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 35 shall
apply mutatis mutandis to the inspection under this  section.
Explanation.—“associate enterprise” in relation to a banking
company includes an enterprise which—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary company or a joint
venture of the banking company; or
(ii) controls the composition of the Board of directors or other
body governing the banking company; or
(iii) exercises, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, significant
influence on the banking company in taking financial or
policy decisions; or
(iv) is able to obtain economic benefits from the activities of the
banking company.’
57. By way of seeking to insert the new section 29A, RBI is sought
to be empowered to ‘call for information and returns from the associate
enterprises of banking companies also and inspect the same, if
necessary.
58. As per the Ministry of Finance, RBI is sought to be empowered
in this regard because, ‘RBI as a regulator of Banks should be aware
of the financial impact of the business of such enterprises on the
financial position of banking companies.
59. In terms of the provisions of Section 29(a) (3) as proposed, as
per which ‘the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 35
(of the Banking Regulation Act) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the
inspection’ in respect of associate enterprises, the powers of ‘inspection’

24
exercisable by RBI in respect of Banking Companies, which include,
(i) calling for and carrying out inspection of banks, accounts and other
documents, and (ii) ‘examining on oath’ or ‘administering an oath’ are
sought to be extended to the associate enterprises of Banks.
60. Questioned whether the definition of “associate enterprises” as
shown in the provisions, according to which, an associate enterprise,
inter alia includes an enterprise, which is a holding company or a
subsidiary company or a joint venture of a banking Company; or
controls the composition of the Board of Directors or other body
governing the banking company; or exercises significant influence on
the banking company in taking financial or policy decisions; or is able
to obtain economic benefits from the activities of the banking company
was not very wide and may cause a substantial increase in compliance
cost for banking companies, the Ministry, in a written reply, inter alia
stated as under:
“Even though, the definition is wide and leaves it to the subjective
judgment, the said subjective judgment will have to stand the test
of judicial scrutiny (in case of challenge), if it is used to give effect
to the purposes of proposed Section 29A. Associate, for this purpose
is more a matter of linkage of financial interest of the two concerns
and hence the criteria have necessarily to be related to the bearing
on the financial interest of one entity over the other. This will
have to be determined on the facts of each case.”
61. When pointed out that the proposed addition of the powers to
call for information, returns etc., and cause inspections of associate
enterprises of Banks could possibly lead to a jurisdictional overlap
with other regulatory bodies such as IRDA, SEBI etc., under whose
purview the associate enterprises may fall, the Ministry in a written
response, inter alia stated:
“Where an entity is regulated by another regulator, normally the
information required will be sought for from the regulator or from
the concerned bank of which such entity is the associate. In case
the associate enterprise does not fall under the jurisdiction of any
other regulator, this provision will allow RBI to call for such
information directly from such entity or cause an inspection of
such entity.”
62. By way of incorporating the new Section 29 A to the Banking
Regulation Act in terms of the provisions of Clause 7 the Reserve
Bank is inter alia sought to be vested with the power to ‘call for
information and returns’ from the associate enterprises of Banking

25
Companies and also inspect the same, if necessary. By virtue of the
provisions of Clause 29A(3), as proposed, the ‘power of inspection’
exercisable by the Reserve Bank in respect of Banking Companies,
which include, calling for information and ‘examining on oath’ are
sought to be extended to ‘associate enterprises’ of Banks. The
Committee are of the view that conferring such powers on the
Reserve Bank is a necessity mainly in view of the present day
multifarious activities of commercial banks, which include
outsourcing of office functions, data processing etc. The Committee,
however, observe that in the case of associate enterprises such as
insurance companies, housing banks, and mutual funds, which may
fall under the regulatory purview of other statutory bodies such as
IRDA, SEBI etc. in practicality, the Reserve Bank will have to work
in consultation/co-ordination with such bodies in exercising the
powers of inspection. This would be essential to prevent the
possibility of jurisdictional overlap with other statutory bodies. The
Committee expect the Government to ensure that appropriate
guidelines/instructions are formulated for enabling the Reserve Bank
in discharging the powers of inspection, without leaving any scope
for jurisdictional overlap with other statutory regulatory bodies.
Clause 8—Supersession of Board of Directors in certain cases
63. Clause 8 read as under:
Insertion of new Part IIAB.—
After Part IIA of the principal Act, the following Part shall be
inserted, namely:—
“Part IIAB
SUPERSESSION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF BANKING
COMPANY
36ACA. Supersession of Board of directors in certain cases.—(1)
Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that in the public interest or
for preventing the affairs of any banking company being conducted
in a manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors or any
banking company or for securing the proper management of any
banking company, it is necessary so to do, the Reserve Bank may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, supersede the
Board of directors of such banking company for a period not
exceeding six months as may be specified in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of directors
may be extended from time to time, so, however, that total period
shall not exceed twelve months.

26
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession of the Board of directors
of the banking company under sub-section (1), appoint an
Administrator for such period as it may determine.
(3) The Reserve Bank may issue such directions to the
Administrator as it may deem appropriate and the Administrator
shall be bound to follow such directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of directors
of a banking company, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),—
(a) the chairman, managing director and other directors shall, as
from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or this Act,
or any other law for the time being in force, be exercised and
discharged by or on behalf of the Board of directors of such
banking company, or by a resolution passed in general meeting of
such banking company, shall, until the Board of directors of such
banking company is reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by
the Administrator appointed by the Reserve Bank under sub-section
(2):
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall be
valid notwithstanding that such power is exercisable by a resolution
passed in the general meeting of such banking company.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute a committee of three or more
persons who have experience in law, finance, banking,
administration or accountancy to assist the Administrator in the
discharge of his duties.
(6) The committee shall meet at such times and places and observe
such rules of procedure as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(7) The salary and allowances to the Administrator and the
members of the committee constituted by the Reserve Bank shall
be such as may be specified by the Reserve Bank and be payable
by the concerned banking company.
(8) On and before the expiration of two months before the expiry
of the period of supersession of the Board of directions as specified
in the order issued under subsection (1), the Administrator of the

27
banking company, shall call the general meeting of the company
to elect new directors and reconstitute its Board of directors.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or in
any contract, the memorandum or articles of association, no person
shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or
termination of his office.
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (2) shall vacate
office immediately after the Board of directors of such banking
company has been reconstituted.”
64. In response to the point made that it would be desirable to
prescribe the qualification(s) of the Administrator, who may be
appointed on the supersession of the Board of Directors of a Banking
Company the Ministry, in a written reply stated that ‘if may be
provided that the person to be appointed as Administrator, shall have
experience in law, finance, banking, administration or accountancy, as
provided in sub-section (5) of proposed Section 36ACA for the members
of the Committee’.
65. The Committee note that Government have agreed to their
suggestion on prescribing in the provisions of the Bill, the pre-
qualifications of the Administrator, who is to be appointed for taking
charge of the affairs of the Banking Company following the
supersession of Board of Directors. Though the Ministry have
informed that selection of Administrator would be from persons
having experience in law, finance, banking, administration or
accountancy, the Committee feel that the qualifications required to
be met should be confined to experience in the fields of law, finance,
banking and accountancy only and no bureaucrat should be chosen
for the assignment. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that
appropriate changes be made in the provisions to indicate the
qualifications of the Administrator.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
12 December, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

28
NOTE OF DISSENT
Submitted by Shri Chittabrata Majumdar, MP
In the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 the Government
propose to allow the private Banks to mobilise capital from the capital
market and issue of preference share for such purpose is being
considered.
In this regard I would like to mention that during the tenure of
the previous Government, a Notification was issued dated March, 2004
by the Ministry of Finance stating that the Foreign Direct Investors
could take over Private Banks and the limit was raised to 74 per cent.
There has been hue and cry that this was another way of permitting
entry of Foreign Direct Investors in India in the Banking Sector. Such
ruthless and unwarranted entry of the Foreign Direct Investors with
very high levels of equity (74%) in the name of take over of control
and revival of sick Private Banks will be in effect disastrous.
There is good reason to cancel the said earlier Notification dated
March, 2004 appropriately and if at all the private sector weak banks
are to be provided support and help through better management and
making available required capital, the Indian companies who are
interested in such take over and revival should be allowed to do that
and in no circumstances the Foreign Direct Investors can be allowed
to control our financial sector through such entry with unacceptable
level of equity and control.
This Note of Dissent may be incorporated in the Report as this
Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 has direct bearing in the
existing Notification of March, 2004 of the Finance Ministry , which
need to be annulled at the earliest.
Sd/-
(Shri Chittabrata Majumdar, MP)

29
NOTE OF DISSENT
Submitted Separately by S/Shri Rupchand Pal,
Laxman Seth, MPs
In the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 the Government
propose to allow the private Banks to mobilise capital from the capital
market and issue preference share for such purposes is being
considered.
In this regard I would like to mention that during the tenure of
the previous Government, a Notification was issued on March, 2004
by the Ministry of Finance, stating that the Foreign Direct Investors
could take over private Banks and the limit was raised to 74 per cent.
There has been hue and cry that this was another way of permitting
entry of Foreign Direct Investors in India in the banking sector. Such
ruthless and unwarranted entry of the Foreign Direct Investors with
very high levels of equity (74%) in the name of take over of ownership
and revival of sick private Banks will be in effect disastrous.
There is good reason to cancel the said Notification appropriately
and if at all the private sector weak Banks are to be provided support
and help through better management and making available required
capital, the Indian companies who are interested in such take over
and revival should be allowed to do so. And in no circumstances the
Foreign Direct Investors can be allowed to control our financial sector
through such entry with unacceptable level of equity and control as
mentioned in the above Notification.
This Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 has direct bearing
in the existing Notification of March, 2004 of the Finance Ministry,
which need to be annulled at the earliest.
Sd/- Sd/-
(Shri Rupchand Pal, MP) (Shri Laxman Seth, MP)

30
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 14th July, 2005 from 1030 to
1200 hours and 1215 to 1320 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri M.S. Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha
11. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
13. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—
Banking Division)
1. Shri A.K. Jha, Secretary
2. Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary (FS)
3. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA)
4. Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (CM)

31
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the witnesses from the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Banking
Division) to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention to
the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker.
3. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs—Banking Division) briefed the Committee on the
various provisions contained in the Banking Regulation (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 and the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The
Members asked clarificatory questions which were replied to by the
representatives. The Chairman, then, directed the representatives of
the Ministry that the information with regard to queries of the Members
which were not readily available with them might be furnished to the
Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part-II
(1215 to 1320 hours)
2. ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

32
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 9th August, 2005 from 1500 to
1620 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri Lakshman Seth
9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
14. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
ICICI Bank Ltd.
1. Shri K.V . Kamath, Managing Director & CEO
2. Smt. Kalpana Morparia, Deputy Managing Director

33
Oriental Bank of Commerce
1. Shri K.N. Prithviraj, Chairman & Managing Director
2. Shri M.D. Mallya, Executive Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the First
sitting of the newly constituted Committee. The Chairman informed
the Members that a separate sitting will be convened for selection of
subjects for examination during the year.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of ICICI
Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank of Commerce to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
the Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
ICICI Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank of Commerce on the provisions of
the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the Reserve Bank
of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory
questions which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman,
then, directed the representatives of ICICI Bank Ltd. and Oriental Bank
of Commerce that the information with regard to queries of the
Members which was not readily available with them might be furnished
to the Committee later on.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record or proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

34
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 10th August, 2005 from 1500 to
1620 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Rupchand Pal
7. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
8. Shri K.S. Rao
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Punjab National Bank
Shri S.C. Gupta, Chairman & Managing Director
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
Shri M.R. Umarjee, Consultant

35
Fixed Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA)
1. Shri Sudhir Joshi, Chairman
2. Shri C.E.S. Azariah, CEO
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
1. Shri Jayant Bhuyan, Dy. Director General
2. Shri Rana Kapoor, Chairman, CII—Banking Committee
3. Shri Vikram Badshah, Sr. Consultant
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Punjab National Bank, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Fixed Income
Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA) and
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and invited their attention to
the provisions contained in the Direction 55 of the Directions by the
Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
Punjab National Bank, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), Fixed Income
Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA) and
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) on the provisions of the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the Reserve Bank of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory questions
which were replied to by the representatives. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

36
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 22nd August, 2005 from 1500 to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
State Bank of India
Shri A.K. Purwar, Chairman
Bank of India
Shri M. Balachandran, Chairman & Managing Director

37
HDFC Bank Ltd.
1. Shri Aditya Puri, Managing Director
2. Shri Rajender Sehgal, Senior Vice President
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
State Bank of India, Bank of India and HDFC Bank Ltd. to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
State Bank of India, Bank of India and HDFC Bank Ltd. on the
provisions of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the
Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Members asked
clarificatory questions which were replied to by the representatives.
The Chairman, then, directed the representatives that the information
with regard to queries of the Members which was not readily available
with them might be furnished to the Committee later on.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
6. ** ** ** ** **
7. ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

38
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 30 September, 2005 from 1100 to
1300 hrs. and 1530 to 1640 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
Secretariat
1. Smt. (Dr.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part-I
(at 1130 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** ** **

39
Part II
(at 1530 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance
(i) Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary (DEA)
(ii) Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary (FS)
(iii) Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BOA)
(iv) Shri U.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary (CM)
Reserve Bank of India
(i) Shri H. Bhattacharya, CGM
(ii) Shri Anand Sinha, CGM
(iii) Shri G.S. Hedge, Joint Legal Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained in
Direction 55 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry on the provisions of the (i) Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005, and (ii) Reserve Bank of India (Amendment)
Bill, 2005. The Members asked clarificatory questions which were
replied to by the representatives of the Ministry. The Chairman, then,
directed the representatives that the information with regard to queries
of the Members which was not readily available with them might be
furnished to the Committee later on.
5. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

40
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 7 November, 2005 from 1030 to
1145 hrs. and thereafter from 1145 to 1330 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
12. Shri Ajit Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Vijoy Krishna
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri R.P . Goenka
17. Shri Jairam Ramesh
18. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
19. Shri Yashwant Sinha
20. Shri Amar Singh

41
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
Part I
(1030 to 1145 hrs.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft reports
on:
(i) The Banking Regulation (Amendment) bill, 2005 and
(ii) The Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
4. While deliberating on the draft report on the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005, the Committee felt that additional clarification
was required to be obtained from the Ministry of Finance on the
proposal under Clause 3 as to whether the proposal applies only to
private sector banks, or both private and public sector banks, before
finalizing the recommendation/observation at para nos. 17 and 18.
The Committee, thereafter, approved the draft report (except
observation/recommendation at para nos. 17 and 18) with the
modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure.
5. The Committee also decided to seek clarifications on other issues
viz. floating of Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) and Capital
adequacy Norms etc., raised during the sitting.
6. ** ** ** ** **
Part-II
(1145 to 1330 hrs.)
2. ** ** ** ** **
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. ** ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** ** **
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

42
ANNEXURE
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT
ON THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL,
2005 AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 7 NOVEMBER, 2005]
Page 4,
Add sub para to The Committee also received written views/
Para No. 5 suggestions on the Bill from All India Bank
Officers Confederation, National Confederation
of Bank Employees, Bank Employees Federation
of India, Corporation Bank Officers
Organisation and State Bank of India Officers’
Association (Patna Circle)
Page 18,
Para No. 39
For “The Committee hope that the eligibility criteria
for determining ‘fit and proper’ status of the
persons would be applied judiciously.”
Substitute “The Committee desire that the eligibility
criteria to be followed by the Reserve Bank for
determining ‘fit and proper’ status of the
persons is in line with global best practices.”
Page 25,
Para No. 55,
Line 4 from
below
After “… to reflect the change in the Government’s
policy proposals.
Insert “This is indicative of carelessness on the part
of the Government in formulating the
provisions.”

43
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, 8th December, 2005 from 1500 to
1600 hours.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
4. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
5. Shri Rupchand Pal
6. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
7. Shri Lakshman Seth
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.B. Arora — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then approved the draft recommendation at
Sl. No. 1 (para nos. 17 & 18) of the draft report on the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 with modifications as shown in
the Annexure-I.

44
4. ** ** ** ** **
5. Some Members desired to submit notes of dissent on certain
policy measures for inclusion in the report on Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005. The Chairman informed them that they could
send the notes by 9 December, 2005.
6. The Committee, thereafter authorised the Chairman to finalise
the Reports in the light of the amendments suggested as also to make
verbal and other consequential changes and present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

45
ANNEXURE I
[MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT
ON THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL,
2005 AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 8 DECEMBER, 2005]
Page No. 8, Para No. 18
Line 7,
For …that permitting issue of preference shares would be
beneficial to the banks in raising cheap capital
Substitute … that permitting issue of preference shares would be
beneficial to the banks in raising the required capital…
Line 11
For … would be stipulated by the Reserve Bank.
Substitute … would be specified by the Reserve Bank.
Line 8 from below
For This, the Committee feel, would make …
Substitute The Committee feel that this would make ……

46
As Intr oduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 72 of 2005
THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and to make consequential
amendments in certain other enactments.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-
sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act
shall be construed as a reference to the coming
into force of that provision.
2. In section 5 of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), for clause (a), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(a) “approved securities” means the
securities issued by the Central Government or
any State Government or such other securities
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from
time to time.’
3. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1),—
(i) for clause (ii), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 5.
Amendment
of section
12.
10 of 1949.

47
“(ii) that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Companies Act, 1956, the
capital of such banking company consists
of—
(a) ordinary or equity shares, and
(b) preference shares issued in
accordance with the guidelines framed
by the Reserve Bank specifying the
class of, and the terms and conditions
subject to which the preference shares
may be issued:
Provided that no holder of the preference
share issued by the company shall be entitled
to exercise the voting right specified in clause
(b) of sub-section (2) of section 87 of the
Companies Act, 1956.”;
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted;
(iii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
4. After section 12A of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted, namely:
‘12B. (1) No person (hereinafter referred to
as “the applicant”) shall, except with the
previous approval of the Reserve Bank, on an
application being made, acquire or agree to
acquire, directly or indirectly, by himself or
acting in concert with any other person, shares
of a banking company or voting rights therein,
which acquisition taken together with shares
and voting rights, if any, held by him or his
relative or associate enterprise or person acting
in concert with him, makes the applicant to
hold five per cent. or more of the paid-up share
capital of such banking company or entitles him
to exercise five per cent or more of the voting
rights in such banking company.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
sub-section,—
(a) “relative” shall have the meaning
as assigned to it in section 6 of the
Companies Act, 1956;
Insertion of
new section
12B.
Regulation
of
acquisition
of shares of
voting
rights.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

48
(b) “associate enterprise” includes an
enterprise which,—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary
company or a joint venture of the applicant;
or
(ii) controls the composition of the
Board of directors or other body governing
the applicant; or
(iii) exercises, in the opinion of the
Reserve Bank, significant influence on the
applicant in taking financial or policy
decisions; or
(iv) is able to obtain economic benefits
from the activities of the applicant.
(c) persons shall be deemed to be
“acting in concert” who, for a common
objective or purpose of acquisition of shares
or voting rights in excess of the percentage
mentioned in this sub-section, pursuant to
an agreement or understanding (formal or
informal), directly or indirectly co-operate
by acquiring or agreeing to acquire shares
or voting rights in the banking company.
(2) An approval under sub-section (i) may
be granted by the Reserve Bank if it is satisfied
that—
(a) in the public interest; or
(b) in the interest of banking policy; or
(c) to prevent the affairs of any banking
company being conducted in a manner
detrimental or prejudicial to the interests
of the banking company; or
(d) in view of the emerging trends in
banking and international best practices; or
(e) in the interest of the banking and
financial system in India,
the applicant is a fit and proper person to
acquire shares or voting rights:

49
Provided that the Reserve Bank may call
for such information from the applicant as it
may deem necessary for considering the
application referred to in sub-section (1):
Provided further that the Reserve Bank may
specify different criteria for acquisition of shares
or voting rights in different percentages.
(3) Where the acquisition is by way of
transfer of shares of a banking company and
the Reserve Bank is satisfied that such transfer
should not be permitted, it may, by order, direct
that no such share shall be transferred to the
proposed transferee and may further direct the
banking company not to give effect to the
transfer of shares.
(4) The approval for acquisition of shares
may be subject to such conditions as the
Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose,
including a condition that any further
acquisition of shares shall require prior
approval of the Reserve Bank and that the
applicant continues to be a fit and proper
person to hold the shares or voting rights.
(5) Before issuing or allotting any share to
any person or registering the transfer of shares
in the name of any person, the banking
company shall ensure that the requirements of
sub-section (1) are complied with by that person
and where the acquisition is with the approval
of the Reserve Bank, the banking company shall
further ensure that the conditions imposed
under sub-section (4), if any, of such approval
are fulfilled.
(6) Every application made under sub-
section (l) shall be deemed to have been
granted, unless before the expirty of a period
of ninety days from the date on which the
application was received by the Reserve Bank,
it communicates to the applicant that the
approval applied for has not been granted:

50
Provided that in computing the period of
ninety days, the period taken by the applicant
for furnishing the information called for by the
Reserve Bank shall be excluded.
(7) The Reserve Bank may specify the
minimum percentage of shares to be acquired
in a banking company if it considers that the
purpose for which the shares are proposed to
be acquired by the applicant warrants such
minimum shareholding.’
5. In section 20 of the principal Act, after
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(6) The Reserve Bank may, subject to such
conditions as may be specified, grant to any
banking company exemption from the
provisions of this section in regard to any
restriction on entering into any commitment for
granting any loan or advance to any company
referred to in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of
sub-section (1).”
6. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(a) sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be
omitted;
(b) for sub-section (2A), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2A) A scheduled bank, in addition to the
average daily balance which it is, or may
be, required to maintain under section 42
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and
every other banking company, in addition
to the cash reserve which it is required to
maintain under section 18, shall maintain
in India, assets, the value of which shall
not be less than such percentage not
exceeding forty per cent. of the total of its
demand and time liabilities in India as on
the last Friday of the second preceding
fortnight as the Reserve Bank may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify
Amendment
of section 20
Amendment
of section 24

51
from time to time and such assets shall be
maintained, in such form and manner, as
may be specified in such notification.”;
(c) sub-section (2B) shall be omitted.
7. After section 29 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘29A. (1) The Reserve Bank may at any time
direct a banking company to disclose in its
financial statements or furnish to it separately,
within such time and at such intervals as may
be specified by the Reserve Bank, such
statements and information relating to the
business or affairs of any associate enterprise
of the banking company as the Reserve Bank
may consider necessary or expedient to obtain
for the purpose of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956,
the Reserve Bank may, at any time, cause an
inspection to be made of any associate
enterprise of a banking company and its books
and account by one or more of its officers or
employees or other persons.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and
(3) of section 35 shall apply mutatis mutandis to
the inspection under this section.
Explanation .—“associate enterprise” in
relation to a banking company includes an
enterprise which—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary
company or a joint venture of the banking
company; or
(ii) controls the composition of the
Board of directors or other body governing
the banking company; or
(iii) exercises, in the opinion of the
Reserve Bank, significant influence on the
banking company in taking financial or
policy decisions; or
Insertion of
new section
29A.
Power in
repsect of
associate
enterprises.

52
(iv) is able to obtain economic benefits
from the activities of the banking company’.
8. After Part IIA of the principal Act, the
following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART IIAB
SUPERSESSION OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS
OF BANKING COMPANY
36ACA. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is
satisfied that in the public interest or for
preventing the affairs of any banking company
being conducted in a manner detrimental to
the interest of the depositors or any banking
company or for securing the proper
management of any banking company, it is
necessary so to do, the Reserve Bank may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order,
supersede the Board of directors of such
banking company for a period not exceeding
six months as may be specified in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession
of the Board of directors may be extended from
time to time, so, however, that total period shall
not exceed twelve months.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession
of the Board of directors of the banking
company under sub-section (1), appoint an
Administrator for such period as it may
determine.
(3) The Reserve Bank may issue such
directions to the Administrator a sit may deem
appropriate and the Administrator shall be
bound to follow such directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession
of the Board of directors of a banking company,
notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956,—
(a) the chairman, managing director and
other directors shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
Insertion of
new Part
IIAB.
Supersession
of Board of
directors in
certain
cases.
1 of 1956.

53
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
the Companies Act, 1956 or this Act, or
any other law for the time being in force,
be exercised and discharged by or on behalf
of the Board of directors of such banking
company, or by a resolution passed in
general meeting of such banking company,
shall, until the Board of directors of such
banking company is reconstituted, be
exercised and discharged by the
Administrator appointed by the Reserve
Bank under sub-section (2):
Provided that the power exercised by the
Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding
that such power is exercisable by a resolution
passed in the general meeting of such banking
company.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute a
committee of three or more persons who have
experience in law, finance, banking,
administration or accountancy to assist the
Administrator in the discharge of his duties.
(6) The committee shall meet at such times
and places and observe such rules of procedure
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(7) The salary and allowances to the
Administrator and the members of the
committee constituted by the Reserve Bank shall
be such as may be specified by the Reserve
Bank and be payable by the concerned banking
company.
(8) On and before the expiration of two
months before the expirty of the period of
supersession of the Board of directors as
specified in the order issued under sub-section
(1), the Administrator of the banking company,
shall call the general meeting of the company
to elect new directors and reconstitute its Board
of directors.
1 of 1956.

54
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law or in any contract, the
memorandum or articles of association, no
person shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the loss or termination of his
office.
(10) The Administrator appointed under
sub-section (2) shall vacate office immediately
after the Board of directors of such banking
company has been reconstituted.”.
9. In section 51 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), before the words, brackets, figures
and letters “sub-sections (1B), (1C) and (2) of
section 30”, the figures and letter “29A”, shall
be inserted.
10. (1) In section 56 of the principal Act,—
(A) in clause (o) relating to the
modification of section 22,—
(a) in sub-section (l),—
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;
(ii) after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that nothing in this sub-
section shall apply to a primary credit
society carrying on banking business at the
commencement of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Act, 2005, for a period of one
year or for such further period not
exceeding three years as the Reserve Bank
may, after recording the reasons in writing
for so doing, extend.”;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words, “every primary credit
society which becomes a primary co-
operative bank after such commencement
shall before the expirty of three months
from the date on which it so becomes a
Amendment
of section 51
Amendment
of section 56

55
primary co-operative bank” the words,
“every primary credit society which had
become a primary co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Act, 2005, shall before the
expiry of three months from the date on
which it had become a primary co-operative
bank” shall be substituted;
(ii) the words, “other than a primary
credit society” shall be omitted;
(iii) in the proviso,—
(a) in clause (ii), for the words
“thereafter, or” the word “thereafter,” shall
be substituted;
(b) clause (iii) shall be omitted;
(B) in clause (s) relating to the
modification of sections 29 and 30, for the
words and figures, “sections 29 and 30” the
word and figure, “section 29” shall be
substitued;
(C) after clause (s), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(sa) for section 30, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“30. (1) Without prejudice to anything
contained in any other law for the time
being in force, where the Reserve Bank is
satisfied that it is necessary in the public
interest or in the interest of the co-operative
bank or its depositors so to do, it may at
any time by order direct that a special audit
of the co-operative bank accounts, for any
such transactions or class of transactions or
for such period or periods as may be
specified in the order, shall be conducted
and may by the same or a different order
appoint a person duly qualified under any
law for the time being in force to be an
Audit.

56
auditor of companies to conduct such
special audit, and the auditor shall comply
with such directions and make a report of
such audit to the Reserve Bank and forward
a copy thereof to the co-operative bank.
(2) The expenses of, or incidental to, the
special audit specified in the order made by
the Reserve Bank shall be borne by the
co-operative bank.
(3) The auditor referred to in sub-section
(1) shall have such powers, exercise such
functions vested in and discharge the duties
and be subject to the liabilities and penalties
imposed on auditors, if any, appointed by the
law establishing, constituting or forming the co-
operative bank.
(4) In addition to the matters referred to in
the order under sub-section (l) the auditor shall
state in his report.
(a) whether or not the information and
explanation required by him have been
found to be satisfactory;
(b) whether or not the transactions of
the co-operative bank which came to his
notice have been within the powers of the
co-operative bank;
(c) whether or not the returns received
from branch offices of the co-operative bank
have been found adequate for the purpose
of his audit;
(d) whether the profit and loss
accounts, shows a true balance or profit or
loss for the period covered by such account;
(e) any other matter which he considers
should be brought to the notice of the
Reserve Bank and the shareholders of the
cooperative bank.” .

57
11. The enactments specified in the
Schedule are hereby amended to the extent and
in the manner mentioned in the third column
thereof.
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 11)
Sl.No. Short title Amendment
1. The State Financial
Corporation Act, 1951 (63
of 1951).
2. The State Bank of India
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955)
3. The State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959 (38 of 1959)
4. The Warehousing
Corporations Act, 1962
(58 of 1962)
5. The Regional Rural
Banks Act, 1976 (21 of
1976)
6. The Industrial Finance
Corporation (Transfer of
Undertaking and Repeal)
Act, 1993 (23 of 1993)
7. The Industrial Reconst-
ruction Bank (Transfer
of Undertakings and
Repeal) Act, 1997 (7 of
1997)
8. The Unit Trust of India
(Transfer of Undertaking
and Repeal) Act, 2002 (58
of 2002)
In section 7 , sub-section (3), the
words and figures “and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949”
shall be omitted.
In section 12, the words and
figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall be
omitted.
In section 20, the words and
figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall be
omitted.
In section 5, the words and
figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall be
omitted.
In section 7, the words and
figures “and shall also be
deemed to be approved
securities for the purposes of
the Banking Regulation Act,
1949” shall be omitted.
In section 10, the words and
figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall be
omitted.
In section 11, the words and
figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall be
omitted.
In section 17, the words and
figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall be
omitted.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
10 of 1949
10 of 1949
10 of 1949
10 of 1949
10 of 1949
10 of 1949
10 of 1949
10 of 1949

58
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 has been in force for more than
five decades. It empowers the Reserve Bank of India (hereinafter
referred to as the Reserve Bank) to regulate and supervise the banking
sector. The banks are now operating in a liberalised environment. In
this scenario, it has become necessary that the banks in India are able
to raise capital in accordance with international best practices. To ensure
that the control of banks is in the hands of fit and proper persons,
persons who propose to acquire 5% or more of the share capital of a
bank should be required to obtain prior approval from the Reserve
Bank and the Reserve Bank should have the necessary power to impose
such conditions as it deems necessary while granting such approval.
It is, therefore, proposed to remove the restriction on voting rights
concurrently with the stipulation of the statutory requirement of prior
approval for acquisition of shares above the specified limit. The Reserve
Bank should also be able to specify acquisition of a minimum
percentage of shares in a banking company if it considers necessary.
2. It is necessary to confer more operational flexibility on the
Reserve Bank in the conduct of monetary policy. For this purpose, the
Reserve Bank should have the power to specify Statutory Liquidity
Ratio without any floor or ceiling as also to specify any security as
approved security for this purpose.
3. The present restrictions on lending to directors and the companies
or firms in which the directors are interested is posing a difficulty to
banks in appointing competent independent directors. It is, therefore,
necessary to empower the Reserve Bank to grant exemption to banking
companies in appropriate cases.
4. Taking advantage of the liberalised environment, banks are
engaging in multifarious activities through the medium of associate
enterprises. The Reserve Bank as the regulator of banks should be
aware of the financial impact of the business of such enterprises on
the financial position of banking companies. The Reserve Bank should,
therefore, be empowered to call for information and returns from the
associate enterprises of banking companies also and inspect the same,
if necessary.
5. The Reserve Bank has the power to remove any director or
other officers of a bank but that power is not sufficient if the entire

59
Board of Directors of a bank is functioning in a manner detrimental
to the interests of depositors or the bank itself. To deal with such a
situation it is necessary that the Reserve Bank has the power to
supersede the Board of Directors of a bank and appoint an
administrator to manage the bank till alternate arrangements are made.
6. For a sound and healthy banking system, it is necessary to
ensure that only the cooperative societies that have been licensed by
the Reserve Bank carry on the business of banking. To protect the
interest of depositors, the primary co-operative societies should therefore
be given a timeframe within which they have to either stop the business
of banking or fulfil all the requirements specified by the Reserve Bank
and obtain a licence to carry on the business of banking. The Reserve
Bank should have the power to order a special audit of co-operative
banks in public interest for a more effective supervision of co-operative
banks. The proposed legislation aims to make the regulatory powers
of the Reserve Bank more effective.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
  New Delhi; P . CHIDAMBARAM
The 6th May, 2005.

60
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon the Reserve
Bank of India to specify approved securities.
2. Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to empower the Reserve Bank to
issue guidelines to specify the class of, and the terms and conditions
subject to which, the preference shares may be issued.
3. Clause 4 of the Bill confers power upon the Reserve Bank to
specify different criteria for acquisition of shares or voting rights in
different percentages. This clause further empowers the Reserve Bank
to specify the minimum percentage of shares to be acquired in a
banking company by an applicant.
4. Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Reserve Bank to specify such
percentage of value of assets, which shall be maintained in India by
every banking company.
5. The matters in respect of which notification or guidelines issued
or specified are all matters of procedure and administrative details
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, of a normal character.

61
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE B ANKING R EGULATION A CT, 1949
(10 OF 1949)
******
5. In this Act, unless there is anything
repugnant in the subject or context.
(a) “approved securities” means—
(i) securities in which a trustee may
invest money under clause (a), clause (b),
clause (bb), clause (c) or clause (d) of
section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;
(ii) such of the securities authorised by
the Central Government under clause (f)
of section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
as may be prescribed;
******
12. (1) No banking company shall carry on
business in India, unless it satisfies the
following conditions, namely:—
******
(ii) that the capital of the company consists
of ordinary shares only or of ordinary shares
or equity shares and such preferential shares
as may have been issued prior to the 1st day
of July, 1944:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall apply to any banking company
incorporated before the 15th day of January,
1937.
(2) No person holding shares in a banking
company shall, in respect of any shares held
by him, exercise voting rights on poll in excess
of ten per cent of the total voting rights of all
the shareholders of the banking company.
******
Interpretation
Regulation
of paid-up
capital,
subscribed
capital and
authorised
capital and
voting
rights of
shareholders
2 of 1882
2 of 1882

62
24. (1) After the expiry of two years from
the commencement of this Act, every banking
company shall maintain in India in cash, gold
or unencumbered approved securities, valued
at a price not exceeding the current market
price, an amount which shall not at the close
of business on any day be less than 20 per
cent. of the total of its demand and time
liabilities in India.
Explanation—For the purpose of this section,
“unencumbered approved securities” of a
banking company shall include its approved
securities lodged with another institution for
an advance or any other credit arrangement to
the extent to which such securities have not
been drawn against or availed of.
(2) In computing the amount for the
purposes of sub-section (1), the deposit required
under sub-section (2) of section 11 to be made
with the Reserve Bank by a banking company
incorporated outside India and any balances
maintained in India by a banking company in
current account with the Reserve Bank or the
State Bank of India or with any other bank
which may be notified in this behalf by the
Central Government, including in the caseof a
scheduled bank the balance required under
section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934, to be so maintained, shall be deemed to
be cash maintained in India.
(2A) (a) Notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (1) or in sub-section
(2), after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of the Banking Companies
(Amendment) Act, 1962,—
(i) a scheduled bank, in addition to the
average daily balance which it is, or may
be, required to maintain under section 42
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and
Maintenance
of a
percentage
of assets.
2 of 1934
36 of 1962
2 of 1934

63
(ii) every other banking company, in
addition to the cash reserve which it is
required to maintain under section 18, shall
maintain in India,—
(A) in cash, or
(B) in gold valued at a price not
exceeding the current market price or in
unencumbered approved securities valued
at a price determined in accordance with
such one or more of, or combination of,
the following methods of valuation, namely,
valuation with reference to cost price,
market price, book value or face value, as
may be specified by the Reserve Bank from
time to time.
an amount which shall not, at the close of
business on any day, be less than twenty-
five per cent, or such other percentage not
exceeding forty per cent as the Reserve
Bank may from time to time, by notification
in the Official Gazette; specify, of the total
of its demand and time liabilities in India,
as on the last Friday of the second
preceding fortnight.
(b) in computing the amount for the
purpose of clause (a),—
(i) the deposit required under sub-
section (2) of section 11 to be made with
the Reserve Bank by a banking company
incorporated outside India;
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in
India by a banking company other than a
scheduled bank with itself or with the
Reserve Bank or by way of net balance in
current account in excess of the aggregate
of the cash or balance or net balance
required to be maintained under section 18;

64
(iii) any balances maintained by a
scheduled bank with the Reserve Bank in
excess of the balance required to be
maintained by it under section 42 of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(iv) the net balance in current accounts
maintained in India by a scheduled bank;
(v) any balances maintained by a
Regional Rural Bank in call or fixed deposit
with its Sponsor Bank,
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India.
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (a)
of this sub-section, the market price of an
approved security shall be the price as on the
date of the issue of the notification or as on
any earlier or later date as may be notified
from time to time by the Reserve Bank in
respect of any class or classes of securities.
(2B) The Reserve Bank may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, vary the percentage
referred to in sub-section (2A) in respect of a
Regional Rural Bank.
******
51. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions
of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, or any
other enactment, the provisions of sections 10,
13 to 15, 17, 19 to 21A, 23 to 28, 29 [excluding
sub-section (3)], sub-sections (1B), (1C) and (2)
of sections 30, 31, 34, 35, 35A, 36 [excluding
clause (d) of sub-section (1)], 45Y to 45ZF, 46
to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall also apply, so far as
may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of
India or any corresponding new bank or a
Regional Rural Bank or any subsidiary bank as
they apply to and in relation to banking
companies:
Application
on of
certain
provisions
to the State
Bank of
India and
other
notified
banks.
2 of 1934
23 of 1955.

65
Provided that—
(a) nothing contained in clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 10 shall apply to
the Chairman of the State Bank of India or
to a managing director of any subsidiary
bank in so far as the said clause precludes
him from being a director of, or holding
an office in, any institution approved by
the Reserve Bank;
(b) nothing contained in sub-clause (iii)
of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section
20 shall apply to any bank referred to in
sub-section (1), insofar as the said sub-
clause (iii) of clause (b) precludes that bank
from entering into any commitment for
granting any loan or advance to or on
behalf of a company (not being a
Government company) in which not less
than forty per cent of the paid-up capital
is held (whether singly or taken together)
by the Central Government or the Reserve
Bank or a corporation owned by that bank;
and
(c) nothing contained in Section 46 or
in Section 47A shall apply to,
(i) an officer of the Central
Government or the Reserve Bank,
nominated or appointed as director of
the State Bank of India or any
corresponding new bank or a Regional
Rural Bank or any subsidiary bank or
a banking company; or
(ii) an officer of the State Bank of
India or a corresponding new bank or
a Regional Rural Bank or a subsidiary
bank nominated or appointed as
director of any of the said banks (not
being the bank of which he is an
officer) or of a banking company.”
******

66
PART V
APPLICATION OF THE A CT TO C O-OPERATIVE B ANKS
56. The provisions of this Act, as in force
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation
to, co-operative societies as they apply to or in
relation to, banking companies subject to the
following modifications, namely:—
******
(o) in section 22,—
(i) for sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the
following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) Save as hereinafter provided, no
co-operative society shall carry on banking
business in India unless—
(a) it is a primary credit society, or
(b) it is a co-operative bank and holds
a licence issued in that behalf by the
Reserve Bank, subject to such conditions, if
any, as the Reserve Bank may deem fit to
impose:
Provided that nothing in this sub-
section shall apply to a cooperative society,
not being a primary credit society or a co-
operative bank carrying on banking
business at the commencement of the
Banking Laws (Application to Co-operative
Societies) Act, 1965, for a period of one year
from such commencement.
(2) Every co-operative society carrying on
business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,
1965, shall before the expirty of three months
from such commencement, every co-operative
bank which comes into existence as a result of
the division of any other co-operative society
Act to
apply to
co-operative
societies
subject to
modifications.
23 of 1965
23 of 1965

67
carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or
the amalgamation of two or more co-operative
societies carrying on banking business shall,
before the expiry of three months from its so
coming into existence, every primary credit
society which becomes a primary co-operative
bank after such commencement shall before the
expiry of three months form the date on which
it so becomes a primary co-operative bank and
every co-operative society other than a primary
credit society shall before commencing banking
business in India, apply in writing to the
Reserve Bank for a licence under this section:
Provided that nothing in clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1) shall be deemed to prohibit:
(i) a co-operative society carrying on
business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,
1965; or
(ii) a co-operative bank which has come
into existence as a result of the division of
any other co-operative society carrying on
business as a co-operative bank, or the
amalgamation of two or more co-operative
societies carrying on banking business at
the commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act,
1965 or at any time thereafter; or
(iii) a primary credit society which
becomes a primary co-operative bank after
such commencement,
from carrying on banking business until it is
granted a licence in pursuance of this section
or is by a notice in writing, notified by the
Reserve Bank that the licence cannot be granted
to it.
******
23 of 1965
23 of 1965

68
EXTRACT FROM THE S TATE F INANCIAL
CORPORATION A CT, 1951
(63 OF 1951)
7. (1) * * * * *
(3) The Financial Corporation may, for the
purposes of carrying out its functions under
this Act, borrow money from the State
Government consultation with the Development
Bank and the Reserve bank on such terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon.
******
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE S TATE BANK OF
INDIA A CT, 1955
(23 OF 1955)
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this Section,
the shares of the State Bank shall be deemed
to be included among the securities enumerated
in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
and also to be approved securities for the
purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938, and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
******
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA
(SUBSIDIARY B ANKS) A CT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this Section,
the shares of a subsidiary bank shall be deemed
to be included among the securities enumerated
Additional
capital of
the financial
corporation
and its
borrowing
powers.
Shares to
be
Approved
securities.
Shares to
be
Approved
securities.
2 of 1882
4 of 1938
10 of 1948

69
in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
and also to be approved securities for the
purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938, and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
******
————
EXTRACT FROM THE W AREHOUSING C ORPORATION
ACT, 1962
(58 OF 1962)
******
5. (1) The shares of the Central
Warehousing Corporation shall be guaranteed
by the Central Government as to the repayment
of the principal and the payment of the annual
dividend at such minimum rate as may be fixed
by the Central Government, by notification
published in the Official Gazette, at the time
of the issue of the shares.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts mentioned in this sub-section, the
shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation
shall be deemed to be included among the
securities enumerated in section 20 of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be
approved securities for the purpose of the
Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Companies
Act, 1949.
******
E
XTRACT FROM THE R EGIONAL R URAL B ANKS A CT,
1976
(21 OF 1976)
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this Section,
the shares of a Regional Rural Bank shall be
deemed to be included among the securities
Shares to
be
guaranteed
by Central
Government
and to be
trusted or
approved
securities.
Shares to
be
Approved
securities.
2 of 1882
4 of 1938
10 of 1949
2 of 1882
4 of 1938
10 of 1949

70
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882, and shall also be deemed to be
approved securities for the purposes of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
******
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION
(TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKING AND R EPEAL)
ACT, 1993
(23 OF 1993)
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the
shares, bonds and debentures of the Company
shall be deemed to approved securities for the
purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the
Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949.
******
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE INDUSTRIAL RECONSTRUCTION BANK
(TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS AND R EPEAL)
ACT, 1997
(7 OF 1997)
******
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the
shares, bonds and debentures of the Company
shall be deemed to be approved securities for
the purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
******
—————
Shares,
bonds and
debentures
to be
deemed to
be
approved
securities
Sahres,
bonds and
debentures
to be
deemed to
be
approved
securities
2 of 1882
10 of 1949
2 of 1882
2 of 1938
10 of 1949
2 of 1882
4 of 1938
10 of 1949

71
EXTRACT FROM THE U NIT T RUST OF I NDIA
(TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKING AND R EPEAL)
ACT, 2002
(58 of 2002)
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the
shares, bonds, debentures and units of the
specified undertaking shall be deemed to be
approved securities for the purposes of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the Insurance Act, 1938
and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
******
Shares,
bonds;
debetures
and unit to
be deemed
to be
approved
securities.
2 of 1882
4 of 1938
10 of 1949

72
LOK SABHA
——————
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and to make
consequential amendments in certain other enactments.
———————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Minister of Finance)