CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fifty-Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
(formerly Ministry of Company Affairs) which was presented to Lok
Sabha 28th April, 2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2007.
2. The Report contained 8 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2 (Para Nos. 45 & 50) 3, 4 (Para
No. 72) 5, 6, 7, & 8
 (Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. Nil
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1 & 2 (Para Nos. 48 & 49)
 (Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2 (Para Nos. 46, 47, 51 & 52),
and 4 (Para No. 71)
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapter I & V may be furnished to them expeditiously.

2
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Comprehensive Revision of the Companies Act, 1956
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para Nos. 18 and 19)
5. Keeping in view of the urgency and importance attached to the
issue, the Committee strongly recommended that the process of
finalising the Bill to amend the Companies Act, 1956 be expedited and
the same be introduced in Parliament in this financial year i.e. 2007-
08.
6. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their action taken reply
have, inter alia , stated that the draft Companies Bill is being finalized
with vetting by the Ministry of Law. As recommended by the Hon’ble
Committee the process of finalizing the Bill is being expedited and
every effort will be made to introduce the Bill in Parliament at the
earliest.
7. The Committee regret to note that the action taken reply
furnished by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs is in no way different
from what was stated by them during the Committee’s examination
in April, 2007. The Ministry had then indicated that the Legislative
Department was vetting the draft on Companies Bill and as soon as
the bill was finalized, it would be introduced in Parliament after
obtaining requisite approvals. It appears that since then there has
been no concrete progress in finalization of the Bill. The Committee
in this connection would draw the Ministry’s attention to the
commitment made in the Ministry’s Outcome Budget of 2007-08 that
the Bill would be finalized and introduced in Parliament in the
financial year 2007-08. The Committee stress that all out efforts be
made to ensure that the Bill is finalised and introduced in the
financial year 2007-08.
B. Failure of the Companies to file Annual Returns
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 48 & 49)
8. In view of the failure of the substantial number of companies
in filing annual returns as required under sections 159, 160 & 161 of
the Companies Act, 1956, the Committee recommended that strict
measures should be taken by Government to put an end to this blatant
violation of law. However, in view of the submissions made by the
Government regarding enforcement related problems the Committee
felt it essential to initiate and pursue prosecution proceedings at least
against such companies, which are found repeatedly failing in filing
annual returns, which would serve as an effective deterrent for others.

3
9. The Government in their action taken reply, inter-alia, stated as
under:—
“It is correct that the law provides for penalties for non-compliance
by the companies but such penalties and fines can be imposed
only through filing of prosecution cases in the courts of competent
jurisdiction. It has been observed that the process requires
(i) issuance of show cause notices to the defaulting companies and
the officers in default, (ii) filing of prosecution cases in the courts
of competent jurisdiction and then follow-up thereof in the courts.
Filing of prosecutions against the companies and the judicial process
has been found to be very time consuming, and rather ineffective,
as brought out by the O.P . Vaish Committee appointed for this
purpose. Going by the rate of default, the Ministry may be required
to file about 18.00 lakh prosecution cases every year [assuming a
default by 3.00 lakh companies and three prosecutions required to
be filed in each case of default on non-filing of Annual Returns
and Balance Sheets respectively]. Neither the Ministry has the
manpower to handle such large numbers of prosecutions nor the
Courts have the capacity to decide so many cases within a
prescribed time frame. Moreover, the costs involved in this exercise
for outweigh the benefits. The Ministry has carried out an analysis
on the basis of database now available in the electronic registry to
address this problem and drawn up an action plan for improvement
in compliance management. It is brought out from the following:
(i) The compliance rate in filing of Annual Returns and Balance
Sheets has improved by more than 65% and 80% in one
year with the implementation of MCA 21 as is brought out
from the following statistics:
No. of ARs and BSs No. of ARs and BSs
filed during 2005-06 filed during 2006-07
(as on 15 May, 2007)
BS AR BS AR
No. of Companies 2,04,346 1,90,252 3,43,000 3,43,000
Improvement in % 67.85% 80.28%
(ii) It has been observed that there are a large number of
companies which have not filed any documents for a period
of more than 03 years which leads to the presumption that
these are defunct companies. A total of 1,37,456 such
companies have been identified and the Registrar of

4
Companies have been directed to take suo-motu action under
section 560 of the Companies Act, 1956 to strike off the
names of the defunct/inactive companies from the register
of companies with a view to cleaning the registry from the
administrative burden of such defunct companies. About
49,000 companies have already been struck off the Register
under the Simplified Exit Schemes of 2003 and 2005;
(iii) The analysis further brings out the need to focus on
compliance management in an order of priority. For example,
from the public interest point of view, it is important that
the non-compliance is controlled and minimised in respect
of the listed companies, public companies and the private
companies with an authorised capital of more than Rs. 1.00
crore, comprising of about 90,000 companies in all, where
the compliance rate is already above 70%. It has been
decided to issue show cause notices to the defaulting
companies in these categories in the order mentioned above
in the first instance and follow the same with legal process;
(iv) The focus on improvement in compliance management in
respect of companies with an Authorised Capital between
Rs. 10.00 lakh and up to Rs. 1.00 crore is proposed to be
taken up as the next priority;
(v) Small private companies with an authorised capital of up
to Rs. 10.00 lakh constitute 53% of the total companies and
there is hardly any public interest involved in these
companies. The data shows that the bulk of the defaulting
companies, including the defunct/inactive companies fall in
this group. Hence, this group is proposed to be targeted
with a two-fold action plan i.e. (i) by way of taking recourse
to Section 560 proceedings with a view to striking off their
names from the registry as the top priority, and (ii) taking
recourse to the legal measures against the balance defaulting
companies as the next priority.
It is requested that the Hon’ble Committee may accept and approve
of the approach proposed to be followed by the Ministry in this
area.”
10. As regards the Ministry’s request for the Committee’s
approval, the Committee would like to point out that it is not for
the Committee to accord approval for the action plans of the
Government. It is entirely within the jurisdiction of the Government
to take such action as deemed appropriate on implementing the

5
Committee’s recommendations. In regard to the question of
compliance management of small companies, the Committee note
that small companies constitute as much as 53% of the total number
of companies. Unless strict action is taken against all those
companies, which repeatedly fail to file annual returns, illegal
activities, if any, indulged in by those companies may escape notice.
The Committee, therefore, emphasise that urgent measures are
necessary against all defaulting companies irrespective of the size of
their capital. The Committee also desire that the defunct as well as
ineffective companies should be truck off from the register at the
earliest.
C. Identification of Vanishing Companies
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 46, 47, 51 & 52)
11. (i) As it is essential to have an effective mechanism of ‘Real
Time Online Exchange of Factual Information’ among the Ministry ,
SEBI and other agencies inter alia  to identify vanishing companies and
their promoters and to bring them to book, the Committee had
recommended inclusion of this feature/mechanism in MCA-21
e-governance project. The Government, in its action taken reply, have
inter alia stated that the possibilities of the ‘Online Exchange of
Information’ between various agencies and provision of its functionality
in the MCA 21 system were being explored keeping in view the
compatibility of the programmes being followed by the SEBI and the
RBI which was likely to take some time.
(ii) In the absence of availability of any means with Registrar of
Companies (RoC) to check/cross check the verasity of address of a
company as may be furnished in the annual returns, the Committee
further recommended for evolving a viable mechanism for checking/
cross checking the veracity of the information provided. On the issue
of making available Registrar of Companies (RoCs) the means to check/
cross check the veracity of the address and other details of a company,
the Government have informed, inter-alia,  that they were already
working on the action plan to address the concern expressed by the
hon’ble standing Committee and data validation/Correction has been
identified as a major thrust area under MCA 21 for 2007-08.
(iii) As there is likelihood of non-traceability of the vanishing
companies the Committee also recommended that criteria for identifying
a company as vanishing needs to be streamlined and the Government
should revise the definition so that any Company which does not
fulfil even one of the pre set criteria might be categorized as a
vanishing company. With regard to the need for changing the criteria

6
for identifying the vanishing companies, the Government have replied
that the Committee’s recommendation has been noted for compliance.
Recognizing the need for revisiting the criteria, CMC is stated to have
already constituted a small group consisting of officials from MCA,
MoF and SEBI to examine the issue carefully keeping in view the
legal provisions.
12. The Committee desire the Government to initiate fresh and
effective initiatives expeditiously and they be informed of the
outcome of these initiatives.

7
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Identification of Vanishing Companies
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para Nos. 45 & 50)
The Committee note that the present list of vanishing companies
pertains to the period 1992-1998. The Task Forces of the Ministry,
entrusted with the main responsibility of identifying the companies
which disappeared, are presently engaged in the process of locating
the companies that mobilized public funds during the period 1998-
2001 and are not traceable. Although the exercise of identification of
such companies which went in for public issues during this period is
stated to be nearing completion, it appears to the Committee that not
a single a company that may have vanished after 1998 has been
identified till date which is indeed disappointing. The Committee,
therefore feel the need for addressing the issue with due seriousness
and planning. The Committee are also not satisfied with the contention
of the Government that identification of such companies for the period
2001-04 will be taken up subsequently. They are of the opinion that
the period of identification of vanishing companies should be extended
up to 2005.
The Committee take note of the fact that very little has been done
in regard to prosecuting/disgorging the assets of the 115 vanishing
companies that have reportedly been traced back. The Committee
emphasise on giving adequate attention to not only tracing vanishing
companies but also prosecuting such companies as have been traced
back so as to enable in compensating the duped investors. The
Committee also reiterate the need for taking special care at the time
of registration of a company to assess its veracity and potential viability
to function in the competitive environment of the capital market.
Reply by the Government
As regards the exercise for identification of Vanishing Companies,
which came out with IPOs during the period 1998-2001, it is submitted
that the exercise has already been completed. It has been found that
none of the companies which went in for Public Issues during the
check period [1991-2001] are found vanishing in the Eastern, Northern

8
and Western Regions. However, 09 Companies have been identified as
Vanishing in the Southern Region. The names of these companies are
given in the following table:
Sl.No. Name of the Company State
1. M/s. Baron Infotech Limited Andhra Pradesh
2. M/s. Daisy Systems Limited       -do-
3. M/s. IMAP Technologies Limited       -do-
4. M/s. Orpine System Limited       -do-
5. M/s. Sequel Soft India Limited       -do-
6. M/s. Sibar Media & Entertainment Limited       -do-
7. M/s. Sibar Software Services (India) Limited       -do-
8. M/s. Swal Computers Limited       -do-
9. M/s. Visle Cybertech Limited       -do-
The Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC) on Vanishing
Companies has considered the recommendations made by the Regional
Task Forces in its 20th meeting held on 23rd April 2007 and the said
09 companies have been included in the list of Vanishing Companies
and action is being initiated against the promoters/directors of these
companies.
It is further submitted that the recommendations of the Hon’ble
Standing Committee for identification of Vanishing Companies, which
came out with IPOs during the period 2001—2005 have been noted
for compliance. A list of companies that came out with IPOs during
the period 2001—05, as forwarded by SEBI, has been circulated among
four Regional Task Forces for identifying the Vanishing Companies.
The inspections of the companies (which are traced back), have
been carried out under Section 209A of the Companies Act, 1956 and
prosecutions have already been filed against such companies and its
promoters/directors under various provisions of the Companies Act,
1956. Disgorgement proceedings have also been filed against two
companies as a test case. In one case, the CLB has dismissed the
application filed by the Ministry and an appeal has been preferred
against the CLB orders. In the second case, the orders of the CLB are
still awaited.
The concept of Director Identification Number (DIN) has been
introduced as part of the e-governance initiative. All the existing

9
Directors as well as those intending to be Directors in future are now
required to obtain DIN with the implementation of MCA-21 for which
a process has already been put in place. The allotment of DIN requires
an applicant to submit proof of his identity and proof of his residence
at the time of submission of application and these documents are duly
certified by the authorities recognized for this purpose. The need for
introduction of a unique identifier for Directors arose from (i) creating
a comprehensive and authentic database on the Directors, and (ii) the
phenomenon of companies that raise funds form the public and
subsequently vanish, with their Directors becoming untraceable. Sections
266A to 266G of Companies (Amendment) Act, 2006, provide for
Director Identification Number (DIN). The DIN is in the form of a
unique identifier for an existing or a future intending Director,
containing personal information about such Director. A reference to
DIN allotted to a Director is already a mandatory field in respect of
certain filings. Since the process establishes the identity of Directors
on the companies and develop a link between the Company
Identification Number (CIN) and the DIN, it would enable the Ministry
to do a meaningful processing in relation to enforcing compliance of
statutory provisions of the Companies Act. This would not only help
in tracking the identity of the persona but also correlate his
participation in other companies past or present. It is expected that
the DIN would help in tracking the Directors indulging in such
unethical practices.
As far the need to take special care at the time of registration of
a company to assess its veracity and potential viability to function in
the competitive environment of the capital market, it may be submitted
that this due diligence is required at a stage when a company decides
to get listed for accessing capital market and not at the time of
incorporation. It is required to meet the criteria prescribed by SEBI, as
the Capital Market Regulator, through its prescribed listing guidelines.
Now that SEBI have revised their listing requirements and made them
more stringent, there is greater amount of scrutiny involved in the
process. Enforcement of these guidelines by SEBI should considerably
reduce the entry of such companies in the capital market domain.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3, Para No. 63)
The central concern of the Committee as expressed in their earlier
reports was on evolving an effective procedure for exit of companies
slated for liquidation. Though the Committee had emphasized on
evolving an effective mechanism for enabling exit or liquidation of
companies within a time frame of 2-3 years, the Government has tried

10
to clear itself of all delays in this respect by inter-alia stating that ‘all
the actions by the official liquidators are taken with the approval of
the High Courts’. The Committee are constrained to note the rise in
number of pending cases enlisted for liquidation. The total number of
companies in the process of liquidation has steadily increased from
5357 in 2002 to 6444 in 2006. While the Ministry of Company Affairs
has initiated the process of setting up the National Company Law
Tribunal/National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, which would
inter-alia enable in easy and early liquidation of companies; the proposal
is yet to materialize owing to legal challenges. An effective system of
liquidation of companies being an important pre-requisite of a sound
financial system, the Committee expect the Government to initiate and
pursue appropriate steps to have the stay on the setting up of the
NCLT/NLAT vacated at the earliest. The Committee also recommend
for incorporating appropriate provisions in the revised Companies Law
Bill to enable easy and effective liquidation of companies. The
Committee also desire that till such time as the setting up of NCLT/
NCLAT comes through, the Government should formulate and come
out with special scheme such as the ‘simplified exist scheme’ of the
past, which would enable in easy exit of the companies seeking
liquidation.
Reply by the Government
The SLP filed by the Central Government before the Supreme Court
in the matter of setting up of NCLT/NCLAT has since been heard.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court has referred the matter to the
Constitutional Bench, which is yet to be constituted.
As regards introduction of Simplified Exit Scheme, it is stated that
the provisions of Section 560 of the Companies Act, 1956 provide for
a modality for striking off names of defunct companies from the
Register of companies maintained by Registrar of Companies. The
Ministry has issued instructions to all ROCs to examine and initiate
suo motu action under Section 560 of the Act for striking off the names
of eligible companies from amongst those which have not filed their
statutory documents for the last more than 3 years. Through this
process itself, it is expected that a large number of non-working, defunct
companies would be weeded out from the Register of companies. In
doing so, care needs to be maintained that unscrupulous elements do
not misuse this facility to evade their obligations to their shareholders
and creditors. The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee for
incorporating appropriate provisions in the revised Companies Bill to
enable easy and effective liquidation of companies and to formulate
special “Simplified Exit Scheme” have been noted.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]

11
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 72)
The Committee further note from the information furnished that
the activities of the associations taking grants under IEPF are largely
confined mainly to organizing seminars/workshops which may not
suffice in promoting awareness on aspects relating to investment in
the corporate sector. They, therefore, recommend that the regular and
sustained media campaigns through electronic and print media,
including the vernacular media be launched for creating awareness
among the existing as well as potential investors. They are also of the
view that concerted efforts need to be made for promoting financial
literacy, which would enable the investors to select the potential
companies for investing and be well versed with the pros and cons
and nuances of investing in the corporate sector.
Reply by the Government
The recommendation of the Standing Committee to launch regular
and sustained media campaigns through electronic and print media,
including the vernacular media has been noted. Media campaign would
be launched more extensively to educate and create awareness among
investors. The media campaign would be so designed that this would
also promote financial literacy.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 5, Para No. 80)
The Committee are dismayed to note that despite of the increasing
pendency of applications/petitions referred to Company Law Board
and despite being aware of the fact that non-availability of Members
in the Company Law Board is hampering its efficiency, the Government
have initiated steps to fill up only two of the five vacant posts on the
Board. The Committee do not agree with the approach of the
Government in trying to maintain a minimum functional arrangement
which is not in the interest of speedy disposal of petitions/applications.
The Committee are of the view that the transitory period to the setting
up of the NCLT/NCLAT which has been delayed owing to legal
challenges should not be treated in a cursory manner by the
Government, as it would only result in piling up of petitions/
applications as is evident from the data made available to the
Committee. For instance, the percentage of pending petitions/
applications before the Benches rose from 28.8% during the period
01.04.2005 to 31.03.2006 to 36.53% during the period, 01.4.2006 to
31.12.2006. They, therefore, recommend that all the vacant posts in the
Company Law Board be filled up in order to facilitate speedy disposal
of pending cases.

12
Reply by the Government
On the basis of recruitment process undertaken for filling up of
one post each of Member (Judicial) and Member (Technical), Selection
Committee met on 03.5.2007 and has recommended candidates for these
posts. The proposal has been sent to the Department of Personnel &
Training (DOPT) for obtaining approval of Appointments Committee
of the Cabinet (ACC).
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 6, Para No. 85)
The Committee are surprised to note that year after year unrealistic
Budget Estimates are being projected under the Head ‘Modernisation,
Computerisation and Networking—Other Charges’. Though the actual
utilization of the budgeted amount for 2006-07 was only Rs. 29.12
crore, the Ministry has proposed an allocation of Rs. 64.27 crore as
Budget Estimates during this year. The Committee are concerned to
note that there has been some delay in the implementation phase of
the project under Modernisation and Computerisation of Ministry of
Company Affairs and its field offices, namely MCA-21. The Committee
desire that the Ministry should furnish a report to them within a
month regarding the reasons, impact, persons responsible for the delay
in the implementation of MCA-21 project and the action taken thereon.
The Committee are also not happy to find that even though the Budget
Estimates were downsized sharply while revising them, the actual
expenditure incurred since 2004-05 has not matched even the Revised
Estimates. The actual expenditure during 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07
was Nil, Rs. 16.55 crore and Rs. 29.12 crore as against the RE of
Rs. 1 crore, Rs. 28.13 crore and Rs. 39.15 crore respectively, during
three years. This is indicative of lack of prudent budget planning.
They, therefore, recommend that the budgetary exercise is executed in
such a way that realistic proposals are made and allocated sums utilized
productively.
Reply by the Government
MCA21 e-Governance Project:
The Background:
The MCA21 e-Governance Project was initiated by the Ministry to
enhance efficiency in delivery of service and move towards electronic
corporate governance. A Committee consisting of officers from the
Ministry and the NIC was constituted on 21.05.2001 to work out the
requirements and recommend ways and means to enhance efficiency
and move towards electronic corporate governance. To meet the

13
expenditure under this project, a separate Object Head 05.99.50,
“Modernisation & Computerisation of MCA and its field offices” was
also created.
2. Having explored various alternatives, it was decided to go in
for a comprehensive end-to-end service delivery e-Governance Project
rather than following the approach of piece-meal computerization. This
required a thorough study and development of the concept, business
process re-engineering, architectural solution and development of service
level benchmarks to be prescribed for the operator. A group of experts
was identified under the aegis of NISG and the RFP document, which
remains a unique document and valid till date, was prepared through
2003-04. Competitive bids were invited and the process of selection of
solution providers was set in motion.
3. The MCA21 project was under various stages of Government of
India’s approval during FY 2004-05. The Committee on Non-Plan
Expenditure (CNE) approved the project on 16.12.2004 and the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) accorded its approval on
02.02.2005. Thereafter, the project implementation was started on
01.03.2005 with the signing of contract with M/s TCS, the selected
operator. It was for this reason that even though budget provision of
Rs. One crore had been made for FY 2004-05 to meet any contingent
requirements but no expenditure could be incurred on this account
due to the time taken in completion of various procedural requirements
till March, 2005.
Overall Project Cost Details:
4. MCA21 was conceptualized as a unique service delivery project
following a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) approach based on the
BOOT principle. It is different from a normal computerization project
as it focuses on service delivery. The operator was required to make
the investments upfront and paid by the Government in instalments
spread over a period of six years through Equated Quarterly
Instalments (EQIs). The contract provides for release of payments to
the operator based on completion of deliverables duly certified through
a prescribe system. The project budget, as approved by the CCEA,
consists of the following components:
Sl.No. Description Amount
12 3
(a) Project Cost Rs. 314.114 crore with permissible
addition of Rs. 4.68 crore towards
change of scope in the Bespoke
software up to 30%.

14
(b) Cost of Scanning and This amount will be firmed up only
digitization of legacy when data migration is completed
records beyond 6 crore at all sites. Costs up to six crore
sheets (one side) of paper pages is included in the Project
Cost.
(c) Estimated Cost of PMU Rs. 10.50 crore (The exact outlay
and Exit Management will be firmed up after finalization
Activities of bids and selection of
implementation agency)
(d) Estimated Cost of setting Rs. 12.40 crore (The exact outlay
up and maintaining the will be firmed up after finalization
GSR of bids and selection of
implementation agency)
(e) Cost of Consultants Rs. 4.20 crore
Total Costs (a)+(c)+(d)+(e) Rs. 341.214 crore (estimated) plus
the permissible addition of Rs. 4.68
crore towards change of scope in
the Bespoke software up to 30%
Phasing:
5. The Project consists of two phase i.e. (i) the implementation
phase (which was envisaged to be completed over a period of 60
weeks from the date of signing of contract and being April 24, 2006
in this case) and (ii) the operations phase for a period of six years
after the Project Implementation Completion Date (which is contingent
upon successful testing and certification of the solution). Further, the
project cost of Rs. 314.114 crore, which is payable to the operator, and
remains a fixed cost over the project period (implementation phase
and operations phase over a period of six years) consists of the
following components:
Sl.No. Description Amount
12 3
12 3
1. Cost of Bespoke Software (to be
paid to the operator on
development of the Software as
it becomes a property of the
MCA)
Rs. 15.60 crore (50% to be
paid on launch of two pilots
and the balance 50% on final
certification)

15
12 3
2. Cost towards Scanning and
Digitisation of Physical records of
Companies
3. EQI-II Payments (towards setting-
up and operating the Facilitation
Centres at 52 locations throughout
the country)
4. EQI-I Payments (towards O & M
of Data Centre, DRC, and the
delivery of services through the
Operations Phase of six years)
5. Total
Rs. 17.64 crore @ Rs. 2.94 per
sheet of paper up to 6.0 crore
pages
Rs. 56.6004 crore (to be paid
in quarterly instalments of
Rs. 4.7167 crore each over a
period of three years from the
date of Certification of Project
Implementation Completion
Date)
Rs. 224.2741 crore (to be paid
in quarterly instalments of
Rs. 9.3475 crore each over a
period of six years from the
date of Certification of Project
Implementation Completion
Date)
Rs. 314.114 crore with
permissible addition of
Rs. 4.68 crore towards change
of scope in the Bespoke
software
6. It is clear from the above that as per the Project Design,
M/s TCS (the operator) made investments upfront on setting up
facilities for scanning and digitization of legacy documents,
development of Bespoke Software, setting-up the Data Centre at Delhi
and the Disaster Recovery Centre at Chennai, provision of hardware
[computers (about a 1000), scanners, printers, UPS and power back-up
including DG sets] in all the offices of the Ministry and setting-up
state-of-the-art Facilitation Centres (including leasing, renovating,
equipping and staffing costs) at 52 locations throughout the country.
BE and RE 2005-06
7. The Budget provision for FY 2005-06 had to be made in the
month of January, 2005 anticipating the approvals and progress in the
implementation of the project. As such, a provision for an amount of
Rs. 60.00 crore was projected at BE stage. However, keeping in view
the initial delay in take-off, a mid-year review was undertaken and
the RE was projected for an amount of Rs. 28.1310 crore. As per the

16
original schedule, the pilots were to be rolled out in week 40 i.e. by
December 05, 2005 but these were postponed to February and March
2006 due to the time needed for resolution of various issues. As such,
against the RE of Rs. 28.1310 crore, expenditure could be incurred for
an amount of Rs. 16.55 crore. The payments could be released to the
operator only to the extent of completion of prescribed milestones.
The delays were primarily on account of the following:
(i) Long time taken in determination of System Requirement
Specifications (SRS) by the Ministry keeping in view the
volumes;
(ii) Resultant delay in finalization of the solutions development;
(iii) Time taken in identification of suitable locations for setting-
up the Facilitation Centres by the Operator, entering into
lease agreements, furnishing etc;
(iv) Problems of space in ROC offices for setting-up scanning
and digitization facilities in production mode;
(v) Time taken in notifying the amendments in rules and
regulations to facilitate e-filing and notification of e-forms;
(vi) Resolution of the Payment and Accounting Processes
requiring approvals from the CGA and the C&AG for
accepting payment of statutory fees in electronic mode.
BE and RE 2006-07
8. Again, the BE for the FY 2006-07 was made for an amount of
Rs. 70.8370 crore keeping in view the progress achieved till January,
2006 and based on the unpaid commitments of the previous year and
the anticipated requirement for release of payments to the operator
and the PMU consultants. As scheduled, the Operator was able to
roll-out the project at 12 out of the 20 ROC locations by April 28, 2006
[as against April 24, 2006 coinciding with week 60 as per original
schedule]. As the programme required involvement of external
stakeholders (about 7.5 lakh companies and professionals) for usage of
the facilities, functional problems were encountered at these locations.
It was at this stage that the Ministry decided to temporarily withhold
further roll-outs and take effective steps towards stabilization of the
functional issues, a communication-cum-awareness plan and facilitation
in addition to hand-holding of the internal staff to operate in an
electronic work processing environment. The roll-out was resumed only
in the month of July, 2006 when the system robustness was certified
to have reached a reasonable level of comfort and completed at all
locations by July 30, 2006 with the exception of Jammu ROC office

17
where it was made operational from September 4, 2006. The Ministry
then mandated e-filing from September 16, 2006. Keeping the actual
progress of the project in view, the RE 2006-07 was kept as Rs. 39.15
crore. However, the Ministry closely monitored the progress of the
project and the actual expenditure during 2006-07 was Rs. 29.2637
crore. The remaining amount was withheld as the TCS could not
provide the deliverables by March, 2007.
9. The MCA21 project has been designed for end to end delivery
of services involving internal and external stakeholders. The feedback
received from the stakeholders after the launch of this project at
12 ROC office locations, necessitated consideration and settlement of
following issues:
(i) Improvement in system performance,
(ii) Improvement in stability of the system,
(iii) Optimization in processes/forms,
(iv) Gradual transformation from manual filing to electronic
filing and
(v) Awareness & preparedness of stakeholders.
10. Further, there were other issues like dependencies on external
agencies for provision of leased connectivity lines in field offices and
obtaining of DSCs by the stakeholders. The delay in implementation,
whatsoever, was for very strong ground realities and an effort on the
part of the Ministry to ensure that the massive transition from a manual
system of operations to a completely electronic process was smooth
and acceptable to various stakeholders. The Ministry took a series of
steps to pave the way for successful implementation of the project,
major among which are as follows:
(i) Amendments in the Companies Act to provide for Director
Identification Number (DIN) and mandating of e-filing;
(ii) Introduced the scheme of Certified Filing Centres (CFCs) to
provide for facilitation for e-filing on a nationwide basis;
(iii) Network connectivity problems at certain locations;
(iv) Repeated rounds of testing and certification of the system
through STQC;
(v) Assimilating feedback/response from the stakeholders to
build on the programme features;
(vi) Improving the ease of navigation/usability of the system;

18
(vii) Arrangements to cope with the load of first peak-filing
season;
(viii) Introduction of a new process of Straight Throughput of
documents required to be taken on record;
(ix) Arrangements for DIN issuance process for the Directors;
(x) Development of operational MIS systems etc.
11. It is the result of all these efforts that, what started with 100%
stakeholders coming to the Facilitation Centers for filing their
documents initially, has undergone a major transition today with 92%
of the documents being filed by the corporates and professionals from
their Virtual Offices (VFOs) without using the facilitation centres. There
cannot be a greater measure of acceptance of the programme by the
external stakeholders. The Hon’ble Committee may like to note that
inspite of six years of introduction of e-filing in UK, only 40% of the
companies continue to file documents electronically, whereas it is 100%
in case of India from September 16, 2006, which is a sort of world
record. MCA21 has been recognized as a path-breaking initiative in
Governmental governance processes for the year 2006. In a recent
survey of the CFOs of leading companies conducted by the Ernst &
Young and aired on the CNBC, 92% of the CFO unequivocally rated
the implementation of MCA21 programme as a revolutionary step by
the Government in the right direction.
12. Notwithstanding the above, as the contact provided for release
of payments to the Operator only upon fulfilment of the prescribed
and linked milestones, the ministry did not release the payments to
the operator as certain parts of the deliverables were still to be
completed, and the certification of deliverables was yet to be achieved
inspite of eight rounds of testing of the software by the STQC, engaged
for this purpose. The Ministry has been very cautious not to
compromise on the quality of the software and the certification with
closure of all the outstanding items was insisted upon.
13. The requirement of funds was reviewed during the mid-year
and the demand was revised to Rs. 39.1500 crore in the RE 2006-07
for which the Finance Ministry was duly informed on November 10,
2006 itself during the review meeting. The Ministry could have utilized
the RE fully but it deliberately and consciously chose to decide in
favour of the expediency of quality of the programme rather than
utilization of the budget, much to the discomfort of the operator. As
a matter of fact, the Ministry deserves to be completed for its due
diligence on this account. It was only on January 17, 2007 that the
project reached the stage of provisional certification meriting release of

19
EQI and other payments to the operator. Accordingly, whatever became
due to be released, strictly in accordance with the provisions of the
contract, an amount of Rs. 29.12 crore was finally utilised. It did create
a lot of pressure on the financials of the project for the operator but
the Ministry decided to insist on the quality of the programme and
completion of various critical deliverables rather than utilization of the
Budget.
BE 2007-08
14. An amount of Rs. 64.27 crore has been provided in BE 2007-
08 for meeting the expenditure requirements on the MCA 21 Project.
The provision was made on the basis of anticipated expenditure for
payment of the Quarterly Instalments which work out to Rs. 56.25
crore, payments to NISG for rendering PMU services, balance payments
to the Project Consultants, payment towards DIN issuance process and
the balance and final payments towards scanning and digitization.
However, on a mid-term review of the anticipated expenditure of the
project and considering certain changes in the schedule of some of the
deliverables to the next financial year, it is expected that there would
be an anticipated savings of Rs. 8.70 crore in the Project expenditure
during the current Financial Year and accordingly, an amount of
Rs. 55.5674 crore has been proposed in the RE 2007-08. The savings
have been communicated to the Department of Expenditure.
15. The operational statistics of the programme as on May 15,
2007 are given below for the kind information of the Hon’ble
Committee:
Sl.No. Description Count
12 3
Filing Status as on November 02, 2007
1. Average portal hits per day 18.32 lakh
2. Peak portal hits (Nov. 29, 2006) 65 lakh
3. Maximum number of documents filed on a 36,242
single day (November 29, 2006)
4. Total number of documents filed till date 30.89 lakh
5. Companies registered online 80,651
6. Total DINs issued till date 6.80 lakh
7. Company records viewed on-line 3.46 lakhs
8. Number of Balance-sheets filed 4.86 lakh

20
9. Number of Annual Returns filed 4.86 lakh
10. Number of DIN-3 filed by companies 3.54 lakh
11. E-filing through VFO 92%
12. On-line payment transaction 45%
16. Implementation of the programme has made a significant impact
on the speed and certainty in delivery of services to the stakeholders
which is brought out from the following table:
A COMPARATIVE CHART SHOWING IMPROVEMENT
IN DELIVERY OF SERVICES UNDER MCA21
E-GOVERNANCE PROJECT
Sl.No. Particulars of Period as Actual time Time taken
power and given in the taken pre- post MCA21
functions Citizen Charter MCA21 implementation
12 3 4 5
1. Application 3 working days 7 days 1 day
for approval
of name of a
proposed
company-
section 20
of the
Companies
Act, 1956
2. Application 10 working 15 days 5 days*
for registration days
of a company-
Section 33
including
issuance of
Incorporation
Certificate
3. Application 15 working days 15 days 3 days
for change of
name of a
company-
Section 21/31
and Section
43A(4), 572
12 3

21
4. Registration 2 working days 10-15 days 2 days
of charges,
modifications
and satisfaction-
Section 125
and 141
5. Issue of certified 5 working days 10 days 2 days
copy of
documents-
Section 610
6. Registration 60 days 60 days
of  other
documents filed
with ROCs
7. Annual         Instantaneous
Filings (Annual
Returns and
Balance sheets)
8. Form 32 (Change in 3 days
Director)
9. Form 18 (Change in 3 days
Regd. Office Address)
10. Form 5 3 days
(Increase in
Authorised Capital)
11. Inspection of Manual and On-line
Public time consuming public view
Documents process requiring facility
physical visits
to ROC
Offices
*System is capable of delivering the service the same day. In a test case, a company was
incorporated in one hour also. However, it depends on mode of payment of statutory
fees by the service-seeker (on-line or off-line) which may add up to 3 more days and
receipt of stamp paper physical documents in time for verification purposes.
The Hon’ble Standing Committee may consider the above details
and accept the submissions made by the Ministry on this account.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT (Part-II)]
12 3 4 5

22
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7, Para No. 90)
The Committee note that for the year 2004-05 and 2005-06, the
expenditure incurred under the Head “Investor Education and
Protection Fund (IEPF)” was about half of what was sought as non-
plan Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates. The Committee are also
surprised to find that since December 2006 only 10% of the amount
sanctioned was spent. The reason, as advanced by the Ministry, for
the under spending is that adequate number of quality proposals
seeking financial assistance were not received from investor association/
voluntary organizations. The Committee observe that though the
amount earmarked for the purpose of providing assistance under IEPF
is large, the Ministry has not been coming up with appropriate
proposals for its proper utilization, with the result that the amounts
are underutilized. It is common knowledge that bereft of the right
kind of knowledge and awareness; scores of investors are being duped
at the hands of promoters and directors of delinquent companies. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should endeavour
to utilize the funds allocated under IEPF objectively and appropriately
so as to facilitate in promoting investors awareness on a large scale.
Reply by the Government
The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted.
All out efforts would be made by this Ministry to utilize the funds
allocated under IEPF objectively and appropriately so as to facilitate
in promoting investors awareness on a large scale.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8, Para Nos. 95 & 96)
The Committee note that the Actual Expenditure for the year
2005-06 under the head ‘Grants-in-Aid’ as indicated in the detailed
Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Company Affairs is nil.
However, in their reply furnished to the Committee, the Government
have stated that the actual expenditure incurred under the ‘Head’
during the year 2005-06 was Rs. 1.2 crore approximately and the matter
regarding non-booking of this expenditure in the books of accounts is
being referred to Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA). This is indicative
of lack of exercise of caution and care in furnishing figures of Demands
for Grants, which needs to be avoided.
The Committee also noted that the actual/likely expenditure of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs under the head Grants-in-Aid has
been less than the Budget Estimates for the last three years. They,

23
therefore, recommend that, to the optimum extent possible the
budgetary exercise should be done in such a way that the allocated
resources are spent during the year without large variation.
Reply of the Government
The matter was taken up with the Principal accounts office,
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, who have clarified that on verification
of accounts for the period 2005-06, it was found that an expenditure
of Rs. 1.25 crore pertaining to the Object head ‘3451-00-090-05.03.31
Grants-in-Aid’ had been misclassified and booked under the Object
head ‘Modernisation’. As the final accounts for the Financial Year
2005-06 have been submitted, no correction is admissible in the books
of accounts at this stage. However, suitable note of error has been
made against the original entries.
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance,
in future.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]

24
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 18)
A need has been felt for quite some time for updation and revision
of the Companies Act, 1956 to meet the requirements of the current
times. In fact the Ministry has initiated steps for a comprehensive
revision of the Companies Act, 1956, involving a wide consultative
process with a view to providing a legal framework for the corporate
sector which is not only easy to understand and implement but also
responsive to a dynamic process of change. The Committee, however,
note that despite the repeated emphasis laid by them on the urgency
of the matter and the assurance given by the Government to this end,
the Ministry is yet to come up with the revised Companies Bill.
Reply of the Government
After evaluation of the recommendations of the J.J. Irani Committee
which submitted its report on 31st May 2005 and other inputs received
by the Ministry on various issues, a draft companies bill is being
finalized. The process is at an advanced stage. The Ministry would
introduce the Companies Bill in the Parliament after obtaining requisite
approvals.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 48 & 49)
The Committee further observe from the information furnished
that of the nearly eight lakh companies registered with the Government,
only about 3.14 lakh companies have filed their Annual Returns which
is contrary to Sections 159, 160 and 161 of the Companies Act, 1956.
Further, the non-filing of such returns attracts a penalty of up to
Rs. 500 per day on every defaulting officer of the company. However,
only a meagre number of cases have been filed in this regard viz. 5157
in 2003-04, 6920 in 2004-05 and 4500 in 2005-06. The Committee
recommend that strict measures should be taken by Government to
put an end to this blatant violation of law.
In this regard, the Committee take note of the submission of the
Government that enforcement related problems such as shortage of
staff are a major hindrance in pursuing prosecution cases on account

26
of non-filing of Annual Returns and balance sheets of companies. In
the circumstances, the Committee feel it to be essential to initiate and
pursue prosecution proceedings atleast against such of the companies
observed to be repeatedly failing in filing the Annual Returns, which
would serve as an effective deterrent for others.
Reply by the Government
The reply to the observations made by the Hon’ble Committee
under paras 48 & 49 above is being given hereunder. The Ministry
shares the concern of the Hon’ble Committee on the issue of non-
compliance by companies in filing of the Annual Returns and Balance
Sheets. It is correct that the law provides for penalties for non-
compliance by the companies but such penalties and fines can be
imposed only through filing of prosecution cases in the courts of
competent jurisdiction. It has been observed that the process requires
(i) issuance of show cause notices to the defaulting companies and the
officers in default, (ii) filing of prosecution cases in the courts of
competent jurisdiction and then follow-up thereof in the courts. Filing
of prosecutions against the companies and the judicial process has
been found to be very time consuming, and rather ineffective, as
brought out by the O.P . Vaish Committee appointed for this purpose.
Going by the rate of default, the Ministry may be required to file
about 18.00 lakh prosecution cases every year [assuming a default by
3.00 lakh companies and three prosecutions required to be filed in
each case of default on non-filing of Annual Returns and Balance Sheets
respectively]. Neither the Ministry has the manpower to handle such
large numbers of prosecutions nor the Courts have the capacity to
decide so many cases within a prescribed time frame. Moreover, the
costs involved in this exercise far outweigh the benefits. The Ministry
has carried out an analysis on the basis of database now available in
the electronic registry to address this problem and drawn up an action
plan for improvement in compliance management. It is brought out
from the following:
(i) The compliance rate in filing of Annual Returns and Balance
Sheets has improved by more than 65% and 80% in one
year with the implementation of MCA 21 as is brought out
from the following statistics:
No. of ARs and BSs No. of ARs and BSs
filed during 2005-06 filed during 2006-07
(as on 15 May, 2007)
BS AR BS AR
No. of Companies 2,04,346 1,90,252 3,43,000 3,43,000
Improvement in % 67.85% 80.28%

27
(ii) It has been observed that there are a large number of
companies which have not filed any documents for a period
of more than 03 years which leads to the presumption that
these are defunct companies. A total of 1,37,456 such
companies have been identified and the Registrar of
Companies have been directed to take suo-motu action under
section 560 of the Companies Act, 1956 to strike off the
names of the defunct/inactive companies from the register
of companies with a view to cleaning the registry from the
administrative burden of such defunct companies. About
49,000 companies have already been struck off the Register
under the Simplified Exit Schemes of 2003 and 2005;
(iii) The analysis further brings out the need to focus on
compliance management in an order of priority. For example,
from the public interest point of view, it is important that
the non-compliance is controlled and minimised in respect
of the listed companies, public companies and the private
companies with an authorised capital of more than Rs. 1.00
crore, comprising of about 90,000 companies in all, where
the compliance rate is already above 70%. It has been
decided to issue show cause notices to the defaulting
companies in these categories in the order mentioned above
in the first instance and follow the same with legal process;
(iv) The focus on improvement in compliance management in
respect of companies with an Authorised Capital between
Rs. 10.00 lakh and up to Rs. 1.00 crore is proposed to be
taken up as the next priority;
(v) Small private companies with an authorised capital of up
to Rs. 10.00 lakh constitute 53% of the total companies and
there is hardly any public interest involved in these
companies. The data shows that the bulk of the defaulting
companies, including the defunct/inactive companies fall in
this group. Hence, this group is proposed to be targeted
with a two-fold action plan i.e. (i) by way of taking recourse
to Section 560 proceedings with a view to striking off their
names from the registry as the top priority, and (ii) taking
recourse to the legal measures against the balance defaulting
companies as the next priority.
It is requested that the Hon’ble Committee may accept and approve
of the approach proposed to be followed by the Ministry in this area.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]

28
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 46)
The Committee further take note of the fact that presently there is
no system of ‘real time online exchange of information’ between various
agencies and the Ministry which are entrusted with the task of
identification of vanishing companies and tracing them. The Committee
are of the view that, in the present day times, it would be essential
for Ministry, SEBI and other agencies to have an effective mechanism
of ‘online real time exchange of factual information’ which would inter-
alia enable in identification of vanishing companies and their promoters
and brining them to book. They, therefore, recommend that this feature
be included as a part of the MCA-21 e-governance project.
Reply by the Government
As regards the issue of the ‘online exchange of information’
between various agencies and provision of this functionality in the
MCA21 system, the possibilities therefor are being explored keeping
in view the compatibility of the programmes being followed by the
SEBI and the RBI. It is likely that new forms may need to be evolved
and adopted for this purpose. It is likely to take some time. RBI has
nominated Shri P . Krishnamurthy, Chief General Manager-in Charge
of D/o Non-Banking Supervision as their representative on CMC so
as to facilitate the setting up of regular co-ordination mechanism at
operational level.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para No. 47)
The Committee observe from the information furnished that there
have been instances of non-compliance with the statutory requirement
of intimation of change in address of a company within the stipulated
time frame of 30 days. As per the practice prevalent, the Registrar of
Companies (ROCs) become aware of change in the address of a
company only when the company files this information with the
Registrar or it is so indicated in the Annual Returns which are
statutorily required to be filed every year. What the Committee find to
be worrisome to note in this regard, is the fact that the ROCs do not

29
have the means to check/cross-check the veracity of the address of a
company, as may be furnished in the Annual Returns. The Committee,
therefore, recommend for evolving a viable mechanism for solving
this problem.
Reply by the Government
A proposal to require the companies to provide their electronic
address along with registered office address is under consideration of
the Ministry. However, mandating of this additional stipulation would
need an amendment in the Act. The e-mail Address/ID of the
Companies incorporated after implementation of MCA 21 is already
being insisted upon. It is felt that detection of non-compliance on this
account would be far more effective with the availability of the
electronic address, once the electronic registry under MCA-21 is
operational with validated data. Separately, the registered office
addresses of the Companies have been made a part of the Master
Company Data available on the portal, free of any charge and the
Companies have been called upon to verify their particulars in the
Master Data and apply for correction of any of the fields which is not
correct or which has undergone a change subsequently. About 80,000
companies have  already responded for correction of data in respect
of various fields so far. Other alternatives for correction of this data
field by way of generation of exception statements from the existing
database and the addresses recorded in the latest documents filed by
the companies are also being explored. The Ministry is already working
on an action plan to address the concern expressed by the Hon’ble
Standing Committee and Data Validation/Correction has been identified
as a major thrust area under MCA-21 for 2007-08.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2, Para Nos. 51 & 52)
With regard to be definition of vanishing companies per se , the
Committee recall that in their 49th Action Taken Report on Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Company Affairs, they had
recommended that the criteria for identifying a company as “vanishing”
should be modified/revised so that a company failing to satisfy even
one of the three conditions stipulated, could be treated as a “vanishing
company” i.e.:—
(a) Companies, which have not complied with listing
requirements/filing requirements of Stock Exchange/ROCs
respectively for a period of 2 years.
(b) No correspondence has been received by the Exchange from
the company for a long time.

30
(c) No office of the company is located at the mentioned
registered office address at the time of Stock Exchange
inspection.
While the first of the criteria stipulated cast an obligation on the
companies to comply with certain statutory requirements, and the third
involves inspection of the companies, only the second criterion is of
the nature of non-obligatory activity on part of the companies. It would,
possibly be very easy for a company to send a cursory communication
to the stock exchange once in two years, but in reality be a ‘fictional’
or ‘dubious company’. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the criteria for identifying a company as a
vanishing needs streamlining and the government should revise the
definition so that any company, which does not fulfil even one of the
pre-set criteria is deemed to be categorised as a ‘vanishing company’.
Reply by the Government
The recommendations made by the Standing Committee for revising
the criteria for identifying a company as ‘vanishing’ have been noted
for compliance. Recognising the need for re-visiting the criteria in
accordance with the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee, the
CMS has already constituted a ‘Small Group’ (consisting of Officials
from the MCA, Ministry of Finance and SEBI) to examine this issue
carefully keeping in view the legal provisions.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 4, Para No. 71)
An Investor Education and Protection Fund has been established
w.e.f. October, 2001 for promoting of investors awareness and protection
of the interests of investors. A Committee on IEPF administers the
Fund. The Committee note that the Indian Institute of Capital Market
(IICM) has been engaged by the Government to scrutinize the
applications of associations seeking registration/financial assistance
under IEPF. The Committee on IEPF which also monitors the activities
of IICM comprises of representatives of RBI, SEBI and experts from
the field of investors’ education and protection. The grants/financial
support to NGOs/Individuals/Group has been Rs. 6362500,
Rs. 7674273.60 and Rs. 654798 during 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06
respectively for organizing seminars/workshops, creation of website,
publication of investors booklet etc. In this regard, the Committee are
of the view that for providing more credence to the system of
utilization, disbursement and scrutiny of funds allotted under IEPF, it
would be appropriate to board base the composition of the Committee

31
on IEPF by providing place therein for the representatives of registered
investor’s associations. They, therefore, recommend that the IEPF Rules,
2001 by suitably modified so as to make provision for co-option of
representatives of registered and known investors’ associations on the
monitoring Committee of IEPF.
Reply by the Government
The recommendation of the Standing Committee to broad base the
composition of the Committee on IEPF by providing place therein for
the representatives of registered investors’ associations and suitably
amending IEPF Rules, 2001 is under examination.
[No. G-20018/7/07-BGT]
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

32
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 28th November, 2007 from
1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ananth Kumar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Rupchand Pal
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
10. Shri S. Anbalagan
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee, then took up the following draft reports for
consideration:—
(i) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 51st Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

33
(ii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 54th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
(iii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 41st Report on ‘Introduction
of New Income Tax Return Form’;
(iv) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 52nd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue);
(v) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 53rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Planning;
(vi) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 55th Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs; and
(vii) Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 43rd Report on ‘Efficacy of
Reform Process in Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam’.
The Committee adopted the reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above
without any amendment and the reports at (iv), (v), (vi) and
(vii) above with modifications as shown in the annexure.
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
reports in the light of the modifications made and present the same to
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

34
ANNEXURE
(a) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 52nd Report on Demands for Grants (2007-
08) of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
** ** **
** ** **
(b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 53rd Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of Ministry of Planning
** ** **
** ** **
(c) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 55th Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08)
of Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Para Line Modification
10 12 Add the following:
“The Committee also desire that the defunct as
well as ineffective companies should be struck
off from the register at the earliest
12 - For
“The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken
by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to
implement the Committee’s recommendations
with regard to identification of vanishing
companies and taking appropriate action
against them. The Committee hope that action
in all respects will be completed expeditiously
and the Committee informed of the final
outcome of these initiatives.”
Substitute
“The Committee desire the Government to
initiative fresh and effective initiatives
expeditiously and they be informed of the
outcome of these initiatives.”

35
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken
report on the 43rd Report on “Efficacy of Reform Process
of Capital Market—Recent IPO Scam”.
** ** **
** ** **

36
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 3 of the introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) OF THE
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 8
(ii) Recommendations/observations which — 71.88%
have been accepted by the Government
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. No. 2
(Para Nos. 45 & 50), 3, 4 (Para No. 72),
5, 6, 7 & 8]
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the — 00.00%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
[Vide  Recommendation at Sl. No. Nil]
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect — 15.62%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
[Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1 & 2
(Para Nos. 48 & 49)]
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect — 12.50%
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
[Vide  Recommendations at Sl. No. 2
(Para Nos. 46, 47, 51 & 52) & 4
(Para No. 71)]

SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.12.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4.12.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


COF No. 63
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 7
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 24
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 25
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 28
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
28th November, 2007............................................................. 32
II. Analysis of the action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
fifty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs .............. 36
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2007-2008)
Shri Ananth Kumar —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri Rupchand Pal
11. Shri Prakash Paranjpe
12. Shri P .S. Gadhavi
13. Shri R. Prabhu
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
16. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
17. Shri Lakshman Seth
18. Shri A.R. Shaheen
19. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
20. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
21. Shri Bhal Chand Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu

25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Mahendra Mohan
27. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
28. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
29. Shri Vijay J. Darda
30. Shri S. Anbalagan
31. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri S.B. Arora — Director
4. Shri G. Srinivasulu — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Archana Srivastava — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixty-third Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
2. The Fifty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28th April,
2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd May, 2007. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 6 July, 2007.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
sitting held on 28 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANTH KUMAR,
28 November, 2007 Chairman,
7 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

63
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs]
SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)
