 1 
76 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2008-09) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
Demands for Grants 
(2008-09)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation] 
 
SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT 
                                                                                                 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)


 2 
 
SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
Demands for Grants 
(2008-09)  
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December,2008 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2008/ Agrahayana ,1930 (Saka)


 3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………       (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………   (iv) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………… 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been  
accepted by the Government ………………….. 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the Committee  
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies …………………………………………… 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
by the Committee …………………………………….  
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited …….. 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11 December, 2008 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Seventieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for 
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2008-2009    
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman 
 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri A. Krishnaswamy 
7. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra 
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
10. Shri Rupchand Pal 
11. Shri P.S. Gadhavi 
12. Shri R. Prabhu 
13. Shri K.S. Rao 
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Shri Lakshman Seth 
16. Shri A.R. Shaheen 
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain 
19. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
20. Shri Ramakrishna Badiga 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Raashid Alvi 
23. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu 
24. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
25. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
26. Shri C. Ramachandraiah 
27. Shri Vijay J. Darda 
28. Shri S. Anbalagan 
29. Shri Moinul Hassan 
30. Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
31. Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh    - Director 
3.   Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan - Deputy Secretary Gr-II 
                                                 
 Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 26.8.2008 
 Vacant w.e.f. 14.11.2008 on nomination of Shri Brajesh Pathak to Rajya Sabha  

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of th e Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventy-sixth Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventieth Report of the Committee (Four teenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demand for Grants (2008 -2009) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
2. The Seventieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. Replies indicating action taken on all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government 
on 22 July and 10 November, 2008. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held 
on 11 December, 2008. 
4. An analysis of action taken by Governme nt on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventieth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        ANANTH KUMAR, 
11 December, 2008             Chairman, 
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 

 6 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 
Seventieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, which was presented 
to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008. 
2.  The Action taken notes have been received from the Government 
in respect of all the 14 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have 
been analyzed and categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8,10,11, 12 & 13 
(Total 10) 
(Chapter II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4, 5 & 9 
(Total 3) 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 
(Total  1) 
(Chapter IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which f inal replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
Recommendation No. Nil 
(Total Nil) 
(Chapter V) 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations 
contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now de al with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
A. Shortfall in Plan Expenditure 

 7 
        (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
5.   In the context of huge shortfall in utilization of plan expenditure of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Pr ogramme Implementation year after year, the 
Committee, inter-alia, recommended that the Ministry should identify the 
shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning and control and take 
corrective measures to ensure timely completion of projects and ut ilization of 
funds as budgeted. 
 
6.   The Government in their action taken reply stated as follows: 
 
“Utmost and vigorous efforts are being made during the current 
year to comply with the directions of the Hon’ble Committee. The 
valuable suggestions made b y the Committee to control and take 
corrective measures to ensure timely completion of projects and 
utilization of funds are being scrupulously followed.” 
 
 
7.  The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation shou ld identify the shortcomings in the 
mechanism of budgetary planning and control and take corrective 
measures to ensure timely completion of projects and utilization of funds 
as budgeted.  The reply of the Ministry has not disclosed as to what were 
the spec ific shortcomings identified and corrective measures taken.  The 
Committee would desire that the requisite information should be furnished 
within a period of one month. 

 8 
B. Identification of Core Statistics  
   (Recommendation Sl. Nos. 6 & 8) 
 
8.  Consider ing the importance of official statistics in policy formulation, the 
Committee inter alia  recommended the National Statistical Commission to 
identify within a timeframe the areas of core statistics and evolve appropriate 
standards and methodology for collecting such statistics. 
 
9.  The Government in their action taken reply stated as follows: 
 
“The Resolution for setting up of a National Statistical 
Commission was notified on 1st June, 2005. In pursuance of the 
Resolution, the service conditions for the Ch airperson and 
Members of the Commission were notified on 8th May, 2006. 
Thereafter, the appointment of Chairman and Members of the 
Commission was notified on 3rd July, 2006 and they have started 
functioning since 12th July, 2006. The identification of core  
statistics and related aspects are under the mandate of the 
Commission. The recommendation of the Standing Committee on 
Finance has been placed before the Commission in its sixteenth 
meeting held on 30 -4-2008 and the Commission noted the 
recommendation.” 
 
10.  The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation appear to 
have derived satisfaction simply by stating that the National Statistical 
Commission has noted the Committee’s recommendation in regard to the 
identification, within a time frame, of a reas of core statistics and evolving 
appropriate standards and methodology for collecting such statistics.  There 
is nothing in the reply to indicate whether any timeframe has been laid down 
as suggested by the Committee.  The Committee expect the Governme nt to 
take the steps for identification of the areas of core statistics in a time bound 
manner and inform the Committee about the action taken in this regard within 
two months from the presentation of this Report to the Parliament. 

 9 
C.     Current Price Statistics 
            (Recommendation No. 7) 
 
11. While noting that the process of formulating separate rural and urban 
Consumer Price Indices (CPI – Rural and CPI - Urban), was not completed by 
December, 2007 as expected, the Committee inter alia  recommended that the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) should, at least now 
take initiative and ensure that commitments made to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee are fulfilled.  The Committee also desired to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Ministry to complete the exercise of developing separate urban and 
rural consumer price indices. 
 
12.  The Government in their action taken reply stated as follows: 
 
“CPI (Urban): 
As far as compilation of CPI (Urban) is concerned, the 
work of pri ce collection has started from 1 st May, 2008 by 
suitable readjustment of field staff of NSSO. 
 
CPI ( Rural): 
 
 The work of CPI(Rural) is a new activity, which is to be 
taken up. So far, National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) 
has been collecting prices for construction of CPI (Agricultural 
Labourers) as per the requirement of Ministry of Labour. 
Question of integration of CPI (Agricultural Labour) and CPI 
(Rural) was discussed with all concerned and NSSO in order to 
collect prices for CPI (Rural) has alr eady put up the proposal as 
a part of the plan scheme on Capacity Development of the 
NSSO. Once the EFC is cleared and the posts sanctioned, the 
work relating to price collection for CPI(Rural) will be taken up.” 
 
13.   The Committee observe that the Secre tary, Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation had made an assurance before the Committee 
that by the end of the year 2007 -08 (i.e. March, 2008), the Ministry would be in 
a position to come up with the CPI (Urban) and CPI (Rural).  This was not 
accomplished by March, 2008.  Now after expiry of several months, the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation have come with the 
response that the work relating to price collection for CPI (Rural) will be taken 
up, once EFC is cleared and the p osts are sanctioned.  This reflects very 

 10 
poorly on the Secretary, Statistics and Programme Implementation who has 
failed to fulfill his assurance made before the Committee more than one and 
half year ago.  The Committee are constrained to consider this an utter 
disregard of their authority.  While taking a serious view of this matter, the 
Committee desire that the Government should furnish an explanation in this 
regard within one month from the presentation of this Report. 
 
14.   Noting that the National Statistical Commission have taken up the issues 
relating to deficiencies in price statistics, the Committee expressed hope that the 
Commission would make its specific recommendations in this regard.  The 
Committee also asked the Commission to specifically address the aspects relating to 
the adequacy of the weightages currently given to the basket of goods and items for 
building the price indices, including the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), which is used 
for measuring prices and inflation level. 
15. The Governm ent in their action taken reply stated that the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee on Finance has been placed before the 
Commission in its sixteenth meeting held on 30 -4-2008 and the Commission noted 
the recommendation. 
 
16.  The Committee would expe ct National Statistical Commission to 
expeditiously finalise their findings on the deficiencies in price statistics.  
Subsequently, the Ministry should ensure conclusive action thereon.  

 11 
D.     Project Monitoring - National Highway Development Project (NHDP) 
(Recommendation No. 13 & 14)) 
 
17.  In view of the slow and tardy progress of implementation of the 
Highway Development Projects, the Committee desired to know about the action 
taken by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) to  
ensure that there is no further cost and time overruns in the projects of the Golden 
Quadrilateral and North -South and East -West Corridor Projects.   
(Recommendation No. 13) 
As regards the submission of information regarding action taken against 
persons/agencies responsible for lapses contributing to cost escalation of projects, 
the Committee had urged the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MOSPI) to obtain such information from all Ministries on quarterly basis and 
closely monitor project implementation.  (Recommendation No. 14) 
18.   The Government in their action taken reply to recommendation No. 13 
stated as follows: 
“The action taken by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) to ensure that there is no further cost and 
time overrun in projects of the Golden Quadrilateral and North -South 
and East -West Corridors projects inter alia include: (i) regular 
monitoring of major packages/ projects on monthly basis through 
Flash Report System. (ii) Visit to project sites by the officers on a 
selective basis and (iii) Review by the Minister of State (I/C), MOSPI 
from time to time.  The officers made 10 visits to various Golden 
Quadrilateral packages, North -South and East -West Corridors of 
Road projects and conducted 5 revie ws under the Chairmanship of 
MOS (I/C). The Secretary has addressed a letter requesting the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to submit a detailed report, 
including details of slippages and reasons thereof and measures 
taken to make up the shortfalls  including policy decisions for six 
laning instead of four laning of some of the packages of Golden 
Quadrilateral Phase-I in the second and third  phase.” 
 
19.   In their action taken reply to recommendation No. 14, the Ministry have 
stated that the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has 
addressed a letter to all concerned Ministries to make effective use of the 
mechanism of Standing Committee set up in each Ministry to review the time and 
cost overruns experienced in projects.  The Ministry have not received any reply 
from the concerned Ministries in this regard, although they were asked to furnish 
the requisite information latest by 9th May, 2008.   

 12 
20. While furnishing the Quarterly implementation status report on 
Central Secto r Projects, each costing Rs. 20 crore and above for the quarter 
January to March 2008, the Ministry have stated that the time and cost overruns 
have been a major problem affecting the central sector projects.  The analysis 
shows that 307 projects have acco unted for a cost overrun of Rs. 51,103 crore i.e. 
45.74% w.r.t their original sanctioned cost during the January-March, 2008 quarter.   
21.  As regards the measures taken to improve the systems and procedures 
relating to project formulation, implementation  and monitoring, the Ministry have 
stated as follows:- 
“The Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD) of the 
MOSPI has strengthened the institution of the MOU system through 
introduction of project  milestones, three-tier regular monitoring, adoption 
of network -based monitoring, extensive training of project managers, 
prioritization of projects with reference to available resources and 
several other project-based interventions.  A host of other measures like 
amendments to the Land Acquisition Ac t, development of a Standard 
Rehabilitation Package, On -line Computerised Monitoring System 
(OCMS), etc. are under progress, by other Ministries and this Ministry.” 
 
22.   The Committee find that the Ministry have not taken with due 
seriousness the issue o f taking action against the persons/agencies 
responsible for the inordinate delays in project execution and the cost 
escalation arising therefrom.  It is a matter of great concern for the Committee 
that 307 projects have accounted for a cost overrun of 45. 74% with reference to 
the original sanctioned cost, as indicated in the status report for January-March, 
2008.  It is further disquieting to note that the concerned Ministries have not 
even cared to reply to the letter written by the Secretary, Ministry of  Statistics & 
Programme Implementation in this regard, although they were asked to furnish 
the requisite information latest by 9 th May, 2008.  Such an instance of 
indifference of the Ministries to a communication from the nodal Ministry can 
only point to t he non -efficacy of the Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation to discharge its assigned role of monitoring Central Sector 
Projects.  While taking an adverse view of the situation, the Committee desire 

 13 
that the Ministry of Statistics and Programm e Implementation should take up 
this matter at the level of the Prime Minister’s Office, as large cost -escalation in 
central projects and the inability of the concerned Ministries to address the 
same have become an endemic problem, warranting immediate and  effective 
intervention.  The Committee expect the Ministry to submit an action taken 
report of their action in this regard vis -à-vis the corrective intervention by the 
Prime Minister’s Office.   
 

 14 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Allocations  
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) for the year 2008 -09 are to the tune of Rs. 1899 crore 
as against the budgetary allocation o f Rs.1853.54 crore for 2007 -08.  The 
Committee in this connection observe that there has been huge shortfalls in plan 
expenditure of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) 
year after year.  The shortfall in plan expenditure against  the budgeted figures 
was as much as Rs.36.83 crore (33%) in 2005 -06, 27.76 crore (33%) in 2006 -07 
and 22 crore (24%) anticipated in 2007 -08.  The Secretary Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) has attributed the shortfall in 2007 -08 
to delay in construction of the National Academy for Statistical Administration by 
CPWD and delay in releasing payment to the procured equipments.  The 
Committee had highlighted the Ministry’s failure in regard to utilization of funds in 
the report on Dem ands for Grants for the year 2007 -08.  It is evident that the 
MOSPI has not taken any effort to improve the position.  The Committee urge the 
Ministry to identify the shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning and 
control and take corrective measures to ensure timely completion of projects and 
utilization of funds as budgeted, 
. 
Reply of the Government 
  
Utmost and vigorous efforts are being made during the current year to comply 
with the directions of the Hon’ble Committee. The valuable suggestion s made by 
the Committee to control and take corrective measures to ensure timely 
completion of projects and utilization of funds are being scrupulously followed. 
 
Shortfall in utilization  
Recommendation No.2 
 
           The committee observe that there ha d been gross under utilization of 
allocated funds under the plan head ‘professional services’ to the extent of 62% 
in 2005-06,51% in 2006-07 and 43% in 2007 -08(expected).There had also been 
substantial under utilization of funds allocated for publications.  The committee 
hope that, taking note of the committee’s observations in the preceding 

 15 
paragraphs, steps will be taken to ensure that there is no under utilization of 
funds in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
          An outlay of Rs.1244.00 lakhs is prop osed under ‘professional services’ 
during 2008-09.  
         An outlay of Rs.650 lakh is proposed to be utilized for funding the study on 
Compilation of Satellite Accounts of Non Profit Institutions (NPI) and providing 
funds to states DESs for conducting t ype studies for updating rates and ratios. 
The entire outlay is expected to be utilized during 2008-09. 
      During the current year the National Academy for Statistical Administration 
(NASA) would be commissioned and a large part of the work will be outs ourced, 
the reimbursement for which will be effected from “Professional Service”. 
     Commissioning of studies/outsourcing to consultants by the IPMD will also be 
under this head. 
     It is expected that the entire allocation under the head would be utilized during 
the current year. 
     The Programme Implementation wing will be undertaking publication of the 
Annual Report of the TPP and MPLADs Divisions, besides the regular 
publications of the Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division. 
   Several St atistical Publications are also proposed to be brought out by the 
Statistics wing of the Ministry. 
 
11th Plan Schemes 
Recommendation No 3 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MOSPI) is not aware  as yet as to what is the plan 
allocation to the Ministry during the 11 th Five Year Plan even one year after its 
commencement. The Committee are shocked to hear from the Secretary, the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) in this con nection 
that there seems to be “complete confusion in terms of getting the administrative 
and financial approvals for the new plan programmes.” It is not clear, what efforts 
were made by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) 
to cl ear this confusion. The Committee does not expect an expression of 
helplessness on the part of the Secretary, MOSPI in this regard. The Committee 
expects the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) to 
finalise 11 th Five Year Plan propos als in consultation with the Planning 
Commission without further loss of time and apprise the Committee of the 
outcome.  

 16 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Planning Commission vide their O.M. No. F -11096/3/2006-PP dated 
the 10th December 2007 had given tentativ e allocation of Rs. 600 crores for the 
11th Plan for the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, against an 
amount of Rs. 1594.74 crores demanded by the Ministry. As it is not possible to 
do justice to various schemes proposed for the 11 th Plan within the allocations, 
matter was taken up at the Secretary (S&PI)’s level with Member Secretary, 
Planning Commission vide D.O. letter dated 17.12.2007 and 11.4.2008 and with 
Adviser (PP) vide D.O. letter dated 8 th January 2008 and 17 th March, 2008. 
Matter has also been taken up with Principal Adviser (PC), Planning Commission 
vide D.O. letter dated 22.4.2008 at the Additional Director General’s level. All the 
issues raised by Planning Commission before considering enhancement in 
MOS&PI’s allocations hav e since been clarified to them vide our letter dated 
22.4.2008.  
 The Planning Commission vide their d.o. letter No. M -11096/3/2007-
PP(Part-I) dated 23.6.2007 have now intimated the final approved allocation of 
Rs.600 crore for the 11 th five year plan for the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation against an amount of Rs.1594.7 crores demanded 
by this Ministry. 
 
Identification of Core Statistics  
Recommendation No.6 
 
One of the mandates of the National Statistical Commission set up in 
June, 200 5 is identifying the areas of core statistics which are of national 
importance.  Considering the importance of official statistics in policy formulation, 
the Committee trust that the National Statistical Commission will identify, within a 
timeframe the are as of core statistics and evolve appropriate standards and 
methodology for collecting such statistics. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Resolution for setting up of a National Statistical Commission was 
notified on 1st June, 2005. In pursuance of the Resolutio n, the service conditions 
for the Chairperson and Members of the Commission were notified on 8th May, 
2006. Thereafter, the appointment of Chairman and Members of the Commission 
was notified on 3rd July, 2006 and they have started functioning since 12th Ju ly, 
2006. The identification of core statistics and related aspects are under the 
mandate of the Commission. The recommendation of the Standing Committee on 
Finance has been placed before the Commission in its sixteenth meeting held on 
30-4-2008 and the Commission noted the recommendation. 
 
Current Price Statistics  
Recommendation Nos. 7 & 8 
 

 17 
 Though the process of formulating separate rural and urban Consumer 
Price Indices (CPI – Urban and CPI – Rural), was expected to be completed by 
December 2007, the Committee have now been informed that no progress could 
be achieved on compilation of CPI (Rural) due to absence of manpower 
resources. Such non -performance reflects poorly on the Ministry’s functioning. 
There is always scope for re -distribution of manpower to attend to important 
items of work.  What is needed is initiative and foresight, which unfortunately is 
lacking in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI).  
The Committee have dealt with the issue of man power shortage in one of t he 
preceding paragraph of this report.  The Committee urges that the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) should, at least now take 
initiative and ensure that commitments made to the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee are fulfilled.  T he Committee would await the action taken by the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) to complete the 
exercise of developing separate urban and rural consumer price indices. 
 
The National Statistical Commission is reported to have ta ken up the issues 
relating to deficiencies in price statistics, which had been pointed out by this 
Committee in their Reports on the Demands for Grants of MOSPI for 2005 -06 and 
2007-08. It has been stated that the Commission is expected to make specific 
recommendations in this regard.  The Committee hope that this will be done 
expeditiously. The Committee expects the Commission to specifically address the 
aspects relating to the adequacy of the weightages currently given to the basket of 
goods and items for building the price indices, including the Wholesale Price Index 
(WPI), which is used for measuring prices and inflation level. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CPI (Urban): 
 
As far as compilation of CPI (Urban) is concerned, the work of price 
collection has started from 1st May, 2008 by suitable readjustment of field staff of 
NSSO. 
 
CPI ( Rural): 
 The work of CPI(Rural) is a new activity, which is to be taken up. So far, 
National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) has been collecting prices for 
construction of CPI (Agricultural Labourers) as per the requirement of Ministry of 
Labour. Question of integration of CPI (Agricultural Labour) and CPI (Rural) was 
discussed with all concerned and NSSO in order to collect prices for CPI (Rural) 
has already put up the propos al as a part of the plan scheme on Capacity 
Development of the NSSO. Once the EFC is cleared and the posts sanctioned, 
the work relating to price collection for CPI(Rural) will be taken up. 

 18 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee on Finance has been 
placed before the Commission in its sixteenth meeting held on 30 -4-2008 and the 
Commission noted the recommendation. 
 
 
 
Natural Resource Accounting  
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
Natural Resource Accounting is stated to be useful tool for measurement 
of genuine ec onomic performance and growth, taking environment factors into 
consideration. The committee notes that the reports of all eight pilot studies 
instituted in different regions of the country in this regard have been finalized. 
The project report have been co nsidered by the Technical Monitoring Committee 
(TMC) and approved. In view of the significance of NRA, the Committee desires 
that the work of developing a suitable methodology and frame work for Natural 
Resource Accounting for different sectors be taken up in a time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            The reports of the eight pilot studies on different sectors viz. land and 
forestry, water, air and mining, in a few States, have provided inputs for 
developing methodology and framework for nat ural resource accounting for 
different sectors. The reports have identified many data gaps in different sectors. 
           Annual Action Plan 2008 -09 of the Ministry includes preparation of 
technical papers on methodology, data requirement, and filling up  of identified 
data gaps for NRA, holding Seminars to discuss the technical papers including 
identifying ways to address the problem of filling the identified data gaps, and 
possibility of firming up the sector specific methodology for NRA  
 
Project Monitoring  
Recommendation Nos.11 & 12 
  
As an apex institute of monitoring, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) ought to play an important role in ensuring timely 
completion of Central Sector Projects within originally estimated cost .  The 
Committee in this connection observe from the status report for the quarter April, 
June, 2007 brought out by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) that out of 890 projects monitored during the quarter, as 
many as 254 projects accounting for nearly 30% did not have approved completion 
schedules or anticipated dates of completion.  The Committee wonder how in the 

 19 
absence of this critical information, MOSPI discharges its responsibility of 
monitoring.  It is not clear what effo rts were made by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MOSPI) to demand this information from the 
Ministries concerned and why they have not been successful.  The Committee 
expects MOSPI to obtain the same by taking up this matter at the  highest level in 
order to make its monitoring activity meaningful and effective. 
 
 
There were as many as 277 delayed projects during the quarter April -June, 
2007 on account of factors such as delay in land acquisition, fund constraints, 
delay in supply of equipment slow progress, etc.  The Committee are concerned to 
note that one single factor which contributed to the delay of as many as 142 
projects was “slow progress” which is obviously attributable to managerial 
deficiency.   This can be rectified by co nstant monitoring and by taking immediate 
corrective measures to resolve problems, if any.  There is a mechanism of 
Standing Committees in each Ministry to review the time and cost overruns in 
projects and fix responsibility thereto.  The Committee feels t hat the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) has a significant role to ensure 
that this mechanism in every Ministry is effective enough to achieve the desired 
objective.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 31 st December 2007, of the 915  projects on the monitor of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 283 projects did not have 
approved completion schedule or anticipated date of completion. Most of these 
projects are in the Railways sector.  Regarding  why this informati on is not being 
obtained by this Ministry, it is stated that this  Ministry has been bringing the 
requisite  facts to the notice of all concerned Ministries every quarter in the 
‘Foreword’ of the Quarterly Project Implementation Status Reports. In the past , 
particularly in the Railways Sector, the issue of projects without date of 
commissioning was even brought to the notice of the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs. CCEA directed the Ministry of Railways to prioritise projects 
according to available res ources with proper completion date, ensure continuity 
of project manager’s co -terminus with completion schedules, and the institution 
of an Expanded Board for Railway (EBR) projects for proper evaluation before 
CCEA approval.  Issue of fixing completion da tes for railway projects was again 
reviewed by the Committee of Secretaries (COS) in 2005.  COS took the 
following decisions: to give high priority to funding projects which had achieved a 
financial progress of 60%, priority to  New Line and Gauge Conversi on for 
completion, ensure State Government participation in funding projects, follow  
Standard Contract Guidelines to deal with steep rise in prices of  steel and 
cement and to put in place an appropriate strategy for raising  and leveraging 

 20 
resources thro ugh improved returns from projects, ring fencing of projects and 
tapping sources such as RVNL, ADB and viability gap funding.   
The recent observations of the Committee have been brought to the notice 
of the Ministries concerned through d.o. letters addres sed by Secretary, MOSPI 
requesting them to provide suitable commissioning dates for such projects for 
meaningful monitoring. 
 
 As on 31st December’07, of the 915 projects on the monitor of MOSPI, 127 
projects are reporting delays on account of “slow progre ss”.  The Hon’ble 
Committee has observed that the mechanism of Standing Committees in each 
Ministry to review time and cost overruns in the projects and fix responsibility 
thereto can play an effective role in cutting down such delays.  In this connection,  
it is submitted that the Standing Committee in each Ministry to review the time 
and cost overrun of projects and fix responsibility is applicable in projects where 
Revised Cost Estimates have exceeded the prescribed limit of 20% in cost 
overrun and time o verrun of 10%.  The Revised Cost Estimates (RCEs) of such 
projects costing Rs.200 crores and above are brought before the CCEA only 
after the responsibility has been fixed by the concerned Administrative Ministries.  
In cases, where the Administrative Mini stries / Departments are competent to 
sanction increase in project cost within the Delegated Powers, responsibility for 
time and cost overrun is fixed by them.  As a member of the Ministerial Standing 
Committee, the role of this Ministry is to assist this Committee in clearly 
identifying delays, reasons and agencies responsible in implementation.  The 
Ministry ensures that this responsibility is effectively discharged.  All concerned 
Ministries have been addressed by Secretary, MOSPI to make use of the 
mechanism effectively as observed by   the Hon’ble Committee. 
 
National Highway Development Project (NHDP) 
Recommendation No.13 
  
Perusal of the status Report of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI), for the quarter April -June 2007 c oncerning 
implementation of the Golden Quadrilateral and North -South and East -West 
Corridors Projects of the National Highway Development Project (NHDP) Phase I, 
reveals slippages in implementing the Highway Development Projects.  The target 
dates of compl etion of the number of highway development projects under the 
Golden Quadrilateral framework have been re -scheduled, and in several cases, 
the contracts re -awarded.  Similarly, the physical progress in respect of the 
projects under the North -South and East -West Corridors (Phase I) range from 
about 16% to 59%.  Given the evidently slow and tardy progress of implementation 
of the Highway Development Projects, the Committee would like to know what 
specific action was taken by the Ministry of Statistics and Pro gramme 

 21 
Implementation (MOSPI) to ensure that there is no further cost and time overruns 
in the projects of the Golden Quadrilateral and North -South and East -West 
Corridor Projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The action taken by the Ministry of Statistics an d Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) to ensure that there is no further cost and time overrun 
in projects of the Golden Quadrilateral and North-South and East-West Corridors 
projects inter alia include: (i) regular monitoring of major packages/ projects on 
monthly basis through Flash Report System. (ii) Visit to project sites by the 
officers on a selective basis and (iii) Review by the Minister of State (I/C), MOSPI 
from time to time.  The officers made 10 visits to various Golden Quadrilateral 
packages, North-South and East-West Corridors of Road projects and conducted 
5 reviews under the Chairmanship of MOS (I/C). The Secretary has addressed a 
letter requesting the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways to submit a 
detailed report, including details of slip pages and reasons thereof and measures 
taken to make up the shortfalls including policy decisions for six laning instead of 
four laning of some of the packages of Golden Quadrilateral Phase -I in the 
second and third  phase. 

 22 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Shortfall in utilization  
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee are distressed to note that as  a fall out of the Ministry’s poor 
handling of Plan schemes, no progr ess was made in implementing the scheme 
‘Basic Statistics for Local Level Development’ although Rs. 5 crore had been 
allocated for the scheme during 2007 -08. It has been stated that the scheme 
could not be launched due to uncertainty regarding inclusion of the scheme in the 
11th Plan. Rs. 5 crore has again been allocated for the scheme during the current 
year. As already recommended in the proceeding paragraph, the Committee 
stress that the scheme/ projects for the 11th  Plan  be finalized immediately and 
there should be no further delay in launching the scheme ‘Basic Statistics for 
Local Level Development’  
Reply of the Government 
Planning Commission has approved the new centrally sponsored scheme 
‘Basic Statistics for Local Level Development’ and agreed to  make available 
necessary funds during the Eleventh Five Year Plan for the scheme. Action has 
been taken to obtain the approval of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) after 
which the scheme will be launched. The activities envisaged for the year 2008 -
09, have been included in the Annual Action Plan. 
 
Shortage of Manpower 
Recommendation No. 5 
 One of the problems which affects the performance of the Field Operation 
Division of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) is 
stated to be sh ortage of manpower and attrition of trained manpower. The 
Committee in this connection note that as against the sanctioned strength of 
3903 as on 1.12.2007 the number of incumbents in position in the Sub -ordinate 
Statistical Service cadre of MOSPI was just  3182. The shortfall in number of 
incumbents is as much as 721. The Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MOSPI) has deposed before the Committee that 
the Ministry is not just getting people. The Committee feel that the Ministry o f 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) should address this problem 
in consultation with the Staff Selection Commission which is the recruitment 
agency of the cadre, if necessary by suitably modifying the eligibility criteria 
without compromising  skill requirements. The Committee also feel that 
desirability of having campus recruitment, if necessary by amending recruitment 

 23 
rules should be examined. The Committee also hope that attrition rate of 
employees can considerably be brought down with the i ntroduction of 
Performance Related Incentive Scheme recommended by the Sixth Pay 
Commision. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 1. Though sufficient number of candidates are being recommended by 
SSC against reported vacancies, the joining rate is only about 55 to 60  percent. 
The rate of resignations is also high (as reflected in the following table): 
YEAR REQUISITION SSC APPOINTED JOINED RESIGNED 
2004 54 54 29 9 
2005 472+100 463+97 377 86 
2006 27 27 15 2 
2008 List of 227 candidates on the basis 2007 examination h as been received 
for nomination/appointment. 
5 
 The reason for the low joining rate & the resignations in the SSS grade is 
the nature of duties required to be performed by SSS officials.  Most of the posts 
are in FOD offices located all over India.  The S SS officers have to perform 
duties in remote sample villages by staying there for 7 to 10 days at a stretch 
with no facilities.  They have to make their own arrangements for boarding, 
lodging, transport etc.  
 Apart from this, as per present Government policy, not more than one third 
of the direct vacancies out of the total vacancies occurring in a year can be filled.  
This further contributes to short fall in SSS manpower. 
  Since the recruitment rules are to be framed as per the existing guidelines 
of Dep artment of Personnel & Training, it may not be possible to revise the 
recruitment rules.  In view of the 6 th CPC recommendations, it is expected that 
the position may improve as the RRs will  have to be modified in the light of the 
merger of scales.  
2. The Committee has recommended Campus recruitment but even then 
the  problem of exodus of incumbents to other jobs will remain. 
3. The Committee has also recommended the introduction of performance 
related incentives to bring down the attrition rate of employ ees.  This may help to 
motivate the employees but in many cases the local public and officials do not 
cooperate with the Field staff and have to be persuaded to provide information to 
(FOD). This coupled with meager promotional opportunities are the main c auses 
for high rate of attrition among employees. 
The Ministry has taken action on the following lines to reduce the occurrence 
of large number of vacancies and also to mitigate attrition of employees. 

 24 
a)  A blanket ban of two years has been imposed on SSS employees who wish to 
go on deputation to other Government Departments. 
b)   It is felt that the vacancies in SSS may come down in view of the 
recommendations of VI Pay Commission which has recommanded merger of 
grades and higher pay scales. 
c) The scope of introducing performance related incentives to field staff as 
recommended by the VI Pay Commission may also be explored in future, 
once the Pay Commissions Report is approved by the Government.  
 
India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) 
Recommendation No.9 
 
A decision was reportedly taken at the 14 th Conference of Central and 
State Statistical Organisations [COCSSO] held in April, 2007 that Phase-II [Tier-I] 
the World Bank aided “India Statistical Strengthening Project [ISSP]”, should be 
implemented by December, 2007.  It is, however, not clear from the information 
made available to the Committee whether the Phase -II [Tier-I] of the project was 
implemented within the targeted date.  The Committee would like to know the 
reasons for delay, if any, in t his regard.  It has been stated that the outlay for the 
tier-II of the project which will be implemented during the 11 th Five Year Plan is 
yet to be received from the Planning Commission.  In view of the fact that the 
project is primarily intended to devel op and strengthen the State Statistical 
Systems in terms of infrastructure facilities and providing reliable, timely and 
credible socio-economic statistics, the Committee desire the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation (MoS&PI) to be pro -active and ensure that 
outlay for Tier-II of the project is finalized early and the work of implementing the 
Project taken up in right earnest 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The work of Phase -II (Tier -I) i.e. the synthesis of all the 35 State/UT specific 
Reports on “Identifying Specific Requirements for Strengthening of State 
Statistical Bureaus” has since been completed.   The delay that had occurred in 
completing phase -II (Tier -I) was on account of procedural delays encountered 
earlier in the process of appointm ent of the National and International 
Consultants.   
2. The Planning Commission has provided an outlay of Rs.30 crores for   this 
project for the annual plan 2008 -09.  The Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation is pursuing the matter actively with the Planning Commission for 
finalizing the outlay for the entire 11 th Plan. In the meantime the Ministry has 
engaged itself in preparatory work such as formulation of National Strategic 
Statistical Plan, formulation of the guidelines for the States to  prepare State 
Statistical Plans and consultation with the State Governments to participate in the 
project. Besides, the process concerning the EFC for this project is being 
pursued. 

 25 

 26 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Project Monitoring  
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
The Committee in one of their earlier reports had sought the information 
about action taken against those held responsible for lapses contributing to cost  
escalation of projects.  In response, information has been received from only one 
Ministry viz. Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways, disclosing the findings of 
the Standing Committee regarding five projects.  The Committee however, 
observes that nothing has been mentioned by the Ministry about the action taken 
against persons/ agencies responsible for lapses except in respect of one case in 
which Liquidity damages have reportedly been imposed on consultant for lack of 
supervision.  The Committee urges  the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) to obtain full information from the Ministry of Road, 
Transport and Highways in respect of all projects.  The Committee are of the 
view that it is the responsibility of Ministry of Statistics  and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) to obtain such information from all Ministries on 
quarterly basis and closely monitor project implementation.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Secretary, MOSPI has addressed a letter once again requesting the 
Secretary, Road Transport and Highways to arrange to provide the Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations of the Standing Committee of the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways in case of delayed projects 
 
 
 

 27 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                      ANANTH KUMAR,  
11 December, 2008                                   Chairman,  
20 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Finance. 

 28 
 
Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11 th December, 2008 from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs.  in 
Committee Room No. ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar –Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
5. Shri Vijoy Krishna 
6. Shri Rupchand Pal 
7. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
8.  Shri Mahendra Mohan 
9.  Shri Vijay J. Darda 
10.  Shri Moinul Hassan 
11.  Shri K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
12.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.C. Ahuja   -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Director 
3.   Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan- Deputy Secretary –II 
 
2.  At t he outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3.  The Committee, then took up the following draft Reports for consideration :- 
  
(i)    Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 67 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Financial Services and Disinvestment);  
 

 29 
(ii)   Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 68 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii)  Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 69 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Planning. 
 
(iv) Draft action take n Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 70 th Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
(v)  Draft action taken Report on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the 71 st Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 
The Committee adopted the Report at (iii) above without any amendment and 
the Reports at (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) with modifications as shown in the annexure. 
4. The Committee aut horized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the 
light of the modifications made and present the same to Parliament. 
5. The Committee decided to defer consideration of the two draft Reports on (i) 
‘Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector’; and (ii) ‘Coun terfeit Currency Notes in 
Circulation’, to a subsequent sitting. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 30 
 
Annexure  
 
 
(a)  Modification made in Chapter -I of the draft action taken report on the 67 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Finance (Departments 
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment);  
 
 XX     XX     XX 
 XX     XX     XX 
  
 
 (b) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 68th  
Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of Ministr y of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
 
 XX     XX     XX 
 XX     XX     XX 
 
 
 (c)  Modification made in Chapter -I of the draft action taken report on the 70 th Report 
on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
 
 
Para Line Amendments/Modifications 
7 - For 
 
 “The Committee would await this information”.  
 
Substitute 
 
 “The Committee desire that the requisite information should be furnished within a 
period of one month”. 
10 7 For: 
 
“---and if not, the reasons therefor.  The Committee would like to be     
informed of the same”. 
 
Substitute: 
 
“The Committee expect the Government to take the steps for identification  
of areas of core statistics in a time bound manner and inform the 
Committee about the action taken in this regard within two months from the 
presentation of this Report to the Parliament”. 
 
13 11 For: 
 
“The Committee expect the Secretary to take personal initiative in this 
matter and ensure that the CPI (Rural) is taken up without any further delay 
and completed within a specific timeframe under intimation to the             

 31 
Committee”.  
 
Substitute: 
 
 “The Committee are constrained to consider this an utter disregard of their 
authority.  While taking a serious view of this matter, the Committee desire  
that the Government should furnish an explanation in  this regard within 
one month from the presentation of this Report”. 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Last  
For: 
           
“---this matter at the highest level of the Government”. 
 
Substitute 
 
“this matter at the level of the Prime Minister’s Office”. 
 
Insert the following sentence at the end of the para 
 
“The Committee expect the Ministry to submit an action taken  
report of their action in this regard vis-à-vis the corrective  
intervention by the Prime Minister’s Office”. 
  
 
 
(d) Modification made in Chapter-I of the draft action taken report on the 
71st Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
 
XX     XX    XX 
XX     XX    XX 

 32 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTIETH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATATISTICS AND 
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
  
              Total  % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of recommendations   14   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which   10  71.43 
have been accepted by the Government     
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6,  
7, 8,10,11, 12 & 13) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the     3  21.43 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view      
of the Government’s replies 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 5 & 9)  
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect      1     7.14 
of which replies of the Government have     
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No.  14) 
 
 
(v) (Recommendation/observation in respect     Nil  00.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
 (Nil) 
 