15
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS—
BANKING DIVISION)
THE CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
(REGULATION) BILL, 2004
FIFTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2005/Magha, 1926 ( Saka)


FIFTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS—
BANKING DIVISION)
THE CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
(REGULATION) BILL, 2004
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.2.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 25.2.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2005/Magha, 1926 (Saka)


COF No. 15
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
Report ....................................................................................................... 1
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sitting held on 4 January, 2005 ........................... 20
Minutes of the Sitting held on 18 January, 2005 ......................... 22
Minutes of the Sitting held on 14 February, 2005 ....................... 24
The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004 ....... 28

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE—2004-2005
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
6. Shri Gurudas Kamat
7. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
9. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Mishra
10. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
11. Shri Rupchand Pal
12. Shri Danve Raosaheb Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
14. Shri K.S. Rao
15. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
16. Shri Lakshman Seth
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri Ajit Singh
19. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
20. Shri Vijoy Krishna
21. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Murli Deora
23. Shri R.P . Goenka
24. Shri Jairam Ramesh
25. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
26. Shri Yashwant Sinha
(iii)

(iv)
27. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
28. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
31. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifteenth  Report on the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Bill, 2004.
2. The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004 was
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 6th December, 2004 and was referred to
the Committee on 13th December, 2004 by the Hon'ble Speaker of
Lok Sabha for examination and report thereon.
3. The  Committee sought memoranda from the (i) Credit
Information Bureau (India) Limited, (ii) Dun & Bradstreet Information
Services (India) Pvt. Ltd., (ii) Indian Banks' Association, and (iv) Punjab
National Bank on the Bill. They also heard the views of the
representatives of (i) Credit Information  Bureau (India) Limited.,
(ii) Dun & Bradstreet Information Services (India) Pvt. Ltd. (iii) Indian
Banks' Association, and (iv) Punjab National Bank on 4th January,
2005. The Committee at their sitting held on 18th January, 2005 took
oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs—Banking Division) on the provisions contained in
the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004.
4. The  Committee considered and adopted the draft report at
their sitting held on 14 February, 2005.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of (i) Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited, (ii) Dun & Bradstreet
Information Services (India) Pvt. Ltd. (iii) Indian Banks' Association,
(iv) Punjab National Bank, and (v) the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs—Banking Division) for co-operation extended in
placing before them their considered  views and perceptions on the
subject and for furnishing written notes and information that the
Committee had desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the  Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
23 February, 2005 Chairman,
4 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

REPORT
Background
The  Introduction of financial sector reforms in 1993 had revealed
the extent of non-performing assets in the Banking system. The  tackling
of NPAs through various measures had been attempted since then. It
has also become imperative to arrest accretion of fresh  NPAs in the
banking sector through an efficient system of credit information  on
borrowers as a first step in credit risk management. In this context the
requirement of an adequate, comprehensive and reliable information
system  on the borrowers through an efficient database system has
been keenly felt by Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Government, as well
as credit institutions.
2. A Working Group, constituted by the Reserve Bank of India to
explore the possibility of setting up a Credit Information Bureau (CIB)
submitted its report in October 1999. It had recommended inter alia
that (a) a CIB be set up under the Companies Act, 1956 with equity
participation from commercial banks, financial institutions and Non-
Banking Financial Companies registered with RBI; (b) a foreign
technology partner be included as collaborator in setting up of a
Company; (c) and appropriate legal framework be put in place to
provide adequate protection to the Company as also the credit
institutions sharing information with the Company; (d) pending
enactment of a master legislation or legal amendments, a beginning
could be made by setting up a Company which can operate initially
by pooling information on suit-filed accounts as also transactions on
which the borrower has given consent, for sharing amongst the user
group. The Working Group in its recommendations had observed that
it would not be possible to set up a world class credit information
bureau within the existing legal framework. The legal prohibition on
disclosure of information enshrined in various Banking Acts would
not permit banks and financial institutions to share credit information
with the Bureau. The power vested with the RBI under section 45C,
Chapter-III A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to collect and
furnish credit information from banks or financial institutions cannot
be delegated by it to another institution. Therefore, amendments would
be required in various enactments.

2
3. In countries like U.S.A., UK., Australia and New Zealand, there
are specific legislations relating to data protection or privacy laws and
such legislations to reinforce, guide and place a few restrictions,
expedient and  necessary for collection and sharing of credit information
by a Credit Information Company. In Sri Lanka, the setting up of
Credit Information Company is governed by an Act of Parliament.
4. Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL) was set up by
the Sate Bank of India in association with Housing Development
Financial Corporation in January 2001, with an authorized capital of
Rs. 50 crore and a paid up capital of Rs. 25 crore, with equity
participation of 40 per cent each and two foreign technology partners
viz., M/s Dun & Bardstreet Information Services (India) Pvt. Ltd., and
Trans Union International Inc., USA sharing the remaining 20 per cent
equity stake. The CIBIL was to be technology-driven to ensure speedy
processing, periodic updating and availability of error-free data at all
times in the system. CIBIL  has launched its consumer bureau
operations on 5th April, 2004. Currently, 108 credit grantors have
accepted membership to CIBIL. These include 68 banks accounting for
over 90% of the total credit outstanding amongst the commercial banks,
11 HFCs, accounting for over 70% of the total credit outstanding
amongst the HFCs, 10 FIs accounting  for over 90% of the total credit
outstanding amongst the FIs and 12 major NBFCs representing a
substantial portion of the credit outstanding of that sector. All credit
grantors (CG), who are members of CIBIL, and have contributed data
are eligible to draw reports.
5. With a view to provide the necessary legislative support to this
Bureau and to ensure a credit market that functions efficiently, the
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004 was introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 6th December, 2004. This Act would provide for
regulation of credit information companies and to facilitate efficient
distribution of credit and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. This is expected to significantly improve the quality of credit
appraisal and decisions. the Bill, inter-alia, contains provisions for the
following:
(1) Prohibition to commence or carry on business of credit
information without obtaining a certificate of registration
from the Reserve Bank of India;
(2) Procedure for making application for grant of certificate of
registration, cancellation of certificate of registration and
appeal against order of rejection of an application for grant
of certificate of registration and cancellation of certificate of
registration;

3
(3) Requirement of minimum capital;
(4) Management of credit information companies;
(5) Co nferring power upon the Reserve Bank of India to
determine policy in relation to functioning of credit
information companies and also giving directions to credit
information companies and other players in the business of
credit information;
(6) Functions of credit information by credit information
companies;
(7) Collection and furnishing of credit information by the credit
companies;
(8) Powers and duties of auditors;
(9) Obtaining of membership by credit institutions of credit
information companies;
(10) Resolution of disputes between credit institutions and credit
information companies or between credit institution and their
borrowers;
(11) Accuracy and security of credit information and privacy
principles;
(12) Alterations of credit information files and credit reports;
(13) Regulation of unauthorised access to credit information;
(14) Offences and penalties;
(15) Cognizance of offences;
(16) Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy;
(17) Exemption from any or all the provisions of the proposed
legislation in any credit information company or credit
institution;
(18) Amending certain enactments specified in the Schedule to
the Bill so as to permit disclosure of credit information under
the proposed legislation;
(19) Power of Central Government  to make rules to carry out
the provisions of the Act;
(20) Power of RBI to make regulations.

4
6. With a view to have an expert opinion on various provisions of
the Bill, the Committee invited suggestions/views/memoranda from
experts, Punjab National Bank and Credit Information Bureau (India)
Limited (CIBIL) etc. In response to that written views/memoranda
were received from various quarters for example (i) Indian Banks'
Association; (ii) Dun & Bradstreet Information Services (India) Pvt.
Ltd.;  (iii) Credit  Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL); and
(iv) Punjab National Bank.
7. The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of
(a) Indian Banks' Association; (b) Dun & Bradstreet Information Services
(India) Pvt. Ltd.; (c) Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL);
(d) Punjab National Bank and Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs—Banking Division) to further enlighten them on
various aspects of the proposed legislation.
8. After having examined the various provisions of the Bill clause
by clause, the Committee are generally in agreement with the broader
objectives of the Bill. However, after hearing the views of all these
organizations/Experts and the Government, the Committee have come
to the conclusion that some provisions/clauses of the Bill need
modification to make it more effective instrument in ensuring
efficient distribution of credit in the economy and proper regulation
of credit information companies as envisaged in the Bill. The
Committee therefore approve the Bill for enactment by Parliament
subject to modifications/recommendations as detailed in the
succeeding paragraphs.

5
Clause 4 (1) & (2): Application for registration
9. Sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 4 state as under:
“Every company which intends to commence the business of credit
information shall make an application for registration to the Reserve
Bank in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations.
Every credit information company , in existence on  the
commencement of this Act, before the expiry of six months from
such commencement, shall apply in writing to the Reserve Bank
for obtaining a certificate of registration under this Act:
Provided that in the case of a credit information company in
existence on the commencement of this Act, nothing in Section 3
shall be deemed to prohibit such credit information company from
carrying on the business of a credit information company, until it
is granted a certificate of registration or is by notice in writing
informed by the  Reserve Bank that a certificate of registration
cannot be granted to it.”
10. By virtue of this Clause any company can commence the
business  of credit information by applying for registration to  the
Reserve Bank in such form and manner as may be specified by
regulations. Hence, there is no restriction on the number of companies
which could enter into the business of providing credit information.
11. As regards the  number of credit information companies the
Working Group had expressed their views as follows:
“The Group is of  the view that the legislation enacted for the
purpose could provide for establishing Bureaus to cater to  the
needs of different market segments and the large geographical area
of the country.”
12. The Punjab National Bank, in a note furnished to the
Committee suggested following:
“The propose Act permits  multiplicity of credit information
companies  in the market. This provision shall result into a
situation, where a credit grantor seeking exposure in a fresh
account, small borrower in particular, shall have to go to all the
credit information companies available in the market so as to ensure
that it gets credit information on the said borrower pertaining to
all the banks with whom the said party is dealing.

6
The above situation may be time consuming besides it's not
being cost effective. In the above backdrop the regulator should
have the power to restrict the number of players in  the market
if deemed necessary  at any point of time. Further the regulator
may also consider constitution of only two such companies in the
market for dealing with commercial and consumer data separately."
13. In their post evidence reply the Punjab National Bank
stated:
“The Act should empower RBI to restrict the number of Credit
Information Companies, preferably upto two/three to avoid
problems due to multiplicity of agencies.”
14. When the Ministry were asked about restricting the  number
of credit information companies by the regulator and whether such
companies should have specific  jurisdiction over different market
segments and also the geographical areas, as suggested by the Working
Group, the Ministry in a note stated as follows:
“The companies which satisfy the criteria laid down under the
provisions of Chapter II of the Bill with respect to minimum paid-
up capital and other conditions would be eligible for grant of
certificate of registration for  functioning as credit information
companies. The Reserve Bank may reject  the application for grant
of certificate of registration of such applicant companies who fail
to satisfy the Reserve Bank in terms of the provisions of Sub-
clauses (b) & (c) of sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill. Except
such rejection, the Reserve Bank as a regulator  would not be in
a position the restrict the number of credit information companies.
It is desirable that  more number of Credit Information  Bureaus
(CIBs) should be formed so as to leave little or no gap in collection
of credit information from the vast geographical area and different
sectors.
As regards the second aspect of this question i.e. whether these
companies should have specific jurisdiction over different market
segments of the country, it may be pointed out that the reference
to different market segments and the large coverage of the
geographical area of the country by credit information companies
made by the group was with a view to emphasizing the desirability
and expediency of establishing more than one credit information
company. Accordingly, the processions in this  behalf have been
included in the Bill and the Bill provides scope for any company
to undertake the business and function of a credit information

7
company subject to compliance of the criterion as laid down under
Chapter II of the Bill, with respect to registration of credit
information companies.
Therefore, in our opinion, credit information company should be
left with their own option to decide the coverage of geographical
area and market segments by themselves depending upon their
own infrastructure and ability to function effectively in accordance
with the Bill.”
15. In this regard the representative of the Indian Banks’ Association
stated as below during the course of oral evidence:
“It cannot be a very large number. It has to be three to four
companies because with the computer technology, which will be
used by these companies, there would not be really any scope for
work for many companies. It would have to be restricted to five
to six companies, at the maximum. And, they could be area-wise,
and they should be class of borrowers-wise. It could be consumers,
it could be small-scale industry and like that. Once they are
covered, the number can be restricted to a few, definitely less than
10 numbers.”
16. When the attention of the Government was drawn to the
problems that may crop up with the existence of multiple credit
information companies, the Ministry in their written submission replied
as under:
“So long the credit information companies (CICs) function in
accordance with the proposed Bill, their number as such may not
cause any problem to credit grantors. In fact, Siddiqui Committee
while recommending that the legislation enacted for the purpose
could provide for establishing more than one CIC had taken into
account that by doing so needs of different market segments would
be fulfilled and it would also enable the large coverage of
geographical area of the country. The Bill also provides scope and
option for one CIC to become member of another CIC as well as
one credit institution to become member of more than one CIC.”
17. The Committee note that under the existing provisions, any
company can apply for undertaking the business of providing credit
information. On the other hand Indian Banks’ Association, is of the
opinion that in the era of computers, there would not be any need

8
for numerous companies providing credit information. The Committee
are of the view that whereas too many Credit Information Companies
may not be desirable, yet in a big country like ours it is necessary
that all regions of Country must be covered. Hence, the Credit
Information Companies should be formed on regional basis and
specialise in different market segments to avoid concentration of
companies in one particular area/region/State or too many companies
catering to the needs of a particular market segment. Therefore, in
view of the Committee RBI should have discretion to decide, keeping
the above in view, on the number of credit information companies
as well as their areas of work so that Credit Information Companies
have wide representation and can provide information on any type
of credit.

9
Clause 7 (1): Appeal against order of Reserve Bank
18. Clause 7 (1) reads as follows:
“A credit information company aggrieved by the order of rejection
of an application for grant of certificate of registration under
Section 5 or cancellation of certificate of registration under
Section 6, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government, within
a period of thirty days from the date on which such order of
rejection or cancellation, as the case may be, is communicated to
the credit information company.”
19. The representative from the Ministry of Law and Justice,
Legislative Department, in this regard submitted following during the
course of oral evidence:
“Under various provisions when an appeal lies to the Central
Government, there are allocation of business rules under which
the concerned Ministry or Department of the Central Government
hears and disposes of the appeal. Under the Securities Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992, when the appeal was being filed before
the constitution of the Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT), the
appeal was being filed to the Central Government. So, under the
allocation of business rules, it was the Finance Ministry. Whenever
in law ‘Central Government’ is mentioned for filing appeal it is
the concerned Ministry or Department. If it is in the context of
petroleum, under the allocation of rules, the matter relating to
them would be dealt by them. Since it is relating to the Ministry
of Finance, therefore the Central Government would be the Ministry
of Finance.
Sir, to reply to your question as ‘who’ in the Central Government,
I would say that an officer of the rank of Special Secretary or an
Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Finance as he was hearing
and disposing of appeal before SAT was set up.
Secondly, this provision is broadly on the lines of Section 45-IA
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. This is regarding the NBFC.
The Ministry being the controlling authorities of the banks and
financial institutions, this model was adopted that the appeal will
lie to the Central Government because it is only from cancellation
of registration of certificate.”

10
20. Clarifying this point, the Ministry in their post evidence reply
stated as under:
“Provisions of Clause 7 of the Bill are on the lines of provisions
of sub-section (7) of Section 45 IA of the RBI Act relating to order
of rejection of application for registration or cancellation of
“certificate of registration” of a company & sub-section (5) of
Section 22 of the B.R. Act. In said provisions also though the
Central Government is an appellate authority, the specific authority
would be notified on a later date. The provisions of said clause 7
of the Bill are based on the precedence of aforesaid provisions of
the RBI Act/B.R. Act. Other Appellate Authorities are specific to
certain sectors. Since appeals against RBI’s order will pertain to
credit information companies which will be closely linked to
financial intermediaries largely banks, it is appropriate that power
to review/appeals should be with Ministry of Finance.”
21. In response to a query that whether the Central Government
would examine the possibility of assigning this function to one of the
existing appellate tribunals, the Secretary, Financial Sector during
evidence before the Committee stated:
“As you have correctly mentioned, we have had this experience of
hearing appeals on SEBI’s orders. The Minister has the authority
to constitute an Appellate Board and earlier two Secretaries, or
one Secretary and one Additional Secretary constituted this
authority. Even today we are hearing some residuary matters
because SAT, once it got constituted started hearing fresh appeals.
Some of the earlier appeals are still continuing. They have just
been disposed of after hearing. So, some powers still subsisted.
But the point of significance is that as a policy, regulator should
not be subject to any orders or judgements of the Government. In
this case, firstly, we checked with the RBI. In this particular case,
they seemed quite comfortable because they thought it was really
an appeal against registration of a company, cancellation or grant
of registration and not in regard to other matters. The total number
of companies that we expect would be only a few. We would be
very surprised if there would be more than six to seven companies.
Applicants may be eight, nine or ten. Therefore, having an
independent authority, given the nature of the task involved where
we are not really making a comment by way of any judgement on

11
RBI’s functioning as such but just treating the larger public policy
issue or whether a company may be allowed to operate in the
market or not and the limited number of cases which are expected
to come.
We thought that it might be expedient to leave it to the Central
Government. But we did not think that any major issues of policy
may be involved in the nature of work. Actually, experience is
different. If we get something like 30 to 40 appeals, then perhaps
you correctly suggested that we can have an alternative authority
not creating a fresh authority and leave this power to SAT or
something like that. But at the present moment, the Central
Government might be more familiar with the area of work because
SAT is really dealing with security issues. If you desire, we would
take a fresh look at it or the Committee may make a
recommendation in this regard.”
22. The Committee take note that clause 7(1) enables a credit
information company to prefer an appeal to the Central Government,
in case it is aggrieved by the order of rejection of application for
grant of certificate of registration or cancellation of certificate of
registration. The existing provisions do not clearly specify authority
in Central Government to whom such appeal shall be made. They
do not agree with the observation of the Secretary, Financial Sector,
that since only a few credit information companies are expected to
come up, therefore, appeal against registration may lie before the
Central Government and there would be no need to constitute a
separate appellate tribunal specially for this purpose. Taking note of
the fact that there is uncertainty about the number of appeals which
may come up, they are of the view that the proposed Act should
specifically indicate the authority to which appeal would lie. Initially
the Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) should function as the
appellate authority which can have expert(s), if required. If the
workload so dictates, the Government may consider constituting a
separate appellate authority in due course.

12
Clause 14 (1) (c): Functions of a Credit Information Company
23. Sub-clause (1) (c) of Clause 14 dealing with functions of credit
information companies states as mentioned below:
“To provide credit scoring to its specified users or specified users
of any other credit information company or to other credit
information companies being its members.”
24. In their suggestions the Punjab National Bank submitted
following view:
“The Bill prescribes that each credit information company shall
allocate a score to each borrower.
If such is the case then one borrower may be given different
scores by different companies. We are of the view that the
methodology of providing scores by different companies to their
borrowers should be common and prescribed by the regulator so
that the two rating of the same borrower allocated by different
companies can be mapped by the user.”
25. In response to this the Ministry in their written submission
replied as under:
“Having regard to provisions of clause 10, clause 11 (which relate
to power of the Reserve Bank to give directions to credit
information company) and sub-clauses (1) & (3) of clause 17 (which
relate to collection and furnishing of credit information), it is open
to the Reserve Bank to stipulate guidelines (to be followed by
credit information companies) with a view to ensure that the
methodology of providing credit score by credit information
companies to their specified users (with respect to the credit
worthiness and capacity of the borrower to repay his loan and
advances and discharge his other obligations in respect of credit
facilities availed or to be availed by him) are uniform. It may be
pointed out that in the questionnaire the reference has been made
with respect to providing of credit score by different companies to
their borrowers which is not the subject matter of the Bill.
Accordingly, while replying this question we have proceeded on
the basis as if said reference relate to providing of credit scoring
by credit information companies to their specified users.”
26. Further the Ministry furnished following written clarification
on this point:
“Clause 11 is an enabling provision for RBI to issue directions for
uniform and consistent applicability of criteria for collecting,

13
collating and disseminating credit information and assigning credit
scores. However, the object is not to ensure that uniform scores
are given by different CICs to the same borrower (in the case of
credit rating agencies too, each agency follows its own classification
and ratings given by two agencies in respect of the same borrower
may be different. CIBIL has also been requested to furnish a reply
in this regard directly to the Government).”
27. During his oral evidence, the Secretary, Financial Sector, stated
as below on the issue of credit scoring by individual credit information
companies:
“There will be independent assessments. But, there will be general
guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India under which they will be
permitted to do so.”
28. When the Committee asked the representative of Indian Banks’
Association to express their view in this regard he stated following
during the course of oral evidence:
“No. As far as the rating of the borrowers is concerned, there are
different companies which will be operating in this area. Each
company may have its own rating, norms and models. The type
of rating which is given, may also change from company to
company. Therefore, there is a need to ensure that there is a
uniform norm prescribed for that rating. Also, nomenclature given
to that rating should be uniform so that everybody knows what
that person is, and he does not have to compare that. One says,
“AAA” means ‘very good’, and ‘AA’ means ‘good’. Like that, it
should not happen.
Therefore, the suggestion is good that the Reserve Bank of
India should say that these are the norms for the purpose of credit
scoring, which is contemplated under the Act, and it is to be
uniform.”
29. The Committee note that clauses 10, 11 and sub-
clauses (1) and (3) of clause 13 enable Reserve Bank to determine
policy and issue directions and thereby maintain vigil on credit
information companies regarding their functions. They concur with
the suggestion of Punjab National Bank that methodology of
providing score to borrowers by different credit information
companies should be uniform. They find that Indian Banks’
Association also favour this view point.

14
30. In this regard, they are not ready to accept the contention of
the Government that the object is not to ensure that uniform scores
are given by different credit information companies to the same
borrower. In their view, if different scores are assigned to the same
borrower by different credit information companies, it would lead
to spate of problems for both borrowers and credit grantors. While
the borrowers would find it difficult to get credit, the credit grantors
would have problem in taking decisions about ‘credit worthiness’ of
a borrower. They, therefore, desire that the norms for the purpose of
credit scoring should be laid down in the Act itself.

15
Clause 16: Failure to become member of a credit information company
31. Clause 16 provides:
(1) “where a Credit Institution:—
(a) abstains from becoming a member of at least one credit
information company; or
(b) at any time is not a member of any credit information
company, the Reserve Bank suo moto or on a complaint from
a credit information company may, direct such credit
institution to take necessary steps within such time, as it
may specify to become a member of a credit information
company.
(2) In case a credit institution fails to comply with the directions
of the Reserve Bank under sub-section (1), to become member of
at least one credit information company, the Reserve Bank may,
without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, intimate such failure
to any other authority for taking such action as it may deem fit.”
32. On this clause, following suggestion was made by Punjab
National Bank:
“As per Section 15 of the proposed Act every credit institution
shall become a member of at least one credit information company.
If a credit institution does not become member of at least one
credit information company, as per Sec. 16 of the proposed Act,
RBI shall take up with the respective authority so that such
authority shall take actions as it may deem fit.
Though the Act as such does not provide for any specific
provision for penalty for not becoming a member, in our view, on
the basis of the reference made by RBI, the concerned authority
shall ensure that the needful is not done. Keeping in view the
above no further provision is required in the Act. As such, there
is no need for any further specific provision in the proposed Act
in this regard. The concerned regulator of the credit institution
will ensure that requirement of Section 15 are complied with.”
33. In this regard the Ministry in their written reply stated as
below:
“As the definition of the term ”credit institution” as provided under
sub-clause (f) of clause 2 of the Bill is wider and covers such
institutions which are included within the purview of the said

16
definition of credit institution and are not regulated or supervised
by the Reserve Bank, said definition also includes an enabling
provision as per sub-clause (vii) of said sub-clause (f) in terms
whereof Reserve Bank may specify any other institution as credit
institution. Keeping in view such aspect, the term “any other
authority” has been included in sub-clause (2) of clause 16 of the
Bill and we presume that the same is to be construed with reference
to the authority in relation to such institutions.”
34. When asked to indicate the action RBI would initiate in this
case and the authority to which RBI would report, the representative
of Indian Banks’ Association, submitted following before the Committee:
“Provisions of this law are proposed to be made applicable to
banks, financial institutions, non-banking finance companies,
housing finance companies, credit card companies and various other
entities engaged in lending. Supposing it is a housing finance
company which is committing a violation.…
Supposing, a housing finance company is not complying with
the direction, RBI has no regulatory control over housing finance
company. It is the National Housing Bank, which is controlling
the housing finance companies. So, RBI will inform the NHB that
this particular housing finance company is not complying and they
will take regulatory action against them. That is the purpose of
this provision.…
The witness added:
there is a prosecution and punishment for violating the provisions
of the Act. The other safeguards are provided by virtue of the
working of that credit information company itself where unless it
is necessary for a particular person to know the information, the
information will not be accessible to him in the company at all.”
35. The Committee note that the Reserve Bank may report failure
of credit institution to become member of at least one Credit
Information Company, to any other authority for taking such action
as it may deem fit. They are in agreement with the Government
view that the term ‘other authority’ for the purposes of this Clause
need not be defined as it would be construed to refer to the authority
that deals with particular types of institutions. However, they find
that this provision does not speak of any action to be taken by such
authority. There may be occasions when the authority on being
informed does not take any action or keep it pending for an
indefinite period. They, therefore, recommend that the action to be
taken by the authority and time limit within which it must take
action should be provided in the Act itself.

17
Clause 18 (1): Settlement of dispute
36. Clause 18 (1) of the Bill states as below:
“Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being
in force, if any dispute arises amongst, credit information
companies, credit institutions, borrowers and clients on matters
relating to business of credit information and for which no remedy
has been provided under this Act, such disputes shall be settled
by conciliation or arbitration as provided in the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, as if the parties to the dispute have
consented in writing for determination of such dispute by
conciliation or arbitration and provisions of that Act shall apply
accordingly.”
37. In this regard Punjab National Bank suggested following:
“Section 21 of the proposed Act enables the borrower to approach
the Credit Information Company or the Credit Institution for getting
the information about him, updated. Further the Act also provides
for resolution of disputes, if any on this account, through
arbitration. In terms of Sec. 18 of the proposed Act the disputes
shall be settled by the arbitrator to be appointed by Reserve Bank.
In this regard, we are of the view that there should be a time
restriction within which the whole arbitration proceedings should
be over. For this we suggest 6 months as the maximum time limit.”
38. As regards the dispute resolution mechanism the representative
of the Indian Banks’ Association stated following during his oral
evidence:
“As regards redressal of grievance and disputes resolution
mechanism, the provision made under the Act is about arbitration
and conciliation proceedings. Although there is no specific
provision, my understanding is that such type of disputes which
are between the bank and the customers of the banks or credit
information companies will really be for financial services which
are given by such banks and companies which will be within the
purview of the Consumer Protection Act and the consumer fora
redressal grievance mechanism would be available to a person
who suffers in the process. It would also be possible for RBI to
get the jurisdiction of Ombudsman for redressal of grievances in
regard to customers of the bank who are suffering as a result of
this.”

18
39. While replying to a query that whether the dispute resolution
mechanism as provided in Clause 18 by arbitration is adequate to
help amicable and speedy settlement of disputes, the Ministry in their
written reply stated as under:
“Yes. The dispute resolution mechanism as provided in Clause 18
of the Bill allows speedier and cheaper mode of settlement of
disputes. Arbitration as on alternate dispute resolution mechanism
is now well recognised to be efficient & faster mode for settlement
of disputes than other forums. As per the general experience, other
modes/recourses for adjudication of disputes by courts, tribunals
have been found to be time consuming and in some cases also
involving higher costs.”
40. On being asked about fixation of a time period for arbitration
of disputes, the Ministry furnished following reply in their written
submission:
“In our opinion providing fixed time period may not serve any
special purpose as in case of genuine and satisfactory reasons
(submitted before the arbitrator by the parties) it would be
expedient in the interest of justice to grant time to the respective
party and the arbitrator may be required to grant time in such
event. Similarly, the inability of an arbitrator to conduct the
proceeding on a given day on account of any genuine and
satisfactory reason, could also be a cause for further delay in
completion of the proceeding within the pre-prescribed time limit.
Moreover, the arbitration proceeding (as provided and contemplated
under the Bill as per provisions of clause 18 thereof) refers to the
provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (which is a
legislation brought into force after due consideration thereof).”
41. The Committee note that dispute resolution mechanism as
provided in clause 18 of the Bill, is through conciliation and
arbitration as provided in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Further, this mode has been preferred to other modes/recourses for
adjudication of disputes such as courts and tribunals, because it is
supposed to be faster and cheaper mechanism for settlement of
disputes. The Committee take note of the fact that there is no specific
time frame within which the disputes are to be settled by the
arbitrator. The Committee opine that it would be better to specify
the time frame within which all disputes are to be resolved. The
Act could provide flexibility in this regard, by providing for extension
of time limit in exceptional cases where situation demands so. This

19
way, faster settlement of disputes can be ensured and there will not
be any backlog of cases which may prove costly to all the parties
involved.
42. They find that IBA while deposing before the Committee
have suggested for setting up of an institution of ombudsman for
this purpose. They are of the view that ombudsman are giving
satisfactory services to the people in various areas. Hence, the
Committee recommend to the government to set up an institution of
ombudsman so as to ensure effective and speedier mechanism for
resolution of disputes.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ. GEN. (RETD.) B.C. KHANDURI,
23 February, 2005 Chairman,
4 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 4th January, 2005 from 1200 to
1315 hrs. and again from 1500 to 1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Shyama Charan Gupt
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Mishra
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
10. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Vijoy Krishna
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Murli Deora
13. Shri R.P . Goenka
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu
16. Shri Chittabrata Mazumdar
17. Shri Amar Singh
18. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
19. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
20

21
Part I
WITNESSES
1. Shri Satish Mehta, MD, Credit Information Bureau (India)
Ltd.
2. Shri Rajesh Mirchandani, Director, Dun & Bradstreet
Information Services (India) Pvt. Ltd.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Credit Information Bureau (India) Ltd. (CIBIL) and Dun & Bradstreet
Information Services (India) Pvt. Ltd. to the sitting of the Committee
and invited their attention to the provisions contained in Direction 55
of Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then the Committee heard their views on various provisions of
the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004. The Chairman
then asked them to furnish information on certain issues on which
clarifications were sought by the Members.
4. The evidence was concluded.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part-II
W
ITNESSES
1. Shri M.R. Umerji, Consultant, Indian Banks Association
2. Shri S.S. Kohli, CMD, Punjab National Bank
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Indian Banks’ Association and Punjab National Bank to the sitting of
the Committee and invited their attention to the provisions contained
in Direction 55 of Directions by the Speaker.
3. Then the Committee heard their views on various provisions of
the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004. The Chairman
then asked them to furnish information on certain issues on which
clarifications were sought by the Members.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The witnesses then withdrew
(The Committee then adjourned to meet again on
5th January, 2005 at 1100 hours.)

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Tuesday , 18 January, 2005 from 1500 to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
5. Shri Bir Singh Mahato
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri Shriniwas D. Patil
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
11. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
12. Shri Vijoy Krishna
13. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Shri Yashwant Sinha
16. Shri Chittabrata Majumdar
17. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
18. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
22

23
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance, Banking Division
1. Shri N.S. Sisodia, Secretary (FS)
2. Shri Vinod Rai, Additional Secretary (FS)
3. Shri Amitabh Verma, Joint Secretary (BO)
4. Shri Ram Muivah, Director (BOA)
5. Shri D.P . Bhardwaj, Under Secretary (BOA)
Ministry of Law & Justice—Legislative Department
Shri V .K. Bhasin, Joint Secretary
Indian Banks Association
Shri M.R. Umarji, Legal Advisor
Reserve Bank of India
3. Shri Prashant Saran, CGM
4. Shri B.B. Tiwari, Additional Legal Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Banking
Division), Ministry of Law & Justice—Legislative Department, Indian
Banks Association and Reserve Bank of India to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to the Direction 55 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives in
connection with the examination of the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Bill, 2004. The Chairman then asked them to furnish
information on certain issues on which clarifications were sought by
the Members. Thereafter, the Chairman directed the representatives of
the Ministry to furnish replies to the points raised by Members which
were not readily available with them.
4. The evidence was concluded.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept
The witnesses then withdrew.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, 14th February, 2005 from 1500 to
1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B.C. Khanduri— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bishnoi
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Gurudas Kamat
5. Shri A. Krishnaswamy
6. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
7. Shri Rupchand Pal
8. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri R.P . Goenka
10. Shri Yashwant Sinha
11. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
12. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Dr. (Smt.) P .K. Sandhu — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
24

25
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft reports
on “Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Bill, 2004”. The
Committee after deliberation adopted the draft Report with
modifications/amendments as shown in the Annexure.
4. The Committee, thereafter authorized the Chairman to finalise
the Report in the light of suggestions received from the Members and
also make consequential verbal changes and present the same to the
Hon’ble Speaker/both Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE
(MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON THE CREDIT
INFORMATION COMPANIES (REGULATION) BILL, 2004 OF THE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS—
BANKING DIVISION) AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 14 FEBRUARY, 2005
Page Para Line Modification
No. No. No.
12 3 4
81 7 3  to 6 Delete:
“The Committee do not agree with the
contention of the Government that more
number of credit information companies
should be formed so as to leave little or
no gap in collection of credit information
from the vast geographical area and
different sectors of the economy.”
7 & 8 For:
“They agree with the views expressed by
the representative of Indian Banks’
Association and are”
Substitute:
“On the other hand Indian Banks’
Association is”
10 For:
“They are of the view that”
Substitute:
“The Committee are of the view that
whereas too many Credit Information
Companies may not be desirable, yet in a
big country like ours it is necessary that
all regions of Country must be covered.
Hence,”
26

27
12 3 4
15 For:
“should have judicial discretion to decide
on the number of credit”
Substitute:
“should have discretion to decide, keeping
the above in view, on the number of
credit”
11 22 13 to 19 For:
“The Committee recommend that the
Government should also examine the
desirability of setting up a financial
services appellate authority which may
not only hear appeals which lie to
Securities Appellate Tribunal but also look
into issues involving the entire gamut of
financial services including credit
information so that it could lead to
integration in financial services both in
regulation and the appellate side.”
Substitute:
“Initially the Securities Appellate Tribunal
(SAT) should function as the appellate
authority which can have expert(s), if
required. If the workload so dictates, the
Government may consider constituting a
separate appellate authority in due
course.”

AS I NTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XXXII of 2004
THE CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
(REGULATION) BILL, 2004
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
3. Prohibition to commence or carry on business of credit
information.
4. Application for registration.
5. Grant of certificate of registration.
6. Power of Reserve Bank to cancel certificate of registration.
7. Appeal against order of Reserve Bank.
8. Requirement as to minimum capital.
CHAPTER III
M
ANAGEMENT OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
9. Management of credit information company.
10. Power of Reserve Bank to determine policy.
11. Power of Reserve Bank to give directions.
12. Inspection of credit information company, credit institution
and specified user.
28

29
CHAPTER IV
AUDITORS
  13. Powers and duties of auditors.
CHAPTER V
FUNCTIONS OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
14. Functions of a credit information company.
15. Credit Institution to be member of a credit information
company.
16. Failure to become a member of a credit information
company.
17. Collection and furnishing of credit information.
18. Settlement of dispute.
CHAPTER VI
I
NFORMATION PRIVACY PRINCIPLES AND FURNISHING OF
CREDIT INFORMATION
19. Accuracy and security of credit information.
20. Privacy principles.
21. Alteration of credit information files and credit reports.
22. Unauthorised access to credit information.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
23. Offences and penalties.
24. Cognizance of offences.
25. Power of Reserve Bank to impose penalty.
26. Application of fines.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. Power of Reserve Bank to specify maximum amount of fees.
28. Disclosure of information before any court or tribunal or
authority.
29. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.

30
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.
31. Bar of jurisdiction.
32. Power of Reserve Bank to exempt in certain cases.
33. Application of other laws not barred.
34. Amendment of certain enactments.
35. Removal of difficulties.
36. Power to make rules.
37. Power of Reserve Bank to make regulations.
THE SCHEDULE

AS I NTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. XXXII of 2004
THE CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
(REGULATION) BILL, 2004
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of credit information companies and to facilitate
efficient distribution of credit and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Credit
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2004.
  ( 2) It extends to the whole of India.
  ( 3) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act,
and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “board” means the Board of directors
of a credit information company;
(b) “borrower” means any person who has
been granted loan on any other credit facility
by a credit institution and includes a client of
a credit institution;
31
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.

32
(c) “client” includes—
(i) a guarantor or a person who
proposes to give guarantee or security for
a borrower of a credit institution; or
(ii) a person—
(A) who has obtained or seeks to
obtain financial assistance from a credit
institution, by way of loans, advances,
hire purchase, leasing facility, letter of
credit, guarantee facility, venture capital
assistance or by way of credit cards or
in any other form or manner;
(B) who has raised or seeks to raise
money by issue of security as defined
in clause (h) of section 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1956, or by issue of commercial paper,
depository receipt or any other
instrument;
(C) whose financial standing has
been assessed or is proposed to be
assessed by a credit institution or any
other person or institution as may, by
notification, be directed by the Reserve
Bank;
(d) “credit information” means any
information relating to—
(i) the amounts and the nature of loans
or advances, amounts outstanding under
credit cards and other credit facilities
granted or to be granted, by a credit
institution to any borrower;
(ii) the nature of security taken or
proposed to be taken by a credit institution
from any borrower for credit facilities
granted or proposed to be granted to him;
(iii) the guarantee furnished or any
other non-fund based facility granted or
proposed to be granted by a credit
institution for any of its borrowers;
2 of 1956

33
(iv) the credit worthiness of any
borrower of a credit institution;
(v) any other matter which the Reserve
bank may, consider necessary for inclusion
in the credit information to the collected
and maintained by credit information
companies, and specify, by notification, in
this behalf;
(e) “credit information company” means a
company formed and registered under the
companies Act, 1956 and which has been
granted a certificate of registration under sub-
section (2) of section 5;
(f) “credit institution” means a banking
company and includes—
(i) a corresponding new bank, the State
Bank of India, a subsidiary bank, a co-
operative bank, the National Bank and
regional rural bank;
(ii) a non-banking financial company as
defined under clause (f) of section 45-I of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(iii) a public financial institution
referred to in section 4A of the Companies
Act, 1956;
(iv) the financial corporation established
by a State under section 3 of the State
Financial Corporation Act, 1951;
(v) the housing finance institution
referred to in clause (d) of section 2 of the
National Housing Bank Act, 1987;
(vi) the companies, engaged in the
business of credit cards and other similar
cards and companies dealing with
distribution of credit in any other manner;
(vii) any other institution which the
Reserve Bank may specify, from time to
time, for the purposes of this clause;
1 of 1956
2 of 1934
2 of 1956
63 of 1951
53 of 1987

34
(g) “credit scoring” means a system which
enables a credit institution to assess the credit
worthiness and capacity of a borrower to repay
his loan and advances and discharge his other
obligations in respect of credit facility availed
or to be availed by him;
(h) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette of India;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules
made under this Act;
(j) “regulations” means regulations made by
the Reserve Bank under this Act;
(k) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank
of India constituted under section 3 of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(l) “specified user” means any credit
institution, credit information company being a
member under sub-section (3) of section 15, and
includes such other person or institution as may
be specified by regulations made, from time to
time, by the Reserve Bank for the purpose of
obtaining credit information from a credit
information company;
(m) words and expressions used herein and
not defined in this Act but defined in the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 or the Companies Act,
1956 shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
R
EGISTRATION OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
3. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
no company shall commence or carry on the
business of credit information without obtaining
a certificate of registration from the Reserve
Bank under this Act.
Prohibition
to
commence
or carry on
business of
credit
information.
2 of 1934
1 of 1934
1 of 1949
1 of 1956

35
4. (1) Every company which intends to
commence the business of credit information
shall make an application for registration to the
Reserve Bank in such form and manner as may
be specified by regulations.,
(2) Every credit information company, in
existence on the commencement of this Act,
before the expiry of six months from such
commencement, shall apply in writing to the
Reserve Bank for obtaining a certificate of
registration under this Act:
Provided that in the case of a credit
information company in existence on the
commencement of this Act, nothing in section
3 shall be deemed to prohibit such credit
information company from carrying on the
business of a credit information company, until
it is granted a certificate of registration or is
by notice in writing informed by the Reserve
Bank that a certificate of registration cannot be
granted to it.
5. (1) The Reserve Bank may, for the
purpose of considering the application of a
company for grant of a certificate of registration
to commence or carry on the business of credit
information, require to be satisfied, by an
inspection of records or books of such company
or otherwise that the following conditions are
fulfilled, namely:—
(a) that the applicant company has
minimum capital structure referred to in section
8;
(b) that the general character of the
management or the proposed management of
the applicant company shall not be prejudicial
to the interest of its specified users, clients or
borrowers or other credit information
companies;
Application
for
registration.
Grant of
certificate of
registration.

36
(c) that any other condition, the fulfilment
of which in the opinion of the Reserve Bank,
shall be necessary to ensure that the
commencement or carrying on of the business
of credit information by the applicant company
shall not be detrimental or prejudicial to the
public interest or banking policy or credit
system or its specified users or clients or
borrowers or other credit information
companies or others who would provide credit
information to the credit information
companies.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, after being
satisfied that the conditions as referred to in
sub-section (1) are fulfilled, grant a certificate
of registration to the applicant company to
commence or carry on the business of credit
information, subject to such conditions which
it may consider fit to impose and if the
company fails to fulfil any of such conditions
or any of the provisions of this Act, the
application of the company shall be rejected:
Provided that no application shall be
rejected unless the applicant has been given an
opportunity of being heard.
6. (1) The Reserve Bank may cancel a
certificate of registration granted to a credit
information company under sub-section (2) of
section 5 if such company,—
(i) ceases to carry on the business of
credit information; or
(ii) has failed to comply with any of
the conditions subject to which the
certificate of registration has been granted
to it; or
(iii)at any time fails to fulfil any of the
conditions referred to in sub-clauses (a) to
(c) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of
section 5; or
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
cancel
certificate of
registration.

37
(iv) fails—
(a) to comply with provisions of
any law for the time being in force or
any direction issued by the Reserve
Bank under the provisions of this Act;
or
(b) to submit or offer for inspection
its books of account and other relevant
documents when so demanded by the
officers, persons or agency referred to
in sub-section (1) of section 12.
(2) Before cancelling the certificate of
registration granted to a credit information
company under this section on the ground that
the company has failed to comply with the
conditions specified in clauses (a) to (c) of sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 5 or the
provisions of any other law for the time being
in force or directions issued under this Act,
the Reserve Bank, shall grant time to such
company on such terms as the Reserve Bank
may deem appropriate for taking necessary
steps to comply with such directions or
provisions or fulfilment of such conditions,
within such time;
Provided that if the Reserve Bank is of the
opinion that the delay in cancelling the
certificate of registration of such company shall
be prejudicial or detrimental to the public
interest or banking policy or credit system or
borrowers or other credit information
companies, the Reserve Bank may cancell the
certificate of registration without granting time
as provided in sub-section (2).
(3) No order of cancellation of certificate of
registration granted to a credit information
company shall be made by the Reserve Bank
unless such company has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.

38
7. (1) A credit information company
aggrieved by the order of rejection of an
application for grant of certificate of registration
under section 5 or cancellation of certificate of
registration under section 6, may prefer an
appeal to the Central Government, within a
period of thirty days from the date on which
such order of rejection or cancellation, as the
case may be, is communicated to the credit
information company.
(2) The decision of the Central Government,
where an appeal has been preferred to it under
sub-section (1), or of the Reserve Bank where
no such appeal has been preferred shall be
final:
Provided that before making any order of
rejection of an appeal, the applicant company
or the credit information company, as the case
may be, shall be given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard.
8. (1) The authorised capital of every credit
information company shall be a minimum of
thirty crores:
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, by
notification, increase the minimum amount of
authorised capital to any amount not exceeding
fifty crores.
(2) The issued capital of every credit
information company shall not be less than
twenty crores:
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, by
notification, increase the issued capital to any
amount not exceeding the minimum amount
of authorised capital as referred to in sub-
section (1).
(3) The minimum paid up capital of every
credit information company at any time shall
not be less than seventy five per cent. of the
issued capital.
Appeal
against
order of
Reserve
Bank.
Requirement
as to
minimum
capital.

39
CHAPTER III
MANAGEMENT OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in any law for the time being in force, or in
any contract to the contrary, every credit
information company in existence on the
commencement of this Act, or which comes into
existence thereafter, shall have one of its
directors, who may be appointed on whole time
or on a part time basis as chairperson of its
board, and where he is appointed on whole
time basis as chairperson of its board, he shall
be entrusted with the management of the whole
of the affairs of the credit information company:
Provided that the chairperson of the board
of the credit information company shall exercise
his powers subject to the superintendence,
control and directions of the board.
(2) Where a chairperson is appointed on a
part time basis, the management of whole of
the affairs of the credit information company
shall be entrusted to a managing director or, a
whole time director by whatever name called,
who shall exercise his powers subject to the
superintendence, control and directions of the
board.
(3) In addition to the chairperson or
managing director or whole-time director, by
whatever name called, the board of directors
shall consist of not less than fifty per cent.
directors who shall be persons having special
knowledge in, or practical experience of, the
matters relating to public administration, law,
banking, finance, accountancy, management and
information technology.
(4) In discharging its functions, the board
shall act on business principles and shall have
due regard to the interest of its specified users,
credit institutions or the clients or borrowers
of credit institutions.
Management
of credit
information
company.

40
(5) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that
it is in the public interest or in the interest of
banking policy or credit system of the country,
or for preventing the affairs of any credit
information company being managed in a
manner detrimental to the interest of banking
policy or credit institutions or borrowers or
clients or for securing the proper management
of any credit information company, it is
necessary so to do, the Reserve Bank may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order
published in the Official Gazette, supersede the
board of such company, for such period not
exceeding six months, as may be specified, in
the order and which may be extended from
time to time, so, however, that the total period
shall not exceed twelve months:
Provided that before making any such
order, the Reserve Bank shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the board of such credit
information company to make representation
against the proposed supersession and shall
consider the representation, if any, of the board.
(6) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession
of the board of a credit information company
under sub-section (5), appoint an Administrator
for such period and on such salary and other
terms and conditions as it may determine.
(7) The Reserve Bank may issue such
directions to the Administrator as it may deem
appropriate and the Administrator shall be
bound to follow such directions.
(8) Upon making of the order under sub-
section (5), superseding the board of a credit
information company—
(a) the chairperson, managing director and
other directors of such credit information
company shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 or this Act or any other
law for the time being in force, be exercised or
1 of 1956

41
discharged, by or on behalf of the board of
such credit information company, or by a
resolution passed in general meeting of that
company, shall, until the reconstitution of its
board under sub-section (10), be exercised and
discharged by the Administrator appointed by
the Reserve Bank under sub-section (6):
Provided that the power exercised by the
Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding
that such powers are exercisable by a resolution
passed in the general meeting of such credit
information company.
(9) The salary and allowances payable to
the Administrator and staff assisting the
Administrator shall be borne by the credit
information company.
(10) On and before the expiration of two
months before expiry of the period of
supersession mentioned in the order of the
Reserve Bank issued under sub-section (5), the
Administrator of the credit information
company, shall call a general meeting of the
credit information company to elect new
directors and reconstitute its board and any
person who had vacated his office under clause
(a) of sub-section (8), shall not be deemed to
be disqualified for re-appointment.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any law for the time being in force or in any
contract or the memorandum or articles of
association, of the credit information company,
on the removal of a person from office under
this section, that person shall not be entitled to
claim any compensation for the loss or
termination of office.
10. Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied that
it is necessary or expedient in the public
interest or in the interest of specified users or
in the interest of credit information companies
or credit institutions or clients or borrowers so
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
determine
policy.

42
to do, it may determine the policy in relation
to functioning of credit information companies
or credit institutions or specified users generally
or in particular and when the policy has been
so determined all credit information companies,
credit institutions and specified users, as the
case may be, shall be bound to follow the
policy as so determined.
11. (1) Where the Reserve Bank is satisfied
that,—
(a) in the public interest; or
(b) in the interest of credit institutions;
or
(c) in the interest of specified users; or
(d) in the interest of banking policy; or
(e) to prevent the affairs of any credit
information company being conducted in a
manner detrimental to the interests of its
specified users or in a manner prejudicial
to the interests of credit institutions or
borrowers or clients; or
(f) to secure the proper management of
credit information companies generally, it
is necessary to issue directions to credit
information companies or credit institutions
or specified users generally or to any credit
information company or credit institution
or specified user in particular, it may, from
time to time, issue such directions as it
deems fit, and such credit information
companies, credit institutions and specified
users or credit information company, credit
institution, and specified user, as the case
may be, shall be bound to comply with
such directions.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on
representation made to it or on its own motion,
modify or cancel any direction issued under
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
give
directions.

43
sub-section (1), and the Reserve Bank, in so
modifying or cancelling any direction, may
impose such conditions as it thinks fit, subject
to which the modification or cancellation shall
have effect.
(3) The Reserve Bank may, at any time, if
it is satisfied that in the public interest or in
the interest of a credit information company or
its members, it is necessary so to do, by order
in writing and on such terms and conditions
as may be specified therein,—
(a) require such credit information
company to call a meeting of its directors
for the purpose of considering any matter
relating to or arising out of the affairs of
the credit information company;
(b) depute one or more of its officers
to watch the proceedings at any meeting
of the board of the credit information
company or of any committee or of any
other body constituted by it and require
the credit information company to give an
opportunity to the officers so deputed to
be heard at such meetings and also require
such officers to send a report of such
proceedings to the Reserve Bank;
(c) require that board of the credit
information company or of any committee
or any other body constituted by it to give
in writing to any officer deputed by the
Reserve Bank in this behalf at his usual
address all notices of, and other
communications relating to, any meeting of
the board, committee or other body
constituted by it;
(d) appoint one or more of its officers
to observe the manner in which the affairs
of the credit information company or of its
officers or branches are being conducted
and make a report thereon;

44
(e) require the credit information
company to make, within such time as may
be specified in the order, such changes in
the management as the Reserve Bank may
consider necessary.
(4) The Reserve Bank may, at any time,
direct any credit information company to
furnish it within such time as may be specified
by the Reserve Bank, such statements and
information relating to the business or affairs
of the credit information company as the
Reserve Bank may consider necessary or
expedient to obtain for the purpose of this Act.
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in section 235 of the
Companies Act, 1956, the Reserve Bank, at any
time, may and on being directed so to do by
the Central Government shall, cause an
inspection to be made by one or more of its
officers or through such other persons or
agency as the Reserve Bank may determine, of
any credit information company or credit
institution or specified user and their books and
account; and the Reserve Bank shall supply to
the credit information company or credit
institution or specified user, as the case may
be, a copy of its report on such inspection.
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or
other officer or employee of the credit
information company, credit institution and
specified user to produce to any officer or
person or agency, as the case may be, making
an inspection under sub-section (1) all such
books, accounts and other documents in his
custody or power and to furnish him with any
statement and information relating to the affairs
of such credit information company, credit
institution and specified user, as the said officer
or person or agency may require of him within
such time as the said officer or person or
agency may specify.
Inspection
of credit
information
company,
credit
institution
and
specified
user.

45
(3) Any officer of the Reserve Bank or
person or an agency making an inspection
under sub-section (1) may examine on oath any
director or other officer or employee of the
credit information company, credit institution
and specified user, in relation to their business,
and may administer an oath accordingly.
(4) The expenses of, or incidental to, the
inspection under sub-section (1) by any person
or an agency referred to in sub-section (1) shall
be borne by the concerned credit information
company or credit institution or specified user,
as the case may be.
CHAPTER IV
A
UDITORS
13. (1) It shall be the duty of an auditor of
a credit information company to inquire
whether or not the credit information company
has furnished to the Reserve Bank such
statements, information or particulars relating
to its business as are required to be furnished
under this Act and the auditor shall, except
where he is satisfied on such inquiry that the
credit information company has furnished such
a statement, information or particulars, make a
report to the Reserve Bank in this regard.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on being
satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in the
pubic interest or in the interest of credit system,
issue directions in particular or in general with
respect to audit of the credit information
company and submission of the report to the
Reserve Bank.
(3) Where the Reserve Bank is of the
opinion that it is necessary so to do in the
public interest or in the interest of the credit
information company or its members, or in the
interest of credit system or credit institution or
its borrower or client so to do, it may, at any
time, by an order, direct that a special audit of
Powers and
duties of
auditors.

46
the accounts of the credit information company
in relation to any such transaction or class of
transactions or for such period or periods, as
may be mentioned in the order, shall be
conducted and the Reserve Bank may by such
order or by a separate order either appoint an
auditor or auditors or direct the auditor of the
credit information company himself to conduct
such special audit and the auditor shall comply
with such directions and make a report of such
audit to the Reserve Bank and forward a copy
thereof to the credit information company.
(4) The remuneration of the auditors as may
be fixed by the Reserve Bank, having regard to
the nature and volume of work involved in
the audit and the expenses of, or incidental to,
the audit, shall be borne by the credit
information company so audited.
CHAPTER V
F
UNCTIONS OF CREDIT INFORMATION COMPANIES
14. (1) A credit information company may
engage in any one or more of the following
forms of business, namely:—
(a) to collect, process and collate
information on trade, credit and financial
standing of the borrowers of the credit
institution which is a member of the credit
information company;
(b) to provide credit information to its
specified users or to the specified users of
any other credit information company or
to any other credit information company
being its member;
(c) to provide credit scoring to its
specified users or specified users of any
other credit information company or to
other credit information companies being
its member;
(d) to undertake research project;
Functions
of a credit
information
company.

47
(e) to undertake any other form of
business which the Reserve Bank may,
specify by regulations as a form of business
in which it is lawful for a credit information
company to engage.
(2) No credit information company for the
purposes of shall engage in any form of
business other than those referred to in sub-
section (1).
(3) Any credit information company
carrying on the business of credit information
may—
(a) register credit institutions and other
credit information companies, at their
option as its member, subject to such terms
and conditions as may be pre-determined
and disclosed by such credit information
company;
(b) charge such reasonable amount of
fees, as it may deem appropriate not
exceeding the maximum fee, as may be
specified under section 27, for furnishing
credit information to a specified user;
(c) generally to do all such other acts
and perform such other functions as are
necessary to facilitate proper conduct of its
affairs, business and functions in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.
15. (1) Every credit institution in existence
on the commencement of this Act, before the
expiry of three months from such
commencement or within such extended period,
as the Reserve Bank may allow on its
application and subject to being satisfied about
the reason for extension, shall become member
of at least one credit information company.
(2) Every credit institution which comes
into existence after the commencement of this
Act, before the expiry of three months from its
Credit
Institution
to be
member of
a credit
information
company .

48
coming into existence, or within such extended
period, as the Reserve Bank may allow on its
application and subject to being satisfied about
the reason for extension, shall become member
of at least one credit information company.
(3) A credit information company may, at
its option, become member of another credit
information company.
(4) No credit information company shall
refuse to register a credit institution or another
credit information company as its member
without providing reasonable opportunity of
being heard to such credit institution or credit
information company, whose application it
proposes to reject and recording reasons for
such rejection and a copy of such order of
rejection shall be forwarded to the Reserve
Bank.
(5) A credit institution or credit information
company aggrieved by the order of rejection of
its application for its registration as a member
of a credit information company under sub-
section (4) may prefer an appeal to the Reserve
Bank, within a period of thirty days from the
date on which such order of rejection was
communicated to it:
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, if it
is satisfied that the appellant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within
the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding thirty days.
(6) On receipt of an appeal under sub-
section (5), the Reserve Bank, after giving the
appellant and other concerned parties, an
opportunity of being heard, pass such order as
it deems fit.
(7) The decision of the Reserve Bank where
an appeal has been preferred to it under sub-
section (5) shall be final and the order of the

49
credit information company under sub-
section (4) shall be final after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days where no appeal has
been preferred under that sub-section to the
Reserve Bank.
(8) Every specified user shall be entitled to
obtain credit information for its use from the
credit information company of which such
specified user is a member.
16. (1) Where a credit institution—
(a) abstains from becoming a member
of at least one credit information company;
or
(b) at any time is not a member of any
credit information company, the Reserve
Bank suo moto  or on a complaint from a
credit information company may, direct
such credit institution to take necessary
steps within such time, as it may specify
to become a member of a credit information
company.
(2) In case a credit institution fails to
comply with the directions of the Reserve Bank
under sub-section (1), to become member of at
least one credit information company, the
Reserve bank may, without prejudice to the
provisions of this Act, intimate such failure to
any other authority for taking such action as it
may deem fit.
17. (1) A credit information company or any
person authorised in that behalf by the
company may, by notice in writing, in such
form, as may be specified by regulations made
by the Reserve Bank or as near thereto, require
its members being credit institution or credit
information company, to furnish such credit
information as it may deem necessary in
accordance with this Act.
(2) Every credit institution which is member
of the credit information company and every
Failure to
become a
member of
a credit
information
company.
Collection
and
furnishing
of credit
information.

50
credit information company which is a member
of other credit information company shall, on
receipt of notice under sub-section (1), provide
credit information to the credit information
company of which it is a member, within such
period as may be specified in the notice.
(3) Every credit information company shall
provide for such purpose, as may be specified
by regulations, the credit information received
under sub-section (2), to its specified user on
receipt of request from him in accordance with
the provisions of this Act and directions issued
thereunder by the Reserve Bank from time to
time in this behalf.
(4) No credit information received under
this Act,—
(a) by the credit information company
shall be disclosed to any person other than
its specified user; or
(b) by the specified user shall be
disclosed to any other person;
(c) by the credit information company
or specified user; shall be disclosed for any
other purpose than as permitted or required
by any other law for the time being in
force.
18. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in any law for the time being in force, if any
dispute arises amongst, credit information
companies, credit institutions, borrowers and
clients on matters relating to business of credit
information and for which no remedy has been
provided under this Act, such disputes shall
be settled by conciliation or arbitration as
provided in the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996, as if the parties to the dispute have
consented in writing for determination of such
dispute by conciliation or arbitration and
provisions of that Act shall apply accordingly.
Settlement
of dispute.
26 of 1996.

51
(2) Where a dispute has been referred to
arbitration under sub-section (1), the same shall
be settled or decided by the arbitrator to be
appointed by the Reserve Bank.
(3) Save as otherwise provided under this
Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to all
arbitration under this Act as if the proceedings
for arbitration were referred for settlement or
decision under the provisions of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996.
CHAPTER VI
I
NFORMATION PRIVACY PRINCIPLES AND FURNISHING
OF CREDIT INFORMATION
19. A credit information company or credit
institution or specified user, as the case may
be, in possession or control of credit
information, shall take such steps (including
security safeguard) as may be prescribed, to
ensure that the data relating to the credit
information maintained by them is accurate,
complete, duly protected against any loss or
unauthorised access or use or unauthorised
disclosure thereof.
20. Every credit information company, credit
institution and specified user, shall adopt the
following privacy principles in relation to
collection, processing, collating, recording,
preservation, secrecy, sharing and usage of
credit information, namely:—
(a) the principles—
(i) which may be followed by every
credit institution for collection of
information from its borrowers and clients
and by every credit information company,
for collection of information from its
member credit institutions or credit
information companies, for processing,
recording, protecting the data relating to
Accuracy
andd
security of
credit
information.
Privacy
principles.

52
credit information furnished by , or obtained
from, there member credit institutions or
credit information companies, as the case
may be, and sharing of such data with
specified users;
(ii) which may be adopted by every
specified user for processing, recording,
preserving and protecting the data relating
to credit information furnished, or received,
as the case may be, by it;
(iii) which may be adopted by every
credit information company for allowing
access to records containing credit
information of borrowers and clients and
alteration of such records in case of need
to do so;
(b) the purposes for which the credit
information may be used, restriction on such
use and disclosure thereof;
(c) the extent of obligation to check
accuracy of credit information before furnishing
of such information to credit information
companies or credit institutions or specified
users, as the case may be;
(d) preservation of credit information
maintained by every credit information
company, credit institution, and specified user
as the case may be (including the period for
which such information may be maintained,
manner of deletion of such information and
maintenance of records of credit information);
(e) networking of credit information
companies, credit institutions and specified
users through electronic mode;
(f) any other principles and procedures
relating to credit information which the Reserve
Bank may consider necessary and appropriate
and may be specified by regulations.

53
21. (1) Any person, who applies for grant
or sanction of credit facility, from any credit
institution may request to such institution to
furnish him a copy of the credit information
obtained by such institution from the credit
information company.
(2) Every credit institution shall, on receipt
of request under sub-section (1), furnish to the
person referred to in that sub-section a copy of
the credit information subject to payment of
such charges, as may be specified by
regulations, by the Reserve Bank in this regard.
(3) If a credit information company or
specified user or credit institution in possession
or control of the credit information, has not
updated the information maintained by it, a
borrower or client may request all or any of
them to update the information; whether by
making an appropriate correction, or addition
or otherwise, and on such request the credit
information company or the specified user or
the credit institution, as the case may be, shall
take appropriate steps to update the credit
information within thirty days after being
requested to do so:
Provided that the credit information
company and the specified user shall make the
correction, deletion or addition in the credit
information only after such correction, deletion
or addition has been certified as correct by the
concerned credit institution:
Provided further that no such correction,
deletion or addition shall be made in the credit
information if any dispute relating to such
correction, deletion or addition is pending
before any arbitrator or tribunal or court and
in cases where such dispute is pending, the
entries in the books of the concerned credit
institution shall be taken into account for the
purpose of credit information.
Alteration
of credit
information
files and
credit
reports.

54
22. (1) No person shall have access to credit
information in the possession or control of a
credit information company or a credit
institution or a specified user unless the access
is authorised by this Act or any other law for
the time being in force or directed to do so by
any court or tribunal and any such access to
credit information without such authorisation
or direction shall be considered as an
unauthorised access to credit information.
(2) Any person who obtains unauthorised
access to credit information as referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees in respect
of each offence and if he continues to have
such unauthorised access, with further fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees for
every day on which the default continues and
such unauthorised credit information shall not
be taken into account for any purpose.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
23. (1) Whoever, in any return or other
document or in any information required or
furnished by, or under, or for, the purposes of
any provision of this Act, wilfully makes a
statement which is false in any material
particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully
omits to make a material statement, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year and shall also be liable
to fine.
(2) Every credit information company or a
credit institution or any specified user wilfully
performing any act or engaging in any practice,
in breach of any of the Principles referred to
in Section 20, shall be punishable with fine not
exceeding one crore.
(3) Any credit information company or
credit institution or specified user wilfully
providing to any other credit information
company or credit institution or specified user
or borrower or client, as the case may be, credit
Unauthorised
access to
credit
information.
Offences
and
penalties.

55
information which is false in any material
particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully
omits to make a material statement, shall be
punishable, with fine which may extend to one
crore.
(4) Any person who contravenes any
provision of this Act or of any rule or order
made thereunder, or obstructs the lawful
exercise of any power conferred by or under
this Act, or makes default in complying with
any requirement of this Act or of any rule or
order made or direction issued thereunder,
shall, if no specific provision is made under
this Act for punishment of such contravention,
obstruction or default, be punishable with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees and
where a contravention or default is a continuing
one, with a further fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees for every day during
which the contravention or default continues.
(5) Where a contravention or default has
been committed by a credit information
company or credit institution or specified user,
as the case may be, every person who, at the
time the contravention or default was
committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to the credit information company
or credit institution or specified user for the
conduct of its business, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the contravention or default and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act if he
proves that the contravention or default was
committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the
contravention or default.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (5), where a contravention or default
has been committed by a credit information
company or credit institution or specified user,

56
as the case may be, and it is proved that the
same was committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any gross
negligence on the part of its chairperson,
managing director, any other director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the credit
information company or the credit institution,
such chairperson, managing director, any other
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that
contravention or default and shall be liable to
be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “company” means any body
corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals, and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm,
means a partner in the firm.
24. (1) No court shall take cognizance of
any offence committed by a member of a credit
information company and punishable under
section 23 except upon complaint in writing
made by an officer of the credit information
company generally or specially authorised in
writing in this behalf by the credit information
company or if so directed by the Reserve Bank
so to do and no court other than that of a
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate
of the first class or any court superior thereto
shall try any such offence.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, “member of a credit information
company” shall mean a member referred to in
section 15.
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any
offence committed by a credit information
company punishable under section 23 except
upon complaint in writing made by an officer
of the Reserve Bank generally or specially
Cognizance
of offences.

57
authorised in writing in this behalf by the
Reserve Bank and no court other than that of
a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class or any court
superior thereto shall try any such offence.
25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 23, if a contravention or default of
the nature referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 22 or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3)
or sub-section (4) of section 23, as the case may
be, is made by a credit information company
or a credit institution then, the Reserve Bank
may impose on such credit information
company or credit institution—
(i) where the contravention is of the
nature referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 22, a penalty not exceeding one lakh
rupees;
(ii) where the contravention is of the
nature referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) of section 23, a penalty not
exceeding one crore;
(iii) where the contravention is of the
nature referred to in sub-section (4) of
section 23, a penalty not exceeding one lakh
rupees and where such contravention or
default is continuing one, a further penalty
which may extend to five thousand rupees
for every day, after the first, during which
the contravention or default continues.
(2) For the purpose of adjudging the
penalty under sub-section (1), the Reserve Bank
shall serve notice on credit information
company or credit institution or specified user,
as the case may be, requiring it to show cause
as to why the amount mentioned in the notice
should not be imposed as penalty and a
reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also
be given to such credit information company
or credit institution or specified user as the case
may be.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
impose
penalty.

58
(3) No complaint shall be filed against
credit information company or credit institution
or specified user, as the case may be, in any
court of law in respect of any contravention or
default in respect of which any penalty has
been imposed by the Reserve Bank under this
section.
(4) Any penalty imposed by the Reserve
Bank under this Act shall be payable within a
period of fourteen days from the date on which
notice issued by the Reserve Bank demanding
payment of the sum is served on the credit
information company or credit institution or
specified user, as the case may be, and in the
event of failure of such credit information
company or credit institution or specified user
to pay the sum within such period, may be
levied on a direction made by the principal
civil court having jurisdiction in the area where
the registered office of credit information
company or credit institution or specified user,
being a company, is situated and in case of
credit institution incorporated outside India
where its principal place of business in India
is situated:
Provided that such direction under this sub-
section shall be made only upon an application
made in this behalf to the court by the Reserve
Bank.
(5) The court which makes a direction
under sub-section (4) shall issue a certificate
mentioning therein the sum payable by a credit
information company or credit institution or
specified user as the case may be, and every
such certificate shall be enforceable in the same
manner as if it were a decree made by the
court in a civil suit.
(6) Where any complaint has been filed
against credit information company or credit
institution or specified user as the case may
be, in any court in respect of the contravention

59
or default of the nature referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 22 and sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 23,
then, no proceedings for the imposition of any
penalty on the credit information company or
credit institution or specified user shall be taken
under this section.
26. A court imposing any fine under this
Act may direct that the whole or any part
thereof shall be applied in or towards payment
of the costs of the proceedings, or for such
purposes as may be directed by the court.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
27. The Reserve Bank may specify by
regulations the maximum amount of fees
leviable under sub-section (3) of section 14 for
providing information to the specified users and
for admissions of credit institutions or credit
information companies as a member of a credit
information company.
28. No chairperson, director, member,
auditor, adviser, officer or other employee or
agent employed in the business of a credit
information company or in the business of a
specified user shall, except for the purposes of
this Act or when required to do so by any
other law in force or court or tribunal or
authority, disclose any information to any
person.
29. (1) Every credit information company
shall observe, except as otherwise required by
law, the practices and usages customary among
credit information companies and it shall not
divulge any information relating to, or to the
affairs of its members or specified users.
(2) Every chairperson, director, member,
auditor, adviser, officer or other employee of a
credit information company shall, before
Application
of fines.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
specify
maximum
amount of
fees.
Disclosure
of
information
before any
court or
tribunal or
authority.
Obligation
as to
fidelity and
secrecy.

60
entering upon his duties, make a declaration
of fidelity and secrecy in the form, as may be
prescribed in this regard.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this
section and section 30 the terms “practices and
usages customary” means such practices and
usages which are generally followed by credit
information companies or may develop in due
course in relation to their functions, in
pursuance of the provisions of this Act, rules
and regulations made and directions issued
thereunder from time to time in pursuance
thereof.
30. (1) No suit or other legal proceedings
or prosecution shall lie against the Reserve
Bank or the Central Government or credit
information company or credit institution, or
their chairperson, director, member, auditor,
adviser, officer or other employee or agent or
any person authorised by the Reserve Bank or
the Central Government or credit information
company or credit institution to discharge any
function under this Act, for any loss or damage
caused or as is likely to be caused by anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be
done, in pursuance of this Act; or any other
law for the time being in force.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1)
shall affect the right of any person to claim
damages against a credit information company,
a credit institution or their chairperson, director,
member, auditor, adviser, officer or other
employee or agents, as the case may be, in
respect of loss caused to him on account of
any such disclosure made by anyone of them
and which is unauthorised or fraudulent or
contrary to provisions of this Act, or practices
or usages customary among them.
31. No court or authority shall have, or be
entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or
authority, except the Supreme Court and a
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Bar of
jurisdiction.

61
High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles
32, 226 and 227 of the Constitution, in relation
to the matters referred to in sections 4, 5, 6, 7
and 18.
32. (1) The Central Government may, on
the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, by
notification in the Official Gazette direct that
any or all of the provisions of this Act shall
not apply to any credit information company
or a credit institution, as the case may be, either
generally or for such period and subject to such
exceptions or modifications, as may be
mentioned in that notification.
(2) A copy of every notification proposed
to be issued under sub-section (1), shall be laid
in draft before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in disapproving the issue
of the notification or both Houses agree in
making any modification in the notification, the
notification shall not be issued or as the case
may be, shall be issued only in such modified
from as may be agreed upon by both the
Houses;
33. The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not, save as provided under
this Act, in derogation of, the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the
time being in force.
34. The enactments mentioned in the
Schedule to this Act shall be amended in the
manner specified therein.
35. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
exempt in
certain
cases.
Application
of other
laws not
barred.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.
Removal of
difficulties.
1 of 1956.

62
inconsistent with the provisions of the Act as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of a period of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
36. (1) The Central Government may, after
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing powers, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the steps to be taken by every credit
information company or credit institution
and specified user for ensuring accuracy,
completeness of data and protection of data
from any loss or unauthorised access or use
of disclosure under section 19;
(b) the form in which a declaration of
fidelity and secrecy shall be made under
sub-section (2) of section 29;
(c) any other matter which is required
to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House
agree in making any modification in the
Power to
make rules.

63
regulation or both Houses agree that the
regulation should not be made, the regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that regulation.
37. (1) The Reserve Bank may make
regulations consistent with the provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder to carry
out the purposes of the Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing powers, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the persons or institutions which
may be specified as specified users under
clause (l) of section 2;
(b) the form in which application may
be made under sub-section (1) of section 4
and the manner of filing such application
under that sub-section;
(c) any other form of business in which
a credit information company may engage
under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section
14;
(d) the form of notice for collection and
furnishing of information procedure relating
thereto and purposes for which credit
information may be provided under sub-
sections (1) and (2) of section 17;
(e) the principles and procedures
relating to credit information which may
be specified under clause (f) of section 20;
(f) the amount which may be required
to be paid for obtaining copy of credit
information under sub-section (2) of
section 21;
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
make
regulations.

64
(g) the maximum amount of charges
payable under section 27.
(3) Every regulation, as soon as may be
after it is made by the Reserve Bank, shall be
forwarded to the Central Government and that
Government shall cause a copy of the same to
be laid before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the regulation, or both Houses agree that
the regulation should not be made, the
regulation shall, thereafter, have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that regulation.

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 34)
AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS
PART I
THE R ESERVE B ANK OF I NDIA A CT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
Section 45E, sub-section (2), after clause (c) insert—
“(d) the disclosures of any credit information under the Credit
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2004.”
PART II
THE B ANKING R EGULATION A CT, 1949
(10 OF 1949)
1. Section 19, after sub-section (3), insert—
“(4) Save as provided in clause (c) of sub-section (1), a banking
company may form a subsidiary company to carry on the business of
credit information in accordance with the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004.
2. Section 28, for “publish any information obtained by them under
this Act in such consolidated form as they think fit”, substitute—
“publish—
(a) any information obtained by them under this Act in such
consolidated form as they think fit;
(b) in such manner as they may consider proper, any credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004.”
PART III
T
HE S TATE F INANCIAL C ORPORATION A CT, 1951
(63 OF 1951)
Section 40, after sub-section (3), insert—
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
65

66
PART IV
THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA A CT, 1955
(23 OF 1955)
Section 44, after sub-section (2), insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART V
T
HE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA (SUBSIDIARY B ANKS) A CT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
Section 52, after sub-section (2), insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART VI
T
HE D EPOSIT I NSURANCE AND C REDIT G UARANTEE
CORPORATION A CT, 1961
(47 OF 1961)
Section 39, after sub-section (2), insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART VII
T
HE S TATE A GRICULTURAL C REDIT C ORPORATIONS A CT, 1968
(60 OF 1968)
Section 40, insert—
“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the
credit information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.

67
PART VIII
THE B ANKING C OMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1970
(5 OF 1970)
Section 13, after sub-section (3) insert—
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART IX
THE B ANKING C OMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1980
(40 OF 1980)
Section 13, after sub-section (3) insert—
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART X
THE E XPORT-IMPORT B ANK OF I NDIA A CT, 1981
(28 OF 1981)
Section 30, after sub-section (3) insert—
“(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART XI
THE N ATIONAL B ANK FOR A GRICULTURE AND R URAL D EVELOPMENT A CT,
1981
(61 OF 1981)
Section 51, after sub-section (2) insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.

68
PART XII
THE P UBLIC F INANCIAL I NSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS TO
FIDELITY AND S ECRECY) A CT, 1983
(48 OF 1983)
Section 3, after sub-section (2), insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART XIII
T
HE N ATIONAL H OUSING B ANK A CT, 1987
(53 OF 1987)
Section 44, after sub-section (2), insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.
PART XIV
THE R EGIONAL R URAL B ANKS A CT, 1976
(21 OF 1976)
Section 25, after sub-section (2), insert—
“(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit
information disclosed under the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2004”.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The introduction of financial sector reforms has brought to fore
the extent of non-performing assets (NPAs) and the management of
NPAs in the banking system. It has become imperative to arrest
accretion of fresh NPAs in the banking sector through an efficient
system of credit information on borrowers as a first step in credit risk
management. In this context the requirement of an adequate,
comprehensive and reliable information system on the borrowers
through an efficient database has been felt by the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI), the Central Government, credit institutions and other
players in the banking and financial sector.
2. The Reserve Bank of India had constituted a Working Group to
explore the possibility of setting up a Credit Information Bureau (CIB).
The working Group observed that it would not be possible to set up
a world class credit information company within the existing legal
framework. The legal prohibition on disclosure of information contained
in various laws relating to banking do not permit banks and financial
institutions to share credit information with the credit information
company. Besides, the power vested with the Reserve Bank of India
under and Chapter IIIA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, to
collect and furnish credit information from banks or financial
institutions cannot be delegated by it to another institution. Therefore,
amendments would be required in various enactments. The Working
Group submitted its report in October, 1999 and recommended amongst
other things (a) enactment of a legislation for facilitating collection
and sharing of information by the proposed bureau and (b) to amend
certain Acts relating to banking to permit sharing of information with
the said bureau.
3. A Credit Information Bureaus (India) Ltd., being a company
formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, has already
been set up in January, 2001. With a view to provide necessary
legislative support to the business of credit information, it is proposed
to enact a legislation, namely, the Credit Information Companies
(Regulations) Bill, 2004 for regulation of credit information companies
and to facilitate efficient distribution of credit. The Bill, inter alia,
contains provisions for—
(a) prohibition to commence or carry on business of credit
information without obtaining a certificate of registration from the
Reserve Bank of India;
69

70
(b) procedure for making application for grant of certificate of
registration, grant of certificate of registration, cancellation of
certificate of registration and appeal against order of rejection of
an application for grant of certificate of registration and cancellation
of certificate of registration;
(c) requirement of minimum capital;
(d) management of credit information companies;
(e) conferring power upon the Reserve Bank of India to
determine policy in relation to functioning of credit information
companies and also giving directions to credit information
companies and other players in the business of credit information;
(f) functions of credit information by credit information
companies;
(g) collection and furnishing of credit information companies;
(h) powers and duties of auditors;
(i) obtaining of membership by credit institutions of credit
information companies;
(j) information privacy principles;
(k) alterations of credit information files and credit reports;
(l) regulation of unauthorised access to credit information;
(m) offences and penalties;
(n) obligations as to fidelity and secrecy;
(o) resolution of disputes between credit institutions and credit
information companies of between credit institutions and their
borrowers;
(p) exemption from any or all the provisions of the proposed
legislation to any credit information company or credit institution;
and
(q) amending certain enactments specified in the Schedule to
the Bill so as to permit disclosure of credit information under the
proposed legislation.

71
4. The existing legislations in force do not address these aspects of
credit information companies and their functioning.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
      NEW D ELHI;P . CHIDAMBARAM
The 25th August, 2004.

Notes on clauses
Clause 2. —This clause defines certain expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 .—This clause relates to prohibition to commence or carry
on business of credit information company . It provides that no company
shall expect as otherwise provided in this proposed legislation
commence or carry on the business of credit information without
obtaining a certificate of registration from the Reserve Bank under this
proposed legislation.
Clause 4 .—This clause contains provisions for making application
by a company for registration.
Sub-clause (1) requires every company which intends to commence
the business of credit information to make an application for certificate
of registration to the Reserve Bank of India in such form, and manner
as may be specified by regulations made by the Reserve Bank of India.
Sub-clause (2) provides that every credit information company, which
is in existence on the commencement of this proposed legislation, shall
apply, before the expiry of six months from such commencement, in
writing to the Reserve Bank for obtaining a certificate of registration
under this proposed legislation. However such credit information
company may continue to carry on the business of credit information,
until it is granted a certificate of registration or is by notice in writing
informed by the Reserve Bank that a certificate of registration cannot
be granted to it.
Clause 5. —This clause contains provisions for grant of certificate of
registration to commence or carry on the business of credit information.
Sub-clause (1) requires the Reserve Bank for the purpose of
considering the application of a company to be satisfied by an
inspection of records or books of such company or otherwise, (a) that
the applicant company has minimum capital structure referred to in
clause 8; (b) that the management or the proposed management of the
applicant company shall not be prejudicial to the interest of its specified
users, clients or borrowers, or other credit information companies;
(c) that any other condition, the fulfillment of which in the opinion of
the Reserve Bank, shall be necessary to ensure that the commencement
72

73
or carrying on of the business of credit information by the applicant
company shall not be detrimental or prejudicial to the public interest
or banking policy or credit system or its specified users or clients or
borrowers or other credit information companies or others who would
provide credit information to the credit information companies.
Sub-clause (2) confers power upon the Reserve Bank to grant a
certificate of registration to the applicant company to commence or
carry on the business of credit information, subject to such conditions
which it may consider fit to impose and if the company fails to fulfil
any of such conditions or any of the provisions of this proposed
legislation, the application of the company shall be rejected after the
applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard.
Clause 6. —This clause relates to the power of Reserve Bank to
cancel certificate of registration. It confers power upon the Reserve
Bank to cancel certificate of registration granted to a credit information
company under sub-clause (2) of clause 5 if such company (i) ceases
to carry on the business of credit information; or (ii) has failed to
comply with any of the conditions subject to which the certificate of
registration has been granted to it; or (iii) at any time fails to fulfil
any of the conditions referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (c) of sub-clause
(1) or sub-clause (2) of clause 5; or (iv) fails to comply with provisions
of any law for the time being in force or any direction issued by the
Reserve Bank under the provisions of this proposed legislation; or
fails to submit or offer for inspection its books of account and other
relevant documents when so demanded by the officers, persons or
agency referred to in sub-clause (1) of clause 12.
If further provides that before cancelling the certificate of
registration granted to a credit information company under this clause
on the ground that the company has failed to comply with the
conditions specified in clauses (a) to (c) of sub-clause (1) or sub-clause
(2) of clause 5 or the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force or directions issued under this proposed legislation, the Reserve
Bank, shall grant time to such company on such terms as the Reserve
Bank may deem appropriate for taking necessary steps to comply with
such directions or provisions or fulfillment of such conditions, within
such time. However if the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that the
delay in cancelling the certificate of registration of such company shall
be prejudicial or detrimental to the public interest or banking policy
or credit system or borrowers or other credit information companies,
the Reserve Bank may cancel the certificate of registration without
granting time as provided in sub-section (2).

74
It is also proposed to provide that no order of cancellation of
certificate of registration granted to a credit information company shall
be made by the Reserve Bank unless such company has been given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 7.—This clause provides for making an appeal against the
order of Reserve Bank. A credit information company aggrieved by
the order of rejection of an application for grant of certificate of
registration under clause 5 or cancellation of certificate of registration
under clause 6, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government,
within a period of thirty days from the date on which such order of
rejection or cancellation is communicated to the credit information
company. The decision of the Central Government, where an appeal
has been preferred to it under sub-clause (1), or of the Reserve Bank
where no such appeal has been preferred, shall be final. However
before making any order of rejection of an appeal, the applicant
company or the credit information company, as the case may be, shall
be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 8.—This clause specifies minimum capital requirement for
every credit information company . It provides that the authorised capital
of every credit information company shall be a minimum of thirty
crores. This clause confers power upon the Reserve Bank to increase,
by notification, the minimum amount of authorised capital to any
amount not exceeding fifty crores.
It further specifies that the issued capital of every credit information
company shall not be less than twenty crores. However, the Reserve
Bank can, by notification, increase the issued capital to any amount
not exceeding the minimum amount of authorised capital as referred
to in this clause. This clause also provides that the minimum paid up
capital of every credit information company at any time shall not be
less than seventy five per cent. of the issued capital.
Clause 9.—This clause contains provisions for management of a
credit information company.
Sub-clause (1) provides that, every credit information company in
existence on the commencement of this proposed legislation, or which
comes into existence thereafter shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in any law for the time being in force, or in any contract

75
to the contrary, have one of its directors, who may be appointed on
whole time or on a part time basis as chairperson of its board of
directors, and where he is appointed on whole time basis as chairperson
of its board, he shall be entrusted with the management of the whole
of the affairs of the credit information company. However, the
chairperson of the board of the credit information company shall
exercise his powers subject to the superintendence, control and
directions of the board.
Sub-clause (2) requires, in case a chairperson of the credit
information company is appointed on a part time basis, the
management of whole of the affairs of the credit information company
shall be entrusted to a managing director or, a whole time director by
whatever name called, who shall exercise his powers subject to the
superintendence, control and directions of the board.
Sub-clause (3) requires that the board of directors shall (in addition
to the chairperson or managing director or whole-time director) consist
of not less than fifty per cent. directors having special knowledge in,
or experience of, the matters relating to public administration, law,
banking, finance, accountancy, management and information technology .
Sub-clause (4) requires the board of every credit information
company, while discharging its functions, to act on business principles
and have due regard to the interest of its specified users, credit
institutions or the clients or borrowers of credit institutions.
Sub-clause (5) provides that the Reserve Bank of India (if it is
satisfied that it is in the public interest or in the interest of banking
policy or credit system of the country, or for preventing the affairs of
any credit information company being managed in a manner
detrimental to the interest of banking policy or credit institutions or
its borrowers or clients or for securing the proper management of any
credit information company, it is necessary so to do), may, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, by order published in the Official Gazette,
supersede the board of such company. Such supersession shall be for
a period not exceeding six months as may be specified in the Order,
and such period may be extended from time to time, but that the
total period in no case shall not exceed twelve months. However before
making any such order, the Reserve Bank shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the board of such credit information company to make
representation against the proposed supersession and shall consider
the representation, if any, of the board.

76
Sub-clause (6) confers power upon the Reserve Bank to appoint, on
supersession of the board of a credit information company under sub-
clause (5), an Administrator for such period and on such salary and
other terms and conditions as it may determine.
Sub-clause (7) confers power upon the Reserve Bank to issue such
directions to the Administrator appointed under clause (5) as it may
deem appropriate and the Administrator shall be bound to follow
such directions.
Sub-clause (8) provides for matters consequent upon supersession
of the board of a credit information company under sub-clause (5). It
provides that on such supersession (a) the chairperson, managing
director and other directors of such credit information company shall,
as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such (b) all
the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of the Companies Act, 1956 or this proposed legislation or any other
law for the time being in force, be exercised or discharged, by or on
behalf of the board of such credit information company, or by a
resolution passed in general meeting of that company, shall, until the
reconstitution of its board under sub-clause (10), be exercised and
discharged by the Administrator appointed by the Reserve Bank under
sub clause (6). However the power exercised by the Administrator
shall be valid notwithstanding that such powers are exercisable by a
resolution passed in the general meeting of such credit information
company.
Sub-clause (9) provides that the salary and allowances payable to
the Administrator and staff assisting the Administrator shall be borne
by the credit information company.
Sub-clause (10) imposes an obligation upon the Administrator of
the credit information company, to call, on and before the expiration
of two months before expiry of the period of supersession mentioned
in the order of the Reserve Bank issued under sub-clause (5), a general
meeting of the credit information company to elect new directors and
reconstitute its board and any person who had vacated his office under
clause (a) of sub-clause (8), shall not be deemed to be disqualified for
re-appointment.
Sub-clause (11) provides that, on the removal of a person from
office under this clause, such person shall not, notwithstanding anything
contained in any law for the time being in force or in any contract or
the memorandum or articles of association of the credit information

77
company, be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or
termination of office.
Clause 10.—This clause confers power upon the Reserve Bank to
determine policy. It provides that in case the Reserve Bank, if it is
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest or in
the interest of specified users or in the interest of credit information
companies or credit institutions or clients or borrowers so to do, may
determine the policy in relation to functioning of credit information
companies or credit institutions or specified users generally or in
particular. All credit information companies, credit institutions and
specified users shall be bound to follow the policy as so determined.
Clause 11.—This clause confers power upon the Reserve Bank to
give directions.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Reserve Bank may, from time to
time, issue directions to credit information companies or credit
institutions or specified users generally or to any credit information
company or credit institution or specified user in particular, and such
credit information companies, credit institutions or specified users or
credit information company or credit institution and specified user,
shall be bound to comply with such directions. The directions shall be
issued by the Reserve Bank if it is satisfied that such directions are
necessary (i) in the public interest; or (ii) in the interest of credit
institutions; or (iii) in the interest of specified users; or (iv) in the
interest of banking policy; or (v) to prevent the affairs of any credit
information company being conducted in a manner detrimental to the
interests of specified users or in a manner prejudicial to the interests
of credit institutions or borrowers or clients; or (vi) to secure the proper
management of credit information companies generally.
Sub-clause (2) confers power upon the Reserve Bank to modify or
cancel, either on representation made to it or on its own motion, any
direction issued under sub-clause (1). The Reserve Bank, may , in so
modifying or cancelling such direction, impose such conditions as it
thinks fit, subject to which such modification or cancellation shall have
effect.
Sub-clause (3) provides that the Reserve Bank may , at any time, if
it is satisfied that in the public interest or in the interest of a credit
information company or its members, it is necessary so to do, by
order in writing and on such terms and conditions as may be specified
therein (i) require any credit information company to call a meeting of

78
its directors for the purpose of considering any matter relating to or
arising out of the affairs of the credit information company; (ii) depute
one or more of its officers to watch the proceedings at any meeting of
the board of the credit information company or of any committee or
of any other body constituted by it and require the credit information
company to give an opportunity to the officers so deputed to be heard
at such meetings and also require such officers to send a report of
such proceedings to the Reserve Bank; (iii) require the board of the
credit information company or of any committee or any other body
constituted by it to give in writing to any officer deputed by the
Reserve Bank in this behalf at his usual address all notices of, and
other communications relating to, any meeting of the board, committee
or other body constituted by it; (iv) appoint one or more of its officers
to observe the manner in which the affairs of the credit information
company or of its offices or branches are being conducted and make
a report thereon; (v) require the credit information company to make,
within such time as may be specified in the order, such changes in the
management as the Reserve Bank may consider necessary.
Sub-clause (4), inter alia,  confers power upon the Reserve Bank to
direct any credit information company to furnish it within such time
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank, such statements and
information relating to the business or affairs of the credit information
company as it may consider necessary or expedient to obtain for the
purpose of this proposed legislation.
Clause 12.—This clause contains provisions relating to inspection
of credit information company, credit institution and specified user.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the Reserve Bank may, at any time,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in clause 235 of
the Companies Act, 1956, and on being directed so to do by the Central
Government shall, cause an inspection of any credit information
company or credit institution or specified users and their books and
accounts of any credit information company or credit institution or
specified users and their books and accounts. Such inspection may be
made by one or more of officers of the Reserve Bank or through such
other persons or agency as it may determine. It further provides that
the Reserve Bank shall supply to the credit information company or
credit institution or specified users, as the case may be, a copy of its
report on such inspection.
Sub-clause (2) imposes a duty upon every director or other officer
or employee of the credit information company, credit institution and

79
specified user to produce to any officer or person or agency, as the
case may be, making an inspection under sub-clause (1) all such books,
accounts and other documents in his custody or power and to furnish
him with any statement and information relating to the affairs of such
credit information company, credit institution and specified user as
the said officer or person or agency may require of him within such
time as the said officer or person or agency may specify.
Sub-clause (3) provides that any officer of the Reserve Bank or
person or an agency making an inspection under sub-clause (1) may
examine on oath any director or other officer or employee of the credit
information company or credit institution or specified user in relation
to their business, and may administer an oath accordingly.
Sub-clause (4) provides that the expenses of, or incidental to, the
inspection under sub-clause (1) by any officer or person or an agency
referred to in sub-clause (1) shall be borne by the credit information
company or credit institution or specified user, as the case may be.
Clause 13.—This clause contains provisions relating to powers and
duties of auditors.
Sub-clause (1) imposes a duty upon every auditor of a credit
information company to inquire whether or not the credit information
company has furnished to the Reserve Bank such statements,
information or particulars relating to its business as are required to be
furnished under this proposed legislation. The auditor is required to
make a report to the Reserve Bank in this regard except in cases
where he is satisfied on such inquiry that the credit information
company has furnished such a statement, information or particulars.
Sub-clause (2) provides that the Reserve Bank may, on being satisfied
that it is necessary so to do, in the public interest or in the interest
of credit system, issue directions in particular or in general with respect
to audit of the credit information company and submission of report
to the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (3), inter alia,  confers power upon the Reserve Bank to
direct, by order, that a special audit shall be conducted of the accounts
of the credit information company in relation to any such transaction
or class of transaction or for such period or periods, as may be
mentioned in the order. The Reserve Bank may, by such order or by
a separate order, either appoint an auditor or auditors or direct the
auditor of the credit information company himself to conduct such

80
special audit and the auditor shall comply with such directions and
make a report of such audit to the Reserve Bank and forward a copy
thereof to the credit information company.
Sub-clause (4) confers power upon the Reserve Bank to fix, having
regard to the nature and volume of work involved in the audit,
remuneration of the auditors and the expenses of, or incidental to, the
audit, shall be borne by the credit information company so audited.
Clause 14.—This clause specifies the functions of a credit information
company.
Sub-clause (1) provides that the credit information company may
engage in any forms of business, namely, (a) to collect, process and
collate information on trade, credit and financial standing of the
borrowers of the credit institution which is a member of the credit
information company; (b) to provide credit information to its specified
users or to the specified users of any other credit information company
or to any other credit information company being its member; (c) to
provide credit scoring to its specified users or specified users of any
other credit information company or to other credit information
companies being its members; (d) to undertake research project; and
(e) to undertake any other form of business which the Reserve Bank
may, specify, by regulations, as a form of business in which it is lawful
for a credit information company to engage.
Sub-clause  (2) prohibit the credit information company to
engage in any form of business other than those referred to in sub-
clause (1).
Sub-clause (3) provides that any credit information company for
the purposes of carrying on the business of credit information may
(a) register credit institutions and other credit information companies,
at their option as its member, subject to such terms and conditions as
may be pre-determined and disclosed by such credit information
company; (b) charge such reasonable amount of fees, as it may deem
appropriate not exceeding the maximum fee, as may be specified under
clause 27, for furnishing credit information to a specified user; and
(c) generally to do all such other acts and perform such other functions
as are necessary to facilitate proper conduct of its affairs, business and
functions, in accordance with the provisions of this proposed legislation.
Clause 15.—This clause requires every credit institution to be
member of at least one credit information company.

81
Sub-clause (1) provides that every credit institution, in existence on
the commencement of this proposed legislation before the expiry of
three months from such commencement or within such extended
period, as the Reserve Bank may allow, on its application and subject
to being satisfied for extension, shall become member of at least one
credit information company.
Sub-clause (2) provides that every credit institution which comes
into existence after the commencement of this proposed legislation,
before the expiry of three months from its coming into existence, or
within such extended period, as the Reserve Bank may allow on
application and subject to being satisfied about the reason for extension,
shall become member of at least one credit information company.
Sub-clause (3) provides that a credit information company may, at
its option, become member of another credit information company.
Sub-clause (4) provides that no credit information company shall
refuse to register a credit institution or another credit information
company as its member without providing reasonable opportunity of
being heard to such credit institution or credit information company,
whose application it proposes to reject and recording reasons for such
rejection and a copy of such order of rejection shall be forwarded to
the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (5) allows a credit institution or credit information
company aggrieved by the order of rejection of its application for its
registration as a member of a credit information company under sub-
clause (4) to prefer an appeal to the Reserve Bank, within a period of
thirty days from the date on which such order of rejection was
communicated to it. However, the Reserve Bank may, if it is satisfied
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further
period not exceeding thirty days.
Sub-clause (6) provides that on receipt of an appeal under sub-
clause (5), the Reserve Bank, after giving the appellant and other
concerned parties, an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as
it deems fit in this regard.
Sub-clause (7) provides that the decision of the Reserve Bank where
an appeal has been preferred to it under sub-clause (5) shall be final
and the order of the credit information company under sub-clause (4)
shall be final after the expiry of said period of thirty days where no
appeal has been preferred under that sub-clause to the Reserve Bank.

82
Sub-clause (8) gives a right to every specified user to obtain credit
information for its use from the credit information company of which
such specified user is a member.
Clause 16.—This clause contains provisions in respect of failure to
become a member of a credit information company. In case a credit
institution abstains from becoming a member of at least one credit
information company or at any time is not a member of any credit
information company, the Reserve Bank suo moto or on a complaint
from a credit information company may, direct such credit institution
to take necessary steps within such time, as it may specify to become
a member of a credit information company . If a credit institution fails
to comply with the directions of the Reserve Bank to become member
of at least one credit information company, the Reserve Bank may,
without prejudice to the provisions of this proposed legislation, intimate
such failure to any other authority for taking such action as it may
deem fit.
Clause 17.—This clause relates to collection and furnishing of credit
information.
Sub-clause (1) provides that a credit information company or any
person authorised in that behalf by the company may, by notice in
writing, in such form, as may be specified by regulations made by the
Reserve Bank or as near thereto, require its members being credit
institution or credit information company, to furnish such credit
information as it may deem necessary in accordance with this proposed
legislation.
Sub-clause (2) provides that every credit institution which is member
of the credit information company and every credit information
company which is a member of other credit information company,
shall, on receipt of notice under sub-clause (1), provide credit
information to the credit information company of which it is a member
within such period as may be specified in the notice.
Sub-clause (3) provides that every credit information company shall
provide for such purpose, as may be specified by regulations, the
credit information received under sub-clause (2), to its specified user
on receipt of request from him in accordance with the provisions of
this proposed legislation and directions, issued thereunder by the
Reserve Bank from time to time in this behalf.

83
Sub-clause (4) provides that no credit information received, by the
credit information company shall be disclosed to any person other
than its specified user, or, by the specified user shall be disclosed to
any other person; or received, by the credit information company or
specified user shall be disclosed for any other purpose than as
permitted or required by any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 18.—This clause relates to settlement of dispute amongst
credit information companies, credit institutions its borrowers and
clients.
This clause provides that if any dispute arises amongst, credit
information companies, credit institutions, its borrowers and clients on
matters relating to business of credit information and for which no
remedy has been provided under this proposed legislation, such dispute
shall be settled by conciliation or arbitration as provided in the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, as if the parties to the dispute
have consented in writing for determination of such dispute by
conciliation or arbitration and provision of that Act shall apply
accordingly.
Where a dispute has been referred to arbitration, the same shall
be settled or decided by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Reserve
Bank. It further provides that the provisions or the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (except as otherwise provided under this
proposed legislation), shall apply to all arbitration proceeding under
this proposed legislation as if the proceedings for arbitration were
referred for settlement or decision under the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
Clause  19.—This clause imposes an obligation on a credit
information company or credit institution or specified user, (which is
in possession or control of credit information) to take requisite steps
(including security safeguards), as may be prescribed, so as to ensure
that the data relating to the credit information maintained by them is
accurate, complete, duly protected against any loss or unauthorised
access or use or unauthorised disclosure thereof.
Clause 20.—This clause relates to privacy principles to be adopted
and followed by every credit information company, credit institution
and specified user in relation to credit information.
Sub-clause (1) provides that every credit information company, credit
institution and specified user shall adopt the privacy principles in
relation to collection, processing, collating, recording, preservation,
secrecy , sharing and usage of credit information. The privacy principles

84
to be followed are mentioned in sub-clause (1), namely, (i) which may
be followed by every credit institution for collection of information
from its borrowers and clients; and by every credit information
company, for collection of information from its  member credit
institutions or credit information companies, for processing, recording,
protecting the data relating to credit information furnished by, or
obtained from, their member credit institutions or credit information
companies, as the case may be, and sharing of such data with specified
users; (ii) which may be adopted by every specified user for processing,
recording, protecting the data relating to credit information furnished,
or received, as the case may be, by it; (iii) which may be adopted by
every credit information company for allowing access to records
containing credit information of borrowers and clients and alternation
of such records in case of need to do so; (b) the purposes for which
the credit information may be used, restriction on such use and
disclosure thereof; (c) the extent of obligation to check accuracy of
credit information before furnishing of such information to credit
information companies of credit institutions or specified users, as the
case may be; (d) preservation of credit information maintained by every
credit information company, credit institution and specified user, as
the case may be, (including the period for which such information
may be maintained, manner of deletion of such information and
maintenance of records of credit information); (e) networking of credit
information companies, credit institutions and specified users through
electronic mode; and (f) any other principles and procedures relating
to credit information which the Reserve Bank may consider necessary
and appropriate and may specify by regulations.
Clause 21.—This clause contains provisions relating to alteration of
credit information files and credit reports.
It provides that any person, who applies for grant or sanction of
credit facility, from any credit institution may request such institution
to furnish him a copy of the credit information obtained by such
institution from the credit information company. Every such credit
institution or institution or specified user, shall on receipt of the request
furnish the copy of such credit information subject to payment of such
charges, as may be specified by regulations, by the Reserve Bank in
this regard. If a credit information company or specified user or credit
institution in possession or control of the credit information, has not
updated the information maintained by it, a borrower or client may
request all or any of them to update the information; whether by
making an appropriate correction, or addition or otherwise; and on

85
such request the credit information company or the specified user or
the credit institution, as the case may be, shall take appropriate steps
to update the credit information within thirty days after being requested
to do so. However the credit information company and the specified
user shall make the correction, deletion or addition in the credit
information only after such correction, deletion or addition has been
certified as correct by concerned credit institution and no such
correction, deletion or addition shall be made in any credit information
if any dispute relating to such correction, deletion or addition in cases
where such dispute is pending, is pending before any arbitrator or
tribunal or court and the entries in the books of the concerned credit
institution shall be taken into account for the purposes of credit
information.
Clause 22.—This clause contains provisions relating to unauthorised
access to credit information.
Sub-clause (1) provides that no person shall have access to credit
information in the possession or control of a credit information
company or a credit institution or a specified user unless the access is
authorised by this proposed legislation or any other law for the time
being in force or directed to do so by any court or tribunal and any
such access to credit information without such authorisation or direction
shall be considered as an unauthorised access to credit information.
Sub-clause (2) provides for punishment for unauthorised access to
credit information. It provides that any person who obtains
unauthorised access to credit information as referred to in sub-clause (1)
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees in
respect of each offence and if he continues to have such unauthorised
access, with a further fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
for every day on which the default continues and such unauthorised
credit information shall not be taken into account for any purpose.
Clause 23.—This clause contains provisions relating to offences and
penalties.
Sub-clause  (1) provides that whoever, in any return or other
document or in any information required or furnished by or under or
for the purposes of any provision of this proposed legislation, wilfully
makes a statement which is false in any material particular, knowing
it to be false, or wilfully omits to make a material statement, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for term which may extend to one year
and shall also be liable to fine.
Sub-clause (2) provides that every credit information company or a
credit institution or any specified user, wilfully, performing any act or
engaging in any practice, in breach of any of the principles referred to
in clause 20, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one crore.

86
Sub-clause (3) provides that any credit information company or
credit institution or specified user, wilfully providing to any other
credit information company or credit institution or specified user, or
borrower or client, as the case may be, the credit information, which
is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully
omits to make a material statement, shall be punishable, with fine
which may extend to one crore.
Sub-clause  (4) provides that any person who contravenes any
provision of this proposed legislation or of any rule or order made
thereunder, or obstructs the lawful exercise of any power conferred by
or under this proposed legislation, or makes default in complying
with any requirement of this proposed legislation or of any rule or
order made or direction issued thereunder, shall, if no specific provision
is made under this proposed legislation for punishment of such
contravention, obstruction or default, be punishable with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees and where a contravention or default
is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees for every day during which the contravention or
default continues.
Sub-clause (5) provides that in case a contravention or default has
been committed by a credit information company or credit institution
or specified user, as the case may be, every person who, at the time
the contravention or default was committed, was in charge of, and
was responsible to the credit information company or credit institution
or specified user for the conduct of its business, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the contravention or default and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
However such person shall not be liable to any punishment
provided in this proposed legislation if he proves that the contravention
or default was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
all due diligence to prevent the contravention or default.
Sub-clause (6) provides that where a contravention or default has
been committed by a credit information company or credit institution
or specified user, as the case may be, and it is proved that the same
was committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to
any gross negligence on the part of its chairperson, managing director,
any other director, manager, secretary or other officer of the credit
information company or the credit institution, such chairperson,
managing director, any other director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention or default and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

87
It is also proposed to define expressions “company” and “director”
used in this clause.
Clause 24.—This clause contains provisions relating to cognizance
of offences.
It provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence except
upon complaint in writing made by an officer of the credit information
company generally or specially authorised in writing in this behalf by
the credit information company or if so directed by the Reserve Bank,
so to do, in case offence is committed by a member of a credit
information company and punishable under sub-clause (4) of
clause 23.
It further provides that where an offence is committed by a credit
information company punishable under clause 23, no court shall take
cognizance of any offence except upon complaint in writing made by
an officer of the Reserve Bank generally or specially authorised in
writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank.
It also provided that no court other than that of a Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any court
superior thereto shall try any such offence.
Clause 25.—This clause confers power upon the Reserve Bank of
India to impose penalty.
Sub-clause (1) provides for levy of penalty by the Reserve Bank. It
specifies that a levy of penalty (a) not exceeding one lakh rupees,
where the contravention is of the nature referred to in sub-clause (2)
of clauses 22, (b) a penalty not exceeding one crore, where the
contravention is of the nature referred to in sub-clause (2) or sub-
clause (3) of clause 23, and (c) where the contravention is of the nature
referred to in sub-clause (4) of clause 23, penalty not exceeding one
lakh rupees and where such contravention or default is continuing
one, a further penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees for
every day, after the first, during which the contravention or default
continues.
Sub-clause  (2) requires the Reserve Bank, for the purpose of
adjudging the penalty under sub-clause (1), to serve notice on credit
information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case
may be, requiring it is show cause as to why the amount mentioned
in the notice should not be imposed as penalty and also to give a

88
reasonable opportunity of being heard to such credit information
company or credit institution or specified user, as the case may be.
Sub-clause  (3) prohibits filing of a complaint against credit
information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case
may be, in any court of law in respect of any contravention or default
in respect whereof any penalty has been imposed by the Reserve Bank
under this clause.
Sub-clause (4) requires that any penalty imposed by the Reserve
Bank under this proposed legislation shall be payable within a period
of fourteen days from the date on which notice issued by the Reserve
Bank demanding payment of the sum is served on the credit
information company or credit institution or specified user, as the case
may be. In the event of failure of such credit information company or
credit institution or specified user to pay the sum within such period,
as may be levied on a direction made by the principal civil court
having jurisdiction in the area where the registered office of credit
information company or credit institution or specified user, being a
company, is situated and in case of credit institution incorporated
outside India where its principal place of business in India is situated.
Such direction under this sub-clause shall be made only upon an
application made in this behalf to the court by the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (5) provides that the court which makes a direction under
sub-clause (4) shall issue a certificate mentioning therein the sum
payable by a credit information company or credit institution or
specified user as the case may be, and every such certificate shall be
enforceable in the same manner as if it were a decree made by the
court in a civil suit.
Sub-clause (6) provides that in case any complaint has been filed
against credit information company or credit institution or specified
user as the case may be, in any court in respect of the contravention
or default of the nature referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause 22 and
sub-clause (2) or sub-clause (3) or sub-clause (4) of clause 23, then, no
proceedings for the imposition of any penalty on the credit information
company or credit institution or specified user shall be taken under
this clause.
Clause 26.—This clause relates to application of fines. It provides
that a court imposing any fine under the proposed legislation may
direct that the whole or any part thereof shall be applied in or towards
payment of the costs of the proceedings, or for such purposes as may
be directed by the court.

89
Clause 27.—This clause relates to power of the Reserve Bank to
specify maximum amount of fees.
It confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify, by regulations,
maximum amount of a fees leviable under sub-clause (3) of clause 14
for providing information to the specified users and for admissions of
credit institutions or credit information companies as a member of a
credit information company.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to disclosure of information before
any court or tribunal or authority institution.
It provides that no chairperson, director, member, auditor, adviser,
officer or other employee or agent employed in the business of credit
information company or in the business of a specified user shall, except
for the purposes of the proposed legislation or when required to do
so, by any other law in force or court or tribunal or authority, disclose
any information to any person.
Clause 29.—This clause relates to the obligations as to fidelity and
secrecy.
Sub-clause (1) provides that every credit information company shall
observe, except as otherwise required by law, the practices and usages
customary among credit information companies and it shall not divulge
any information relating to, or to the affairs of its members or specified
users.
Sub-clause (2) requires every chairperson, director, member, auditor,
adviser, officer or other employee of a credit information company
before entering upon his duties, to make a declaration of fidelity and
secrecy in the form as may be prescribed in this regard. The terms
“practices and usages customary” would mean such practices and
usages which are generally followed by credit information companies
or may develop in due course in relation to their functions, in
pursuance of the proposed legislation and rules and regulations made
and directions issued thereunder from time to time in pursuance
thereof.
Clause 30.—This clause contains provisions for protection of action
taken in good faith under the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (1) provides that no suit or other legal proceedings or
prosecution shall lie against the Reserve Bank or the Central

90
Government or credit information company or credit institution, or
their chairperson, director, member, auditor, adviser, officer or other
employee or agent or any person authorised by the Reserve Bank or
the Central Government or credit information company or credit
institution to discharge any function under the proposed legislation,
for any loss or damage caused or as is likely to be caused by anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done, in pursuance of
proposed legislation or any other law for the time being in force.
Sub-clause (2) provides that provisions contained in sub-clause (1)
shall not affect the right of any person to claim damages against a
credit information company, a credit institution or their chairperson,
director, member, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee or agents,
as the case may be, in respect of loss caused to him on account of any
such disclosure made by anyone of them and which is unauthorised
or fraudulent or contrary to provisions of the proposed legislation or
practices or usages customary among them.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to bar of jurisdiction of other court
or authority.
It provides that no court or authority shall have, or be entitled to
exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority (except the Supreme
Court, and a High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 32, 226
and 227 of the Constitution) in relation to the matters referred to in
clauses 4, 5, 6, 7 and 18.
Clause 32.—This clause relates to power of Reserve Bank to exempt
in certain cases.
It confers power upon the Reserve Bank to exempt the credit
information company or credit institution in certain cases. It provides
that the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the
Reserve Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette direct that any or
all of the provisions of proposed legislation shall not apply to any
credit information company or a credit institution, as the case may be
either generally or for such period and subject to such exceptions or
modification as may be mentioned in that notification. It also provides
that a copy of every such notification proposed to be issued shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament.
Clause 33.—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall be in addition to, and not, (except as provided under
the proposed legislation), in derogation of, the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force.

91
Clause 34.—This clause relates to amendment of certain enactments.
It proposes to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951,
the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks) Act, 1959, the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee
Corporation  Act, 1961, the State Agricultural Credit Corporations Act,
1968, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970, the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, the Export Import Bank of India
Act, 1981, the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Act, 1981, the Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity
and Secrecy) Act, 1983, the National Housing Bank Act, 1987, and the
Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976, inter alia, to provide that the provisions
contained in the said Acts shall not apply to the information disclosed
under the proposed legislation.
Clause 35.—This clause relates to removal of difficulties. It confers
powers upon the Central Government which may, if any difficulty
arises in giving effect to the provisions of this proposed legislation, by
order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation as appear
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. However,
no such order shall be made under this clause after the expiry of a
period of two years from the commencement of the proposed legislation
and every order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 36.—This clause relates to power to make rules.
It confers power upon the Central Government to make rules in
respect of matters specified in the said clause. The rules made by the
Central Government shall be published in the Official Gazette and be
laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 37.—This clause relates to power of Reserve Bank to make
regulations.
It confers power upon the Reserve Bank of India to make
regulations in respect of matters specified in the said clause. The
regulations made by the Reserve Bank of India shall be published in
the Official Gazette and be laid before each House of Parliament.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 32 confers power upon the Reserve Bank of India to exempt
the credit information company or a credit institutions in certain cases.
It provides that the Central Government may, by notification, specify,
on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank of India, that any or all
of the provisions of proposed legislation shall not apply to any credit
information company or a credit institutions, as the case may be, either
generally or for such period and subject to such exceptions or
modification as may be mentioned in the notification. A copy of every
notification proposed to be issued shall be laid in draft before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions. If, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the notification, the notification
shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.
Clause 36 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules by notification to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters
in respect of which such rules may be made are specified therein.
These matters relate, inter alia , to provide for the steps to be taken by
every credit information company and specified user for ensuring
accuracy, completeness of data and protection of data from any loss of
unauthorised access or use or disclosure under section 19; the form in
which a declaration of fidelity and secrecy shall be made under
sub-section (2) of section 29 and any other matter which is required
to be, or may be, prescribed.
2. Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Reserve Bank to make
regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in
respect of which such regulations may be made are specified therein.
These matters relate, to inter alia , the persons or institutions which
may be specified as specified users under clause (1) of section 2 provide
for the form in which application may be made under sub-section (1)
of section 4 and the manner of filing such application under that
sub-section; any other form of business in which a credit information
company may engage under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 14;
92

93
the form of notice for collecting and furnishing of information under
sub-sections (1) and (3); the principles and procedures relating to credit
information which may be specified under clause (f) of section 20;
procedure relating thereto and purposes for which credit information
may be provided; the amount which could be required to be paid for
obtaining copy of credit information under sub-section (2) of section
21 and the maximum amount of charges payable under section 27.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and regulations
made by the Reserve Bank of India shall be laid, as soon as may be
after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matter in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail and
it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power involved is of a normal character.

RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for regulation of credit information companies and to
facilitate efficient distribution of credit and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri P . Chidambaram, Finance Minister)
94