1 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
„ECONOMIC IMPACT OF  
REVISION OF NATURAL GAS PRICE‟ 
 
 
SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                                                                        
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013, Sravana, 1935 (Saka) 
74 


2 
 
SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
„ECONOMIC IMPACT OF  
REVISION OF NATURAL GAS PRICE‟ 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 August, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7  August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2013, Sravana, 1935 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS  
Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee………………………………………. 
Introduction……………………………………………………………. 
 
REPORT 
PART -I 
 
I Introductory  1 
II Impact of low gas production on economy and  
Its various sectors 
 
 3 
III Impact of gas price rise on economy  8 
IV Cost of production of Gas  9 
V Comparison of Global gas production,  
Availability and pricing 
 
 10 
VI Taxes on Natural Gas  12 
VII Revenue Loss to the Government  14 
 Part II  
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee   18 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Notes of Dissent submitted by Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam, MP,  
Shri Dharmendra Yadav, MP, Shri Naresh Agrawal, MP and  
Shri Y.P. Trivedi, MP    ………………………..   
 
II. Minutes of sittings of the Committee held on 9 November, 2012,  
7 June, 2013, 19 July, 2013 and 26 July, 2013…………………………. 
 
  

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
  
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
   MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay* 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Vacant** 
17.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  -  Under Secretary 
___________________________________________________ 
*      Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  13th December, 2012 
**     Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f 17.06.2013 consequent upon his 
induction to the Union Council of Ministers 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Seventy -fourth report on the subject „Economic Impact 
of Revision of Natural Gas Price‟. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Revenue, Economic Affairs and Expenditure), Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Steel and Department of Fertilizer at 
their sittings held on 9 November, 2012 and 7 June, 2013. 
3. The Committee, at their sittings held  on 19 July, 2013 and 26 July, 2013 
considered and adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the 
same and present it to the Parliament. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Finance (Depart ments of Revenue, Economic Affairs and Expenditure), Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry of Power, Ministry of Steel and Department of 
Fertilizer for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and 
information which were desired in connection with the examination of the subject.      
5. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                              YASHWANT SINHA, 
02 August, 2013                                                             Chairman, 
11 Sravana, 1935 (Saka)                                                   Standing Committee on Finance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
Part I 
 
Report on Economic Impact of Revision of Natural Gas Price 
 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
 
 1.1 As per  the Twelfth Five -Year Plan document of Planning Commission, 
India is the fourth largest consumer of energy  in the world after USA , China and Russia 
but it  is not endowed with abundant energy resources. It must, therefore, meet its 
development needs by using all available domestic resources of coal, uranium,  oil, gas 
hydro and other renewable resources, and  supplementing domestic production by 
imports. Meeting the energy needs f or achieving 8 p er cent to 9 per cent economic 
growth and fulfilling the energy requirements of a vast population at affordable  prices 
therefore presents a major challenge. It calls  for a sustained effort at increasing energy 
efficiency to contain the growth in demand for  energy while  increasing domestic 
production as much as possible to keep import dependence at a reasonable level. 
 1.2 As per Economic Survey 2012 -13, the average natural gas production in 
the year 2011 -12 was 130 Million Metric Standard Cubic  Metre Per Day (MMSCMD) 
which was about 9 per cent lower than the previous year mainly due to lower production 
from the KG D6 deep -water block. The  projected natural gas production in 2012 -13 is 
about 117.8 MMSCMD, which is again about 9 per cent lower  than productio n in the 
previous year. Natural Gas  production during April - November 2012 -13 was  28.05 
billion cubic metre (BCM) as compared to  32.28 BCM during the same period of the 
previous year. 
 
Exploration of Domestic Oil and Gas 
  
 1.3 The  New Exploration and Licensing Policy  (NELP) was adopted in 1999. 
India has an estimated sedimentary area of 3.14 million sq. km, comprising 26 
sedimentary basins. Prior to adoption of the NELP, only 11 per cent of Indian 
sedimentary basins were under exploration. Since the oper ationalization of the NELP in 
1999, the government has awarded an area of 47.3 per cent of Indian sedimentary 
basin for exploration. So far, 117 oil and gas discoveries have been made in 39 NELP 
blocks. As on April 2012, about 737 MMT of oil equivalent hyd rocarbon reserves have 

7 
 
been added under the NELP. The investment made by Indian  and foreign companies 
until April 2012 was of the order of US$ 20.2 billion, of which US $12.1 billion  was on 
hydrocarbon exploration and US$ 8.1 billion on development of discoveries. With a view 
to further accelerating the pace of exploration, in the ninth round of the NELP (NELP -
IX), 34 exploration blocks were offered. These include 8 deep -water blocks, 7 shallow -
water blocks, 11 on -land blocks, and 8  Type-S on -land blocks. N ineteen production -
sharing contracts have already been signed with the  awardees. A total of 254 
production-sharing contracts have been signed under the NELP so far. 
 
Gas pricing  
 
 1.4 Before 1987, gas prices were fixed by ONGC and Oil India (OIL).  But 
from January-end 1987, the government  took over the role of regulating prices on a 
cost-plus basis.   The last revision under the administered price  mechanism was 
effected in July 2005.  When the Government started to bid out oil and gas blocks under 
the New Exploration and Licensing Policy (NELP), it decided to opt for market -
determined rates for gas.  The producer enjoyed marketing freedom but needed to get 
the pricing formula approved through “arm‟s length pricing”.  In 2006, the first 
controversy began  when the contractor , allocated the KG D 6 basin, invited bids from 
users and arrived at a price of $4.32 per million metric British thermal units.  
Subsequently, the matter was referred to an empowered group of ministers, which 
agreed on a price of $4.20 a  unit after suggesting a few changes to the contractor‟s 
formula, including elements to do away with price volatility.   Against the target of 62.1 
million metric standard cubic metres a day (mmscmd)  in 2010 -2011 the contractor 
produced 55.89 mmscmd from t he KG-D6 basin.  In 2011-12, the contractor produced 
42.65 mmscmd against the targt of 70.38 mmscmd and in the last fiscal, production at 
27 mmscmd was way short of the 86.73 mmscmd target.  Currently, this b asin is turning 
out around 14.01 mmscmd as opposed to the target of over 86 mmscmd.  With a view 
to incentivising investment and production in gas basin , i n June, 2013 the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved a new formula, which is based on the 
recommendations of a committee headed by C. Rangarajan, Chairman of the Economic 
Advisory Council to the Prime Minister.  This Committee outlined the principles and 
model for gas pricing making use of various benchmark market prices to estimate the 

8 
 
arms length price for gas, which the Government is contractually committed to adopt 
under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC). The formula suggested would yield the 
price with a three -month lag, using the benchmark market prices over the preceding 
twelve months. The Government has decided to apply this formula with effect from April 
1, 2014.    
 1.5 Keeping in the view the fact that pricing of petroleum products , especially 
natural gas has severe repercussions not only on core sectors of the economy but also 
on the fundamental health and outlook of the Indian economy, the Committee decided 
to examine the subject „Economic Impact of Revision of Natural Gas Pric e‟.   The 
succeeding paragraphs of this report deal with the impact of  low production of natural 
gas and the new gas price on the various sectors of the economy.  
 
II. Impact of low gas production on economy and its various sectors 
 
Impact on power sector: 
 2.1 On question of impact of low production of gas on power sector, the 
Ministry of power in their post evidence replies have stated as under: 
“At present, Gas based installed capacity in the country is operating at very 
low average PLF (24%) as the production of KG D6 gas has nose -dived. 
Total installed capacity of 56 gas bas ed power plants in the country is 
18,713 MW with total requirement of 72.34 MMSCMD to operate at 70% / 
75% PLF. Against this requirement, the actual gas available / consumed by 
these power plants during the month of April, 2013 was 35.64 MMSCMD 
only (comprising of 24.84 MMSCMD APM Gas, 7.03 MMSCMD Non APM 
Gas 1.84 MMSCMD Long Term RLNG & 2.23 MMSCMD Spot RLNG). The 
average PLF as on April 2013 of these power plants is 36%, taking 4.07 
MMSCMD of RLNG. The operation of the existing gas power plants at very 
low PLF is neither technically feasible nor commercially viable. The non - 
availability of adequate gas to existing power plants results in huge loss of 
generation.” 
 
 
 
Impact of decline in gas production in KG-D6 on fertilizer/power production 
 

9 
 
 2.2 On being asked about the impact of decline in gas production in KG-D6 on 
fertilizer/power and steel sectors, the respective Ministries/Departments have furnished 
the following replies: 
 
Reply of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas:  
“The production from KGD6 started only in April 2009 and reached  its 
peak level of 61 MMSCMD in March 2010 . The priority sectors including 
power were supplied full contracted quantity of KG -D6 gas till the decline 
started in April 2010. To deal with this decline pro-rata cuts were imposed 
across all sectors between July 2010 and March 2011.  The production of 
KG-D6 gas continued to decline and hence, MoP&NG enforced a priority 
cut in the following order - Non-core sector, CGD, Power, LPG and 
Fertilizer. In October 2011, supply t o CGD became zero as production 
continued to decline. The further decline in production hit the power 
sector from November 2011 & by March -2013 the supply to power sector 
from KG-D6 became zero. Being the highest priority sector, the fertilizer 
sector is g etting supplies of KG -D6 gas as per their requirement against 
the signed GSPAs and has, so far, remained unaffected due to reduction 
in supply of KG-D6 gas.  
The production from KG-D6 has reduced to such an extent that supply to 
power sector from KG -D6 has become zero since March, 2013. This has 
resulted in significant gas based capacity getting stranded or operating at 
sub-optimal level which is techno -commercially unviable. At present, the 
installed capacity of gas based power plants in the country is 18, 713 MW 
having a total requirement of 72 MMSCMD of gas to operate at 70% to 
75% PLF (75% PLF for projects of Andhra Pradesh and 70% PLF for 
others, with projects in Rajasthan and North -East requiring more gas to 
operate due to low calorific value of gas ava ilable). Against this 
requirement, the actual supply to these power plants in March, 2013 was 
about 27 MMSCMD. This is just sufficient to operate these power plants 
at an average PLF of about 29%. 13 power plants with capacity of 4904 
MW, with high depende nce an investment of Rs. 40,000 crore which are 
at risk of becoming non -performing assets, due to non -availability of 
indigenous natural gas. 
Due to fall in production of KG -D6 gas steel sector is getting Zero supply. 
However, Regasified Liquefied Natural Gas (R -LNG) can meet such 
shortfall in supply.  SME sector does not have any firm allocation of KG -
D6 gas but they are getting supplies from other domestic sources and are 
also procuring R-LNG to meet their requirement.” 
 
Reply of Department of Fertilizers: 

10 
 
 E-GoM in its meeting on 28.05.2008, taking into consideration, that the 
production from KG D6 was expected to commence from September 2008 and would 
initially be about 25 MMSCMD and further expected to gradually increase to 40 
MMSCMD by March 2009, decided  that the gas would be supplied in the order of 
priority and the first priority was accorded to “existing gas based urea plants.  
Approximately, 15.5 MMSCD of gas is available from KG D6 Basin for fertilizer sector.  
However, there has not been any reducti on in the production of urea due to the decline 
in gas production in KG D6 Basin.   
Reply of Ministry of Steel 
“There are three Gas based sponge iron units in the country, viz. M/s 
Essar Steel based in Hazira, Gujrat (capacity 7 mtpa), M/s JSW Ispat 
Limited based in Dolvi, Maharashtra (capacity 1.6 mtpa) and M/s Welspun 
Maxsteel Limited based in Salav, Maharashtra (capacity 1.7 mtpa). These 
units were based in Western Coast, far away from other raw material 
sources, based on assumption of easy availability of natural gas. Natural 
gas is used by these units as a feedstock, i.e. basic raw material for 
reduction of iron ore into hot metal and not as a fuel. Therefore, natural 
gas cannot be replaced by these units with any other material, as 
technologically, the se plants are designed to use natural gas only as a 
reductant. In addition to the above plants/ units, SAIL is working to install a 
steel plant based on Gas based Iron making technologies of 1.5 MTPA 
capacity and downstream facilities at its steel unit at Jagdishpur, Distt. 
Sultanpur, Uttar Pradesh. A number of pellet plants based on natural gas 
are also upcoming during the 12 th Five Year Plan period. Due to non 
availability of natural gas to existing units, there is under utilization of 
already created capacity of over 10 million tonnes per annum by the Essar 
steel, JSW Ispat Ltd. and Welspun Maxsteel Ltd. 
Any curtailment of natural gas to the existing plant and non availability of 
gas for the upcoming plants will not only result in reduced production of 
sponge iron/ steel, but may also adversely affect financial viability of these 
units, which in turn, may have an adverse impact on investment in 
downstream steel industry. As natural gas is used as basic input in steel 
plants, top priority should be accorded  to provide natural gas to steel 
plants at competitive market rates. Steel sector particularly the gas based 
sponge iron and steel production will be affected by increase in price of 
natural gas. Any rise in gas prices will result in an increase of the pri ces of 
the end products i.e. steel/ sponge iron.”   
 2.3 When asked in respect of reduced production of gas from KG -D6, will the 
contractor supply equivalent amount of gas after 31.03.2014 at the old price of 
$4.2/mmBTU, the Ministry of petroleum and natur al gas in their written replies have 
stated as under: 

11 
 
 “EGOM has approved natural gas price formula for a period of 5 years 
from the date of commencement of commercial production. The formula is 
not finalized on the basis of volume of gas to be sold at a particular price”.  
 2.4 On question of action taken by the Government against contractor for non-
performance i.e. low production of gas, the Ministry of P&NG in their post evidence 
replies stated as under: 
“(i) Currently, gas is being produced from D1 &  D3 fields and oil/gas is 
being produced from D -26 (MA) field in the block KG -DWN-98/3 operated 
by the consortium of Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) and NIKO 
Resources Limited (NEKO). The commercial oil production from MA field 
and gas production from D1  & D3 fields commenced on 17.09.2008 and 
on 01.04.2009 respectively.  
(ii) There has been decline of oil and gas production from D1, D3 & 
MA fields by the contractor vis -à-vis approved target in the Field 
Development Plan (FDP) of the contractor. The details are given below: 
Year 
 Natural Gas ( D1, D3 & MA) Oil and  condensate (MA) 
Planned 
Production as 
per approved 
FDP  (MMSCMD) 
Actual Production 
(MMSCMD) 
Planned 
Production as per 
approved FDP 
(BOPD) 
Actual 
Production 
(BOPD) 
2008-09 2.52 0.37 20097.70 5171.01 
2009-10 33.83 41.38 34041 10926.72 
2010-11 62.10 55.89 28684.50 23927.5 
2011-12  70.38 42.655 20890 15481.6 
2012-13 86.73 26.18 13562.2 9073.7 
Note: Current natural gas production is about 14.73 MMSCMD and crude oil 
production is about 6324 bopd. 
(iii) The average gas production from the block KG -DWN-98/3block has 
decreased from 55.89 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter Per Day (MMSCMD) 
in 2010 -11 to about 14.73 MMSCMD in 2013 -14. The Directorate General of 
Hydrocarbons (DGH) under this Ministry had aske d the contractor through 
correspondence dated 16.12.2010, 11.1.2011, 15.2.2011, 10.3.2011, 29.3.2011, 
5.4.2011 and 26.4.2011 to take suitable steps to drill, complete and put on 
production more gas wells in D1 & D3 gas fields as well as to adopt   appropri ate 
remedial measures such as wells intervention in D1, D3 & MA   fields to revive 
the sick wells in order to increase the gas production from the block. In the 
Management Committee (MC) meeting held on 17.3.2011, the contractor was 
apprised of his failure  to adhere to the AIDP with respect to D1 & D3 fields and 
directed to implement components of AIDP fully. The Contractor had been asked 

12 
 
to drill, complete and connect more producer wells and undertake appropriate 
remedial measures to revive the sick wells in D1, D3 and MA fields in this block. 
(iv) This Ministry took cognizance of facts regarding various failures of the 
contractor under the PSC given below and issued notice to the contractor on 2nd 
May, 2012:- 
 The contractor has failed to implement the development plan i.e. the Amended 
Initial Development Plan (AIDP). The contractor had made capital expenditure for 
creating gas production, transportation and processing facilities for a peak 
production rate of 80  MMSCMD whereas the contractor failed to adequately 
utilize the facilities so created to achieve the targets with respect to the gas 
production rate as approved in the AIDP.  
 Underutilization of the assets/facilities developed for production/extraction of gas 
as per the AIDP, leading to accumulation of surplus assets and excess capacity 
with the contractor.  
 As per approved IDP as amended by AIDP, the contractor was required to drill, connect 
and put on stream 22 wells by 01.04.2011 with an envisaged produc tion rate of 61.88 
MMSCMD and 31 wells by 01.04.2012 with an envisaged production rate of 80 
MMSCMD; whereas the contractor has completed the drilling of only 18 wells and even 
out of these 18 wells, only 12 wells are in operation.  
 The contractor has dril led 2 wells in Year 2 (2010 -11) and another 2 wells in Year 3 
(2011-12) but has not connected to the stream, thereby resulting in less production. The 
contractor has indicated that the above wells will be completed and connected to the 
stream only by mid 2013-14 i.e. Year 5, which is a clear non-compliance of the AIDP.  
 While the contractor has failed to comply with the AIDP, the contractor recovered cost 
which he is not entitled to recover under the PSC. In terms of PSC provisions, the 
contractor shall be entitled to recover Contract Costs out of a percentage of the total 
value of petroleum produced and saved from the Contact Area. 
 Clause 3.2 of the Accounting Procedure under PSC deals with costs and expenses 
which shall not be recoverable or allowable for cost recovery and profit sharing purpose 
under the PSC. The contractor has been informed that the following cumulative cost 
(which are provisional and subject to verification and finalization by the Government) for 
the respective years is inadmissible:- 
(i) For 2010-11: USD 457,000,000,  
(ii) For 2011-12: USD 1,005,000,000  
The contractor has initiated Arbitration Proceedings disputing the contents of the 
above notice and appointed Justice Mr. S.P. Bharucha former Chief Justice of 
India as their Arbitrator. Government has appointed Justice Mr. V.N. Khare, former 
Chief Justice of India. The two Arbitrators are yet to appoint a third Arbitrator. 

13 
 
EGoM has so far allocated 63.172 MMSCMD of KG -D6 gas on firm basis but 
availability during May, 2013 has dropped to 15.01 MMSCMD.  In view of declining 
availability of KG D6 gas, this Ministry has enforced a priority cut in the following 
order - Non-core sector, CGD, Power, LPG and Fertilizer  which was implemented 
from May 2011.” 
III. Impact of Gas price rise on economy 
 
3.1  When asked as to what will be the impact of rise in gas price on 
prices of fertilizers and MSP of wheat/rice/sugar and hence, on inflation, the 
Ministries/ Department of fertilizers, Planning Commission and P&NG in their post 
evidence replies responded as under: 
”There is a direct impact of rise in gas price on the prices of fertilizers as 
increase in the price of gas by Rs.1.00 per MMBTU results in the increase 
of the cost of production of urea by Rs.24.893.  Therefore, the additional 
liability of subsid y towards domestic urea would be Rs.24.893/MT of urea 
approximately.  Eg. On an average in India around 24.893 MMBTU of 
natural gas is required to produce one MT urea.  If gas price increase by 
$1/MMBTU, then per MT increase in production cost of urea will  be 
24.9*1*55=Rs.1369.5/MT.  Therefore, an increase of USD 1/MMBTU 
translates to enhanced cost of production of about (55*24.9=1369) 
Rs.1369/MT of urea.  Increasing gas price by USD 1/MMBTU translates 
into enhanced cost of almost Rs.2465.1 crores for 18MMT  of urea 
produce by gas based units per annum (1*24.9*55*180/100=2465.1 
crores/annum).  The same will be proportionately increase for 5 MMT 
(1*28*55*50/1000=770 crores/annum) of urea by converting into gas 
based plant, which is being produced presently by naphtha/FO/LSHS 
during 2013-14. 
 
Planning Commission: 
It is estimated by Association of Power Producers and Central Electricity 
Authority (CEA) that 90 MMSCMD gas is required to operate 24,000 MW 
capacity at 75% PLF. The gas supply currently is only 27 MMSCMD (February, 
2013) resulting shortfall of 63 MMSCMD. The new plants of about 8700 MW 
capacity are already stranded and are likely to b ecome NPA if gas is not made 
available.  
As regards steel sector, the 12 th Plan Document has made a demand estimate 
for steel/ sponge iron in the rage of 6 MMSCMD in   2011-12 to 8 MMSCMD in 
2016-17. The allocation to this sector will depend on EGOM‟s decis ion based on 
availability of gas from KGD-6. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas:  

14 
 
The cost of urea production will increase by Rs.1384 /MT with every increase of 
$1/MMBTU in gas prices. 
6.34 Giga Calories (GCal) is the weighted average energy required f or 
production of 1 MT of urea.  
[The above calculation is based on the assumption that the energy requirement 
for production of 1 MT of Urea is 6.34 GCal = 25.16 MMBTU & 1 USD= Rs.55.]” 
IV Cost of production of Gas 
 
 4.1 On question of cost of production of gas in India, the Ministry of Petroleum 
& Natural Gas in their post evidence replies stated as under: 
“Average cost of crude oil & natural gas production varies from company 
to company depending upon age/size/type of the reservoir, location of 
reservoir, operating cost, financing cost, depreciation, depletion & 
amortization applicable and accounting policy followed by various E&P 
companies as well as taxes and duties levied by the Government.  The 
cost incurred on unsuccessful exploration works also has to be 
apportioned. 
The average cost of production of ONGC and OIL is about US$ 
3.59/mmbtu and US$ 3.06/mmbtu respectively for the financial year 2011 -
12.   
The cost of production of oil and gas in deep water and ultra deep water is 
likely to be higher than the cost on land and shallow water”.  
 
 4.2 When asked about the cost of production in KG -D6, the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas in their post evidence replies stated as under : 
“Cost of production for the block is reported in audited accounts for th e 
block.  The expenditure incurred by the contractors is audited by 
independent auditors under the Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) 
which provides for auditing of the actual expenditures by different set of 
auditors; firstly, by the Management Committee  (MC) appointed auditors, 
secondly, by the Government appointed auditors. Comptroller & Auditor 
General of India (C&AG) has audited the accounts of KG -D6 Block on 
request of Government of India. 
Higher Gas price will lead to increase in royalty and profit payable to 
Government of India (GoI) as per provisions of Production Sharing 
Contract. Royalty payment on gas production is 10% of well head price.  

15 
 
In deep water, 5% royalty is payable for first 7 years and thereafter 10% 
royalty is payable.   
In this cas e, 5% of increase in the revenue arising out of a higher gas 
price will be payable to Government of India (GoI) as Royalty for first 7 
years.  In addition, at the present profit sharing rates, about 10% of 
increased revenue will be allocated for profit sha ring between GoI and 
Contractor, with the balance for cost recovery. Out of this only 10% (i.e. 
1% of additional revenue) will be payable to GoI as its share and rest 90% 
(i.e. 9% of additional revenue) will be payable to the contractor”. 
 4.3 The Planning Commission have submitted that they have not made 
any assessment on cost of production in KGD-6 basin. 
 
V Comparison of Global gas production, availability and pricing  
 
 5.1 On being enquired about the global scenario in gas availability and pricing, 
the Ministry of P&NG furnished the following details: 
“As per BP Statistical review 2013: The comparison of gas production & 
consumption in the world, Asia Pacific, Iran, Middle East, Vietnam & India 
are as under:    
 
Comparison of Natural Gas production: 
 
Region/ country 
Production during 
2012 (MMSCMD) 
% of world 
production 
World 9216.22 100.00% 
Asia Pacific 1343.04 14.57% 
Middle East (Excluding Iran) 1062.75 11.53% 
Iran 439.73 4.77% 
Vietnam 25.76 0.28% 
India 110.16 1.20% 
 
Comparison of Natural Gas consumption: 
 
Region/ country 
Consumption during 
2012 (MMSCMD) 
% of world 
consumption 
World 9080.56 100.00% 
Asia Pacific 1712.20 18.86% 
Middle East (Excluding Iran) 700.52 7.71% 
Iran 427.64 4.71% 
Vietnam 25.76 0.28% 

16 
 
India 149.47 1.65% 
 
 
The average Gas price in major countries/ Gas Hubs during 2012 is an under: 
 
                                                                 ($/MMBTU) 
Japan  
(cif) 
European 
Union (cif)  
UK (Heren 
NBP Index) 
US  (Henry 
Hub)  Canada (Alberta)  
16.75 11.03 9.46 2.76 2.27 
 
In many Middle Eastern countries gas has historically been considered a 
free good as high oil prices have boosted national oil company and state 
revenues across the region. As a result gas prices in the Middle East, 
especially Iran &Saudi Arabia are generally very low.”  
 
 5.2 When asked that in Qatar, gas price is <$1 mmBTU, why don‟t we plan to 
set up a urea manufacturing plant there and import urea manufactured  therein, instead 
of seeking to import high cost R -LNG, the Department of Fertilizer in a written reply 
stated as under: 
“In pursuance of the visit of Prime Minister of India to Qatar in November 
2008, the second meeting of the High Level Monitoring Mechanism 
between the State of Qatar and the Republic of India was held in Doha on 
November 14, 2009 the DOF has been pursuing Qatar for: 
a) Setting up of Urea/Ammonia Plant in Joint Venture in Qatar in pursuance 
of MoU signed between QAFCO and IFFCO on Feb. 24, 2009,  
b) Participation of QAFCO or Qatar Oil Co. in the revival of closed  fertilizer 
plants in India as an investment opportunity, 
c) Possibility of setting up  joint venture of fertilizers anywhere in the world 
with participation from both sides, 
d) Long-term imports of Urea from Qatar to India on an agreed formula. 
 
Despite the best efforts of the department of fertilizers the matter could not be 
proceeded beyond the first meeting of HLMM which was held on 14 th 
January, 2011.  Even as decided the first meeting OF HLMM the second 
meeting of Joint Working Group (JWG) could not be held so far.   
Moreover, during IFA conference at Chicago from 18 th to 22 nd May, 2013, a 
meeting held between delegation led by Secretar y(Fertilizers) and Ali Ahmed 
Al-anadi, Director (Mktg.) and Robert W F Chouffot, Executive Director of 
Muntajat, a Government owned company of Kingdom of Qatar.  Muntajat is 
responsible for marketing of 80% of all chemicals and fertilizers produced by 
Qatar.  Qatar produces 6 to 7 million tonnes of Urea -Ammonia a year.  They 
don‟t participate in Indian tenders but have been supplying Urea to Indian 
companies. Presently, DOF is looking for possibility of long -term supply 
arrangements for Urea with Muntajat, Government owned company of Qatar 

17 
 
for which an expression of Interest restricted to only the manufacturers of 
Urea currently under consideration. However, Department of Fertilizers will 
consider only such offer which will be from Government of Qatar for a 
Government to Government agreement for a long term supply of Urea under 
a formula based pricing with discount mechanism.  In this connection, the 
said company of Qatar assured that they will send an offer to Indian 
Government soon.  The response from the said company is awaited”.   
 
 
VI Taxes on Natural Gas 
  
 6.1 On being enquired about taxing of natural gas, the Ministries/Departments 
of P&NG and Revenue have furnished the following replies: 
Reply of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas:  
„The various applicable taxes on gas are as below: 
Custom duty @ 5% on imported R-LNG 
Value added tax/ Central sales tax as applicable on sale of Natural Gas. 
Service Tax @ 12.36% is applicable on the pipeline transportation tariff 
On CNG excise duty of 14.42% is applicable. 
There has been a demand from Gas importers to provide declared good status to 
imported R-LNG which will reduce the price of R-LNG”  
 
Reply of Department of Revenue: 
“With  regard to direct taxes, sub - section (9) of section 80 -IB of the 
Income- tax Act, 1961 provides for hundred percent deduction in respect 
of profits and gains derived from commercial production of mineral oil and 
natural gas.  The deduction is available for seven consecutives 
assessment years for the following:- 
(i) In North- Eastern Region, for commercial production of mineral oil if 
production commenced before 01.04.1997; 
(ii) In any part of India, for commercial production of mineral oil if 
production commenced on or after 01.4.1997.  However, this 
benefit is not available in respect of pr oduction of mineral oil from a 
block licensed under a contract awarded after the 31 st day of 
March, 2011 under the New Exploration Licensing Policy. 

18 
 
(iii)  For refining of mineral oil on or after 1.10.1998 but not later than 
31.03.2012; 
(iv) For commercial production  of natural gas  in blocks licensed 
under NELP-VIII on or after 01.04.2009; & 
(v) For commercial production of natural gas   in blocks licensed 
under NELP -IV for Coal Bed Methane blocks on or after 
01.04.2009. 
Apart from the tax incentive discussed above, all ot her production and 
refining activities in the mineral oil and natural gas sector are subject to 
income –tax.  The profit linked incentive has been practically sunset. 
 
Moreover, in reply to a query regardin g exemption of natural gas from 
excise duty and th e revenue foregone on this account, the Ministry of 
Finance(DoR) has stated following details: 
 
o Excise duty is levied on excisable goods which are produced or 
manufactured in India i.e. the taxable event is production or 
manufacture of excisable goods.  
o Excise duty is normally not levied on goods naturally produced. 
Hence, natural gas attracted Nil rate of excise duty in the First 
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 itself upto 2001.  
o In the Budget 2001 -02, it was decided to levy excise duty o n 
compressed natural gas (CNG). Accordingly, a Chapter Note was 
inserted in Chapter 27 of the said Schedule to the effect that the 
process of compression of natural gas for the purpose of marketing 
it as CNG for use as a fuel would amount to manufacture. S ince 
natural gas and CNG falls under same tariff line, in order to 
operationalise the duty on CNG, the rate of duty in the said 
Schedule was made as 16% and the Nil rate of duty on natural gas 
was retained through notification.  
o In view of the above, it may be noted that all along natural gas 
attracted Nil rate of excise duty. Hence, revenue foregone is not 
quantifiable”. 
 
 
VII Revenue Loss to the Government 
 
 7.1 On the question of revenue loss to the Government due to decline in gas 
production in KG-D6 block, the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Finance in their 
post evidence replies stated as under: 
    Reply of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas:  

19 
 
“The Contractor has submitted the following reasons for  less gas 
production as compared to AIDP of D1 and D3 fields:  
i. Substantial variance in Reservoir Behavior and Character has been 
observed vis -à-vis the prediction, and there seem to be reservoir 
constraints in achieving the gas production rates. 
ii. Pressure decline is several times higher than originally envisaged. 
iii. Early water production in some of the wells was not predicted in initial 
reservoir simulations, though overall field water production is small.  
 
The revenue loss to the Government is to the extent of royalty and profit 
payable on difference of projected and actual production of oil and gas. 
The royalty on production of crude oil and natural gas comes to US$432 
million in the block KG -DWN-98/3 as on 1.4.2012 and profit of US$86.13 
million.  The year -wise profit paid to G overnment on oil/condensate and 
gas production in KG -D6 block and royalty paid on sale of gas from this 
block is as under: 
(in US$ Million) 
Year Royalty on Production  of 
Gas 
GOI Profit Petroleum 
2008-09 - 0.51 
2009-10 93.15 22.80 
2010-11 138.60 34.98 
2011-12  104.27 27.84 
Total 336.02 86.13 
 
Reply of Department of Revenue:  
The revenue foregone for F.Y. 2010 -11, 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 on account of 
section 80-IB is tabulated as under: 
 
 * Revenue forgone ( in Rs. Crore), on account of Section 80 -IB (9) of the 
Income- tax Act, 1961 - Deduction of profits of industrial undertakings de rived 
from production of mineral oil and Natural Gas. 
  
  
CORPORATES  
 
                Financial Year                                                                     Quantum 
1. 2010-11                                                                                                3626 
2. 2011-12                                                                                                7999.0 
3. 2012-13( estimated                                                                              8817.0 
  

20 
 
* The figures have been taken from the Receipts Budget for the year 2012 -13 and 2013 -14.  
This does not include any tax collected on account of Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT).” 
 
Role of Petroleum Regulator 
  
 7.2  On being enquired about the role and utility of Petroleum Regulator, the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas furnished the following reply: 
        “Govt. of India has enacted the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act 
 2006, under which the Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB), has 
 been established. The functions of the Board are as follows:  
 (a) protect the interest of consumers by fostering fair trade and competition amongst 
the entities; 
 (b) register entities to- 
(i) market notified petroleum and petroleum products and, subject to the contractual 
obligations of the Central Government, natural gas; 
(ii) establish and operate liquefied natural gas terminals; 
(iii) establish storage facilities for petroleum , petroleum products or natural gas 
exceeding such capacity as may be specified by regulations; 
 (c) authorise entities to- 
(i)   lay, build, operate or expand a common carrier or contract carrier; 
(ii) lay, build, operate or expand city or local natural gas distribution network; 
 (d) declare pipelines as common carrier or contract carrier; 
 (e) regulate, by regulations,- 
(i) access to common carrier or contract carrier so as to ensure fair trade and 
competition amongst entities and for that purpose specify pipeline access code; 
(ii) transportation rates for common carrier or contract carrier; 
(iii) access to city or local natural gas distribution network so as to ensure fair trade 
and competition amongst entities as per pipeline access code; 
 (f) in respect of notified petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas- 
(i)  ensure adequate availability; 

21 
 
(ii) ensure display of information about the maximum retail prices fixed by the entity 
for consumers at retail outlets; 
(iii) monitor prices and take corrective measures to prevent restrictive trade practice 
by the entities; 
(iv) secure equitable distribution for petroleum and petroleum products; 
(v) provide, by regulations, and enforce, retail service obligations for retail outlets 
and marketing service obligations for entities; 
(vi)monitor transportation rates and take corrective action to prevent restrictive trade 
practice by the entities; 
 (g) levy fees and other charges as determined by regulations; 
 (h) maintain a data bank of information on activities relating to petroleum, petroleum 
 products.”   
 
  

22 
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. The Committee believe that natural gas is a national resource and a public 
asset; and therefore any discourse  on its pricing policy should reflect this 
principle so that it is used for the larger national good and not for profiteering.  In 
the present economic situation with rampant inflation and a slowdown of the 
economy, any increase in gas prices will have a d erailing effect on the economy 
generally and the downstream core sectors of fertilizer , power and steel,  in 
particular.  The Committee note that with gas production from the KG basin fields 
falling drastically in the last couple of years due to w hat the co ntractor claimed 
were “technical problem”, the core sector of the economy dependent on gas as 
fuel was forced to either use expensive imported gas or operate their plants at 
sub-optimal capacities.  As production from KG -D6 gas basin continued to 
decline since April 2010, pro -rata cuts were imposed by Government across all 
sectors between July 2010 and March 2011 ; in October 2011, supply to City Gas 
Distribution (CGD) from this basin became zero and by March 2013, the supply to 
power sector also became zer o.  However, fertilizer sector was getting its 
supplies as per priority fixed by Government .  The reduction in gas supplies 
resulted in several gas-based power plants in the  Country getting strand ed and 
becoming NPA.  The short fall in production also resu lted in zero supply for the 
steel sector.  As regards the impact of gas price increase on priority sectors, the 
Ministry have admitted that there would be a direct impact on the prices of 
fertilizers, as increase in the price of gas by $ 1 per MMBTU result s in the 
increase in cost of production of urea by a huge Rs. 1384 per MT.  It is thus 

23 
 
evident that gas pricing has seriou s repercussions for the economy  as a whole , 
which warrants careful deliberations and prudent decisions.   
2. The Committee would thus like to bring into focus the following critical 
issues and areas of concern arising out of the government‟s decision to revise 
sharply the natural gas price. 
(i) Deploying the single instrument of price to achieve  the multiple 
objectives of incentivizing domestic gas exploration and production 
on the supply side and meeting the huge unmet demand for gas at 
reasonable cost .  In this regard, doubts have been raised as to 
whether a large rise in gas price would at all  attract additional 
investment from home or abroad and relax the supply side 
constraint.  Despite raising the domestic well -head price by almost 
300% during the period beginning 2005 till date  (from as low as 
$1.79/MMBTU to $4.20/MMBTU) , private investments in the sector 
and the country‟s gas output have actually dropped. 
 
(ii) To meet s erious challenges that have arisen due to the tendency of 
contractors to manipulate the investment multiple parameter and 
controlling production, which adversely affected supply. 
 
(iii) To frame a long-term vision based on geo -political developments in 
the energy sector. 
 
(iv) To conduct a  scientific cost study in the gas basins warrant ing / 
justifying a higher price .  It cannot be a mechanism only leading to 
windfall / super-normal profits to entities, thereby putting the cost of 
private profit on society.   
 
(v) The rationale for dollar- denominated gas pricing when the revenues 
are all in rupee and the country has a chronic adverse exchange rate. 
 

24 
 
(vi) Any fixing of input price at a lower level than output price will mean a 
bloating of subsidies; is the government prepared for a 
disproportionately higher subsidy outgo in successive budgets for 
the fertilizer and power sectors and whether th is has been factored 
in the 12 th Plan.  The extent of its inflationary impact needs to be 
considered. 
 
(vii) The need for consultations with  the State governments in this 
process, as they may have to significantly increase power tariffs to 
cover the higher costs  or drastically raise their subsidy expenditure.  
The impact on state budgets should be key determinant as well. 
 
(viii) The need to consider views of concerned Ministries, Planning 
Commission , Industry and experts before arriving at the decision. 
 
(ix) The counter-productive effect  of such large increases in price  by 
forcing consumers of gas to divert to less cleaner fuels, thereby 
stultifying the gas pricing policy itself. 
 
3. The Committee are constrained to note that no due diligence was done 
before arriv ing at the decision to revise gas price .   Neither was any cost or 
impact study done in this regard.  in this context, the Committee would  
recommend that the following aspects should be taken into account as an 
integral part of any gas pricing mechanism , w hich has huge impact on various 
sectors of the economy: 
(i) At this juncture of our economic development, transitioning from a 
regulated to a fully market-based system should be staggered. 
(ii) The Government  needs to rethink certain elements in the pricin g 
formula suggested by the Rangarajan panel, which only serves to 
push the Indian gas price higher than it ought to be.   A more realistic 

25 
 
price formulation better suited to our current priorities may be 
evolved. 
(iii) Secondly, there should be a cap on the  suggested price under the 
formula and for this purpose, there should be a ceiling price.  It 
cannot be the case that gas producers will be allowed to reap 
unlimited gains in the event of upsw ing in global prices at the 
expense of core sectors of the economy. 
(iv) The Government should also subject gas producers to closer 
regulation, especially on aspects of cost recovery and technical 
parameters related to production.  A comprehensive technical study 
on cost estimates of gas production should be conducted for this 
purpose. 
(v) The Government must ensure that the contractor responsible for 
delivering the major chunk of gas from KG -D6 gas field supplies, 
delivers the shortfall he still owes as per the Agreement at the old 
price of $4.2/ MMBtu, rather than get ting the benefit of the new price 
for previous commitments. 
(vi) The important recommendation of the Rangarajan panel of moving to 
a revenue -sharing arrangement with gas producers should be 
considered.  A new Production Sharing Contract (PSC) model should 
be evolved that will do away with incentives to control production 
and manipulating investments, while assuring reasonable returns to 
the producers. 
(vii) The government needs to do a thorough impact study of gas pricing 
on different sectors of the economy, particularly the core sectors of 
power, fertilizer, steel and small scale industry specially those 
effected by pollution control laws/orders .  The quantum of subsidy 
required to compensate these sectors should be precisely arrived at 
over the medi um term .  Similarly, the extent of „revenue loss or 

26 
 
foregone‟ should also be quantified over this period in order to grasp 
fully the implications of the price revision on the Union Budget. 
(viii) As gas pricing will have implications for power tariffs as w ell, State 
governments also need to be consulted and taken on b oard.  Instead 
of hurrying with decisions carrying wider import  and ramifications 
for the country as a whole, broader consultative process involving all 
stakeholders should be put in place. 
(x) Divergence in views within the government cannot be ignored on 
such a major issue and therefore, the valid concerns expressed by 
key economic Ministries of the government like power, fertilizer and 
steel should be duly addressed before finalizing the policy.  
 In the light of the concerns enunciated above, the Committee would 
strongly recommend the Government to review forthwith its decision to raise gas 
prices and come out with fresh pricing which is more balanced and holistic and 
closely related to the audited cost of production and a reasonable return on the 
capital invested.   
 
 
New Delhi;                       YASHWANT SINHA, 
02 August, 2013                                           Chairman, 
11 Sravana, 1935 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Finance. 
  

27 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
     
 Sanjay Nirupam, MP(LS) 
             02/08/2013 
  
 
  
I hereby state the reasons for my note of dissent as follows:- 
 
A.  Report adopted in undue haste 
  
For no apparently justifiable reason the report was adopted in undue haste 
despite the fact that it is to be implemented with effect only from April, 2014. 
  
B.  Inadequate deliberations 
  
To arrive at a conclusion that the Government of India must review its decision 
required comprehensive deliberations whereas the decision was rushed through. In fact, 
detailed discussions with Oil producing companies both Private and Public as well as 
the Ministries of Petroleum, Power and Fertilizers and Chemicals was necessary but the 
same did not happen. It is pertinent to note that even ONGC, though a Public Sector 
undertaking and the biggest Stakeholder in the Hydro Carbon Sector, was not invited to 
give their views.   
  
C.  Rangarajan Committee 
  
The decision of the Government was largely based on the recommendations of 
the Dr. Rangarajan Committee appointed by the Government to carry out an in -depth 
study on the subject. It was therefore imperative for the Committee to invite  Dr. 
Rangarajan to give us an insight into  the reasons for recommending the proposed Gas 
price revision. However, the same was not done. 
  
D.  Investment 
  
As suggested in the title “Economic impact of recent Gas Price Revision”, the 
committee should have taken into account the feasibility of domestic and foreign 
investment in the exploration sector of Natural Gas in India. However due consideration 
was not g iven to this crucial aspect despite specific mention in the Dr. Rangarajan 

28 
 
Committee Report that investors would opt for other destinations if the Gas price was 
not revised and made realistic. 
  
E.   Import 
 
The fertilizer sector is largely dependent on im ported LNG which is adversely 
affecting our Current Account Balance. Therefore while arriving at conclusions on the 
economic impact of the Gas Price Revision it was necessary to understand whether the 
Gas Price Revision will lower the import of Gas and con sequently save precious foreign 
exchange for the Country. This aspect was also given a miss. 
  
In addition to the above mentioned inadequacies in the report I hereby submit a 
statement of justification in support of my dissent to the Report: 
  
1.      In P ara No. 1 of Page 1, the report states “It calls for sustained 
effort at increasing energy efficiency to contain the growth in demand for 
energy while increasing domestic production as much as possible to keep 
import dependence at a  reasonable level”. Further in the later part of the 
same Para, the reports states “As per Economic  Survey 2012 -13, the 
average natural gas production in the year 2011 -12 was 130 Million Metric 
Standard Cubic Meter Per Day (MMSCMD) which was about 9 per cent 
lower than the pr evious year mainly due to lower production for the KG D6 
deep-water block.   The projected natural gas production in 2012 -13 is 
about 117.8 MMSCMD, which is again about 9 per cent lower than 
production in the previous year.   Natural Gas production during Ap ril-
November 2012-13 was 28.05 billion cubic meters (BCM) as compared to 
32.28 BCM during the same period of the previous year”. 
  
It is evident that the concerns of the Government of India on increase in 
production of Natural Gas are based on the fact that production of Natural Gas in India 
is on the decline at the rate of 9% per annum and to take steps towards reduction in the 
quantum of import of Gas. The Committee did not take into account the aspect of 
domestic availability of Gas & dependence on im port, thereby hurting the overall 
economic interests of the country. 
  
2.    In Para 3 on Page No. 1 the reports lauds NELP which is aimed at enhancing 
production of Gas in India. The Committee selectively ignored the aspect related to Gas 
pricing. NELP ha s advocated that explorers must be given free market prices in the 
production of Gas in India to increase efficiency in the use of Gas and enable 

29 
 
consumers to buy Gas at prices that suited them. The Report has conveniently ignored 
this aspect of NELP and i nstead has taken a skewed view to demand that the 
Government of India revise its decision. 
  
3.    In Para 2 of Page 2 the Committee states “Dr. Rangarajan Committee  outlined the 
principles and model for gas pricing making use of various benchmark market p rices to 
estimate the arms length price for gas, which the Government is contractually 
committed to adopt under the Production Sharing Contract (PSC).   The formula 
suggested would yield the price with a three month lag, using the benchmark market 
prices ov er the preceding twelve months.   The Government has decided to aplly this 
formula with effect from  April, 2014”. The Committee has chosen not to deal with this 
aspect even though the decision of the Government was based on the objectives set 
out in the Dr.  Rangarajan Committee Report. On the contrary the observations of the 
Committee are at variance with this objective and are contrary to the letter and spirit of 
the Dr. Rangarajan Committee Report for no logical reasons. 
  
4.    Power Ministry 
  
In Para 3 of Page 3 the Ministry of Power has stated “At present Gas 
based installed capacity in the country is operating at very low average PLF (24%) as 
the production of KG D6 gas has nose -dived.  Total installed capacity of 56 gas based 
power plants in the count ry is 18,713 MW with total requirement of 72.34 MMSCMD to 
operate at 70% / 75% PLF>  Against this requirement, the actual gas available / 
consumed by these power plants during the month of April, 2013 was 35.64 MMSCMD 
only (comprising of 24.84 MMSCMD APM Ga s, 7.03 MMSCMD Non APM Gas 1.84 
MMSCMD Long Term RLNG & 2.23 MMSCMD Spot RLNG).   The average PLF as on 
April 2013 of these power plants is 36%, taking 4.07 MMSCMD of RLNG.   The 
operation of the existing gas power plants at very low PLF is neither technical ly feasible 
nor commercially viable.   The non-availablity of adequate gas to existing power plants 
results in huge  loss of generation”. It is evident from the statement of Power Ministry 
Officials that their greater concern is the availability of Gas rather than the price. 
  
 
 
 
 

30 
 
5.    Petroleum Ministry 
  
On Para 3 of Page 4 the Ministry of Petroleum has admitted that 13 Power Plants 
with the capacity of  4904 MW, with high  dependence an investment of Rs. 40,000/ - 
crores which are at risk of becoming NPA due  to non-availability of indigenous Natural 
Gas. It may be noted that the emphasis of both the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of 
Petroleum is on availability of Gas. 
  
6.    Fertilizer Ministry 
  
All the fertilizer units in India were started before the  NELP regime. As a matter 
of policy the Government gives priority to the fertilizer sector as far as Gas supply is 
concerned. However due to sharp decline in Gas production the sector is largely 
dependent upon import of LNG. Initially Gas Price Revision ma y result in increase in 
prices of urea but in the long run with increased production of domestic Gas, the 
fertilizer sector will be benefited due to reduction in import. At present, the cost of import 
of gas at the rate of 12 USD MMSCMD will subsequently c ome down to 8 USD 
MMSCMD. In the long run cheaper Gas will be available in the domestic market. 
 
7.    NELP & Production Sharing Contracts  
  
Determination of Gas pricing in India is done in accordance with the provisions of 
Production Sharing Contracts si gned between the Government of India and the 
Contractor which is based on the guidelines of National Exploration Licensing Policy 
(NELP) 1999.  It seems that the Committee has not gone into the details of Production 
Sharing Contract or provisions of NELP b efore arriving at its conclusion with regard to 
natural gas price mechanism.     Going through the provisions of one production sharing 
contract one can find that the gas price should be determined by the market.   One 
provision says, the contractors shall e ndeavor to sell all natural gas produced and 
saved from the contract area at arms length prices to the benefit of parties to the 
contract.    In another provision PSC says that, Gas which is sold or disposed or 
otherwise, then in accordance with earlier pa ragraphs shall be valued on the basis of 
competitive arms lengths sales.   Now, the question is what is the meaning of arms 
length sales. In one provision of PSC it clearly states that, arms length sales “ means 
sales made freely in the open market in freel y convertible currencies between, willing 
and unwilling sellers and buyers and in which buyers and sellers have no contractual or 

31 
 
other relationship, directly or indirectly or any common or joint interest as is reasonably 
likely to influence selling prices  and shall,   inter alia, exclude sales (whether direct or 
indirect, through brokers or otherwise) involving Affilates, sales between Companies 
which are Parties to this Contract, sales between government and government -owned 
entities, counter traders, rest ricted or distress sales, sales involving barter arrangement 
and generally any transactions motivated in whole or in part by considerations other 
than normal commercial practices.    Hence, by asking from the Government to review 
the decision of gas price r evision does not appear to be without prejudice on part of 
committee.    
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
In Clause 1, the Committee concludes “That in the present economic situation 
with rampant inflation and slowdown of the economy, any increase in gas p rices 
will have a derailing effect on the economy generally and the downstream core 
sectors of fertilizer, power and steel in particular committee has not considered 
the increasing import price of Gas in the absence of adequate availability of 
domestic gas production”.  
  
In Clause 2 (i) the Committee has expressed doubts on incentivising domestic 
gas exploration through price rise “Despite raising  the domestic well -head price 
by almost 300% during the period 2005 till date (from as low as $1.79/MMBTU to 
$4.20/MMBTU), investments in the sector and the country‟s gas output have 
actually dropped”. The Committee‟s main concern KG D6 started only in 2009 
which proves that the doubts expressed are unfounded. The Committee in 
Clause 2 (iii) has asked GOI to fram e long term vision based on Geopolitical 
Development in the energy sector. Before coming to conclusions it is apparent 
that the Committee itself has not studied the details of this aspect. Clause 2 (iv) 
is misplaced because neither the provisions of NELP w ith regard to Gas price 
and provisions of production-sharing contract have been studied. 
Clause 2(vi) is similarly misplaced because it deals with the aspects of subsidy 
burden on the Government without dealing with the repercussion of increasing 
import pr ices of LNG which is affecting Indian economy more devastatingly.    I 
would like to present a brief picture of the import of LNG in India and its impact 
on Indian economy.  Currently LNG being imported to India by the core sector is 
approx 15 MMSCMD.  By 2015-16 the core sector in India will require the import 
of LNG to the tune of 114 MMSCMD.  The price of LNG in the international 
market is USD 14 / MMBTU.   It translates into annual subsidy to the tune of 20 
Billion US Dollar at current exchange rate; the t otal subsidy bill will go up to the 
tune of Rs. 120,000 Crores.    Thus, the higher subsidy outgo is expected on 
account of the lower availability of Domestic Natural Gas.  
 
Clause 2 (vii) the committee had expressed its concern on impact on State 
Governments with regards to the Power tariff. While report itself accepts in first 
para of observations / recommendations “By March, 2013, the supply  to power 

32 
 
sector also became zero” and “the reduction in Gas supply will render several 
exploratory companies into N PAs”.  In the absence of any operating Gas based 
power plant in any states, no states governments is required to be consulted.      
  
Clause 2 (viii) asks the government to consider views of the concerned 
Ministries, Power Companies, Industry and Experts b efore arriving at a decision 
while ironically the committee has not tak en into account the views of Power 
companies, Industry and Experts in the sector. 
  
Clause 3 of report says Government has “Not done any due diligence before 
arriving at a decision to r aise Gas price”. Committee further says “Neither was 
any cost or impact study done in this regard”. This is absurd because the 
committee itself did not consider the views of important stakeholders and 
experts. 
  
Clause 3 (i) while asking the Government to take a decision on Price Revision in 
a staggered manner, the Committee itself failed to note that as per production 
sharing contract and provisions of NELP price revision exercise was not 
undertaken for a period of 5 years. 
  
The Gas Prices in India have a lways had a cap and were never at par with 
International Prices. Despite this, it is imperative to review the prices in keeping 
with the fluctuations of International Prices. This is precisely what the 
Government of India has done. 
  
  
It is evident from t he report that the committee itself has not done any 
comprehensive technical study on the cost estimate of Gas prices before arriving 
at conclusions. 
 
In view of the aforestated reasons, it is my firm belief that before the Committee 
asks the Government to  review its decision on Gas Price Revision, the 
Committee must look at the entire picture for which purpose it is necessary to 
once again interact with different Stakeholders before adopting this half -baked 
report. It is also apparent that if the Gas Price  Revision is scuttled, the interests 
of our country‟s economy will be damaged in a big way and the only purpose that 
will be served is that windfall gains will accrue to the importers of Gas. 
  
  
 
   Sd/                    
(SANJAY NIRUPAM) 
  

33 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
 
Dharmendra Yadav, MP (LS) 
2/08/2013 
 
 
 Sir, the Committee has accepted the draft on the subject “Economic Impact of 
revision of Natural Gas price”.  I have few objections in this draft which I will mention 
further.  It is my request that my views should also be included in the report along -with 
the recommendations of the Committee. 
 There is a huge need of natural gas in our country.  We are importing maximum 
quantum of gas and doing domestic production also to meet the demand. 
 We should formulate a policy to increase domestic production and to reduce the 
dependency on import so that we can become self dependent in the important sector 
like natural gas and can save foreign currency by decreasing the import. 
 Recommendations made by Committee will e ffect domestic production also.  
Although, it is also a fact that at present also, imported natural gas is very costly in 
comparison to domestic produced natural gas.  Moreover, Government of India is also 
not getting any tax from import.  Domestic product ion will give tax and other benefits to 
the Government. 
 An estimation should be done on the impact on Government subsidy that how 
much subsidy is increased by using imported gas in comparison to domestic production. 
 
 
 
Sd/ 
(DHARMENDRA YADAV) 
  

34 
 
Naresh Agrawal, MP (RS) 
02/08/2013 
 
NOTE  OF  DISSENT    
 
 The Country needs more oil and gas if the economy has to grow.  Increasing 
imports are pushing the economy down a fiscal cliff which can soon end India‟s dreams‟  
of being the global leader of the 21st Century. 
 Any policy regime for increasing domestic exploration and production has to be 
made for the long term and the New Exploration Licensing Policy was no exception.  It 
was approved by the United Front Government led by Prime Minister Deve Gowda in 
1997.  The first Round of Bidding was announced by Prime Minister Atal Bihar Vajpayee 
in 1999.  Subsequently 8 rounds of bidding have taken place during the NDA as well as 
the UPA I and UPA II regimes. 
 The consistency with which different Governments have fo llowed NELP 
demonstrates to the world that India is not a banana republic and follows the rule of law.  
Policies and contracts (PSCs) signed by one regime are honoured and implemented by 
their succeeding regimes, even when the political alignments change.  This is 
something that India can justifiably be proud of. 
NELP as a policy did away with the Administered Pricing Mechanism whereby 
the Government fixed the price for Oil & Gas to be produced in India.  Under the profit 
sharing terms of NELP, Oil & Gas pr ices had to be market based and derived on the 
basis of arms length sales in the country.  Oil and Gas prices were thus to be 
determined by demand and supply based on international benchmarks and not by 
inefficient cost of production methods. 
Under the Investment Multiple (IM) based profit sharing model adopted for NELP, 
the share of all the Parties of the PSC (including the Government) is dependent on the 
Contractor selling Oil & Gas at the best prevailing arms-length price in the market.   
The price propo sed by a Contractor has to be approved by the Government to 
ensure that the proposed price is a true arms -length price.  The current gas price of $ 

35 
 
4.2 per MMBTU was approved in 2007 and is valid until March 2014.  That period 
ending in a few months, the Government is contractually bound to approve a new price. 
Price approval is required well in advance because no Contractor will make 
capital investment or commit operating expenditure to produce unless the sale price is 
known.  The current price for KG D6 w as also approved in October 2007, well before 
production was due to commence in April 2009.  Similarly, the Government is bound to 
approve the April 2014 prices well in time.  It is something contractual which cannot 
await the political cycle of regime change! 
As far as the approval given on June 27, 2013 by CCEA is concerned, NELP 
PSCs having promised arm -length prices, domestic producers have serious contention 
with the price approved by the basis of the Dr. Rangarajan Formula.  A market price is 
determined by the market, not by the Government or the CCEA.  Market price is the 
commitment made under the terms of the NELP PSC to all Contractors whether ONGC, 
OIL, Cairn or RIL and BP.  Those contractual terms have to be honoured. 
The only purpose of Governmen t approval under PSC is to ensure that no party 
transfers revenues to affiliates and interested parties by transfer pricing.  The Contractor 
having been prevented from doing this (through the rejection of the $ 2.34 / MMBTU 
price proposed in 2006)  the Gov ernment must equally desist from the temptation to 
force sales at sub market prices to entities subsidized and supported by it. 
 Unfortunately, certain vested interests are now arguing that the function of 
approval by Government should be used by it to „fi x‟ low gas prices so that the subsidy 
burden of the Government is contained.  That is the subversion of a signed Contract 
entered into by the Government of India.  Government does not have the authority to „fix 
or administer Oil & Gas prices under NELP. 
The Government introduced NELP to incentivise Oil & Gas production by 
allowing market related Oil & Gas prices for attracting investments and technology in 
E&P.       
 Subsidies are macro-economic concerns.  It is counterproductive to allow them to 
affect the production of domestic natural gas by artificially suppressing gas prices to 
reduce the subsidy burden. 

36 
 
 Realizing this simple economic fact, the Government, though carrying a far 
higher burden on account of subsidies given on liquid petroleum products  like LPG, 
Kerosene and Diesel, did not ask Contractors like BG, Cairn, GEO Petrol, GSPC< 
Hardy, HOEC, NIKO, ONGC, RIL, etc. to sell crude oil produced under the PSCs at a 
hefty discount to international prices.  Domestic crude oil produced under PSCs 
continues to be sold at international prices and the Government bears the subsidy 
burden on LPG, Kerosene and Diesel. 
 Let us not forget that out of the 110 discoveries announced under NELP, only 6 
are under production.  Why?  Because Contractors and DGH have not been able to 
approve plans to develop discoveries which are not viable at a gas price of $ 
4.2/MMBTU. 
 Following the CCEA approval, new production will come because (i) many of the 
existing discoveries made by various contractors such as GSPC, ONCG and  others 
become viable at the new price‟ (ii) companies are willing to take higher risks and 
conduct more exploration to establish more reserves of gas. 
 The CCEA decision does not revise the price of gas form RIL‟s KG D6 Block 
along but implements a uniform price for all domestic gas.  The bulk of this gas (70%) is 
produced by PSUs such as ONGC & Oil and not by RIL. 
 For all the talk about benefits being passed to RIL, the fact is that KG D6 Block 
with a mere 15% share in total domestic production, will not  be the biggest beneficiary.  
Not only that 70% of all domestic gas is being produced by ONGC and OIL, but also RIL 
is in no position to boost domestic production and its share in the near future. 
 RIL, even if it implements its new development plans immed iately, does not see 
new gas flow until 2017 -18.  This means that, beyond the 15% share (which is 
declining) it has in domestic production, it does not really benefit from the new price for 
the next five years.  The anticipated increase in production durin g this period comes 
mostly because gas finds of GSPC and ONGC become viable and begin producing.  So 
how does one substantiate the absurd claim that the price increase is only to benefit 
RIL? 
  

37 
 
On the demand side, it must be noted that by 2015 -16, the tota l requirement of 
gas from the power and fertilizer sectors along would be around 169 MMSCMD.  If 
domestic supplies to these sectors remain at the current 55 MMSCMD, the balance 
demand will have to be met through imported LNG.  By fixing artificially  low p rices for 
domestically produced gas, most of India‟s remaining reserves will never be produced 
and unabated imports will continue, resulting in even higher subsidies. 
 Let us not forget that imports mean no royalty, no profit share and no taxes for 
the country.  So unlike in the case of domestic production, subsidies cannot be offset by 
any revenue inflows.  To this add precious savings in foreign exchange resulting form 
lower imports.  The choice is to allow GSPC, ONGC, OIL RIL/BP and others to produce 
more domestic gas at Dr. Rangarajan‟s formula price or import the same gas at over      
$ 13. 
 
Sd/- 
(NARESH AGRAWAL) 
  

38 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
 
Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi, MP (RS) 
29.07.2013 
 
While I accept it fully that our committee are fully entitled to look into the subject and 
infact should look into the subject but I strongly feel that before coming to a mature 
conclusion we should study this complicated subject more thoroughly. In particular I 
suggest that we should consider the following: 
1. This is very complicated issue and if properly handled our country can become 
self sufficient in oil reducing our dependence on huge imports causing a drain on our 
economy. The pricing of oil and natural gas from our fields whether on shore or offshore 
requires to be properly unde rstood. The exploration of oil is a highly risky and uncertain 
job and we need huge Foreign Capital inflow to help us in the job. To make such foreign 
investment sufficiently attractive for them. We have to give them proper incentive. The 
pricing therefore  will have to take in to consideration this aspects and the prevalent 
international price. 
 
2. We must allow the people involved in the process to come and depose before us 
and explain their stand. After duly examining them and the officers of Ministry for 
Petroleum we can arrive at our own decision and convey it to the relevant ministry. 
Thus, even though I do believe in our right to of fer our opinion on Gas pricing.       
I only suggest that we should not come to a hastily conclusion without hearing all the 
parties involved in the process. 
 
Sd/- 
(Dr. Y.P. TRIVEDI) 
  

39 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 9th November, 2012 from 1100 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
15.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
16.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
17.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
19.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh      –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary  
     
Part I 
 (1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 

40 
 
    
WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE    
Shri R.S. Gujral, Finance Secretary 
 
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
 
1. Shri Sumit Bose, Revenue Secretary 
2. Smt. Rashmi Verma, Additional Secretary 
 
Central Board of Excise & Customs (CBEC) 
 
1. Smt. Praveen Mahajan, Chairperson 
2. Smt. Shiela Sangwan, Member (Budget) 
3. Shri P.K. Mohanty, Joint Secretary (TRU-I) 
4. Shri V.K. Garg, Joint Secretary (TRU –II) 
 
 Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) 
1. Shri S.S. Rana, Member (P&V), CBDT 
2. Shri Sunil Gupta, Joint Secretary (TPL –II) 
 
Department of Economic Affairs 
 Shri Arvind Mayaram, Secretary 
 
Department of Expenditure 
 
  Dr. Saurabh Garg, Joint Secretary (PF. II) 
 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 
1. Shri P.K. Singh, Director 
2. Shri S.P. Gupta, Director, PPAC 
 
2. The Finance Secretary briefed the Committee on the subjects „(i) „Mechanism for 
revenue realisation from the sale of petroleum products‟ and (ii) „Taxation issues relating to 
PPP Projects‟.  Members subsequently sought clarifications from the witnesses, wh ich 
included issues like contribution of Central and State taxes in the pricing of petroleum 
products, impact of rationalization of petroleum products on their cost structure, difference 
between landed cost of crude and the final price being charged to the  consumers, element 
of tax on tax, lack of transparency in the concept of under- recovery, etc.   

41 
 
3. Members also raised queries over the issues of loss in revenue due to constricted 
production of natural gas from the KG basin and its effect particularly o n power and 
fertilizer sectors,   
4. Questions were also raised on the issue of cost based price regulation in PPP‟s like 
airports, hydrocarbons, ports, cross subsidy model, escalated estimates on PPP projects, 
etc.  The Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of Finance to furnish replies 
to the points raised by the Members during the discussion within ten days. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
Part II 
 (1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs.) 
       
  WITNESSES  
 
 
5.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
.   
6.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
     The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

42 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 7th June, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1345 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
LOK SABHA 
2.     Shri Nishikant Dubey 
3.     Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4.     Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
5.     Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
6.     Adv. A. Sampath 
7.     Dr. M. Thambidurai 
RAJYA SABHA 
8.     Shri Naresh Agrawal 
9.     Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
10.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad         
SECRETARIAT 
1.    Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Additional Director  
2.    Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary  
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Finance   
1. Shri Sumit Bose, Secretary (Revenue) 
2. Ms. Praveen Mahajan, Chairperson – CBEC 
3. Ms. Sudha Sharma, Chairperson – CBDT 
4. Shri M.L. Meena, Joint Secretary (Revenue) 
5. Ms. Pragya Sahay Saxena, Joint Secretary (TPL-I) 
6. Ms. Sharmila Chavali, Joint Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
 
Ministry of Planning 
1. Ms. Sindhushree Khullar, Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Jain, Adviser (Energy) 
3. Dr. S.C. Sharma, OSD (Petroleum) 
     
 

43 
 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas  
 Shri P.K. Singh, Joint Secretary (IC&GP) 
Ministry of Power 
Shri I.C.P. Keshar, Joint Secretary (Thermal)  
Ministry of Chemical & Fertilizer 
Shri Vijay Ranjan Singh, Director (Fertilizer), Deptt. of Fertilizer 
2. With an objective of preventing undue enric hment of few entities at the cost of 
nation‟s natural resources especially petroleum products including natural gas, the 
Committee resuming its deliberations initiated in November, 2012 on the subject took 
oral evidence of the Ministry of Finance (Departme nt of Revenue); Ministries of 
Planning; Petroleum & Natural Gas and Chemical & Fertilizer on the subject „Revenue 
loss/implications arising out of pricing of petroleum products including natural gas‟.   The 
major issues discussed broadly included quantum o f revenue loss, alternatives to 
production practices, pricing of natural gas, underrecoveries and the effect on various 
sectors such as power and fertilizer due to declining production of natural gas especially 
from KG-basin.  The Chairman directed the rep resentatives to furnish written replies to 
the points raised by the Members during the discussion within a period of ten days and 
also suggested Ministry of Finance to co -ordinate with other representing 
Ministries/Departments. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

44 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th July, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Nishikant Dubey 
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
5.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2.   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration draft report on the subject „Economic 
impact of revision of Natural Gas Price‟.  One of the Members raised the issue that the 

45 
 
subject matter of the draft report did not fall within the jurisdiction of the Commi ttee.  Some 
Members also pointed out that they did not get enough time to go through the draft report as 
it was received late.  Another point raised was that views of experts/Secretary, Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas should be heard before finalisin g the Report.  They, therefore, 
wanted to postpone the consideration for adoption.   The Chairman invited the Members to 
express their views on each of the points raised.  After hearing the views of all the Members, 
the Chairman drew attention of the membe rs to the fact that  the Committee had already 
held two meetings on 9 th November, 2012 and 7 th June, 2013.  The Chairman furhter drew 
attention of the Members to his opening remarks at the sitting of the Committee held on 7 th 
June, 2013 mentioning about th e expansion of scope of examination of the subject by the 
Committee.  The Chairman also stated that the draft report was prepared on the basis of 
facts furnished by the Ministry. He, therefore, ruled that  the subject matter was well within 
the jurisdiction of the Committee.  The Committee then decided to defer consideration of the 
draft report to their next sitting to be held on 26 th July, 2013 so that the members would get 
enough time to go through the draft report. 
 
,   
WITNESS 
      
 
4.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witness then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

46 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 26th July, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1515 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
8.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
9.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
10.  Shr Prem Das Rai 
11.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
12. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
13. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
14. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
15.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
16.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
17.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
18.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
19.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
20.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
21.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1420 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
      
 
2.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
Part II 
(1420 hrs. to 1515 hrs.) 
 
3. The Committee took up draft report on the subject „Economic Impact of Revision of 
Natural Gas Price‟ for consideration and adoption.  Some Members sought clarification and 
opinion of the Hon‟ble Chairman as to whether the subject of the draft report comes under 
the jurisdiction of the Standing Committee on Finance, since there is a separate 
Departmentally related Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas which can deal 
and discuss elaborately on their subject.  Some Members also  desired to hear the views of 
some other stakeholders before considering the draft report on the subject. 
4. While emphasizing the Committee‟s mandate to examine and report upon subject 
under their designated jurisdiction other than those originally select ed by the Committee, the 
Hon‟ble Chairman drew the attention of the Members to Rule 276 of Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, which reads as under: 
 “ A Committee may, if it thinks fit, make a special report on any matter that 
arises or comes to light in the course of its work which it may consider 
necessary to bring to the notice of the Speaker or the House, notwithstanding 
that such matter is not directly connected with, or does not fall within or is not 
incidental to, its terms of reference‟. 
 
5. The Chairman also clarified that in the meeting held on 7 June, 2013, all the 
concerned Departments were represented and given an opportunity to express their views on 
the subject.  Written submissions were also obtained from them.  On the i ssue of jurisdiction, 
the Hon‟ble Chairman further clarified that three Committees of Parliament are examining 
different aspects of natural gas production and pricing.  The Standing Committee on 

48 
 
Petroleum and Natural Gas is examining the methodology of pri cing including Production 
Sharing Contracts (PSCs) as well as gas utilisation policy.  The Public Accounts Committee 
(PAC) is examining the related C&AG Report, which is their mandate.   The Standing 
Committee on Finance has been primarily examining the ov erall impact of gas pricing on 
economy and the Union Budget.  Thus, there is absolutely no jurisdictional overlap or conflict 
involved and the Committee was well within its rights to present a report on this subject.   
6. The Committee accepted the above r uling of the Chairman on the jurisdiction and 
scope of the Committee to consider the draft report and accordingly decided to adopt the 
draft report with minor modifications as suggested by Members.  The Committee also 
authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report in the light of the modifications suggested and 
present to Parliament in the forthcoming Monsoon Session. 
7. Some Members, namely, Shri Sanjay Nirupam, MP, Shri Dharmendra Yadav, MP and 
Shri Naresh Agrawal, MP requested that their dissent notes be  attached to the report which 
was accepted by the Chairman, who further informed that these dissent notes should be 
submitted to him latest by 2 August, 2013. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 