FORTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY
OF INDIA BILL, 2010
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 December, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)

COF No. 42
Price : Rs. 110.00
© 2011 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
A. Introductory ..................................................................................... 1
B. Objectives and Salient Features of the Bill ................................. 2
C. Evolution of the UIDAI .................................................................. 3
D. Issuance of aadhaar numbers pending passing the Bill by
Parliament ........................................................................................ 5
E. UID Scheme ..................................................................................... 7
F. Global Ex perience ........................................................................... 9
G. Existing Identity forms v/s need for Aadhaar Number ............ 10
H. Identity and Eligibility ................................................................... 11
I. Aadhaar Number and National Population Register (NPR) ..... 12
J. Coordination between the agencies involved in the UID
Scheme .............................................................................................. 13
K. Civil Liberties Perspective............................................................. 15
L. Financial Imp lications .................................................................... 17
M. Technology ....................................................................................... 19
N. National Security v/s the UID Scheme ........................................ 20
PART-II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ................. 23

APPENDICES
I. Dissent notes submitted by S/Shri Prem Das Rai, MP,
Manicka Tagore, MP , Raashid Alvi, MP and Magunta
Sreenivasulu Reddy, MP ........................................................ 30
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
11 February, 2011, 29 June, 2011, 29 July, 2011 and
8 December, 2011..................................................................... 34
III. The National Identification Authority of India Bill,
2010 ............................................................................................. 45
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri R aashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V.P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-Second Report on
“The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010”.
2. The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 3 December, 2010 was referred to the Committee on
10 December, 2010 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background note, detailed note and written
information on various provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from
the Ministry of Planning.
4. Written suggestions/views/memoranda on the provisions of the Bill
were received from various institutions/experts/individuals.
5. The Committee took briefing/oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Planning and the Unique Identification Authority of
India (UIDAI) at their sitting held on 11 February, 2011.
6. At the sitting held on 29 June, 2011, the Committee heard the views
of the representatives of (i) the National Human Rights Commission
(NHRC), and (ii) the Indian Banks Association (IBA), and Dr. Reetika
Khera, Visitor, Delhi School of Economics, New Delhi. The Committee
also heard the views of the representatives of the Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII), and experts namely, Dr. Usha Ramanathan, Independent
Law Researcher, New Delhi, Dr. R. Ramakumar, Associate Professor, the
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai and Shri Gopal Krishna, Member,
Citizen Forum for Liberties, New Delhi at the sitting held on 29 July,
2011.
7. The Committee, at their sitting held on 8 December, 2011 considered
and adopted this Report.
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the
Ministry of Planning and the Unique Identification Authority of India
(UIDAI) for furnishing the requisite material and information which were
desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. The Committee

would also thank all the institutions and experts for their valuable
suggestions on the Bill.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
NEW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
9 December, 2011 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
PART I
A. Introductory
1. With a view to ensure that the benefits of centrally sponsored
schemes reaches to right person and not misused, the Central Government
had decided to issue unique identification numbers to all residents in
India and to certain other persons. The scheme of unique identification
involves collection of demographic and biometric information from
individuals for the purpose of issuing of unique identification numbers
to such individuals. The Central Government, for the purpose of
issuing unique identification numbers, constituted the Unique
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) on 28th January, 2009, being
executive in nature, which is at present functioning under the Planning
Commission.
2. It has been observed and assessed by the Government that the
issue of unique identification numbers may involve certain issues, such
as (a) security and confidentiality of information, imposition of obligation
of disclosure of information so collected in certain cases, (b) impersonation
by certain individuals at the time of enrolment for issue of unique
identification numbers, (c) unauthorised access to the Central Identities
Data Repository (CIDR), (d) manipulation of biometric information,
(e) investigation of certain acts constituting offence, and (f) unauthorised
disclosure of the information collected for the purpose of issue of unique
identification numbers, which should be addressed by law and attract
penalties.
3. In view of the foregoing paragraph, the Government has felt it
necessary to make the said Authority as a statutory authority for carrying
out the functions of issuing unique identification numbers to the residents
in India and to certain other persons in an effective manner. It is, therefore,
proposed to enact the National Identification Authority of India Bill,
2010 to provide for the establishment of the National Identification
Authority of India (NIDAI) for the purpose of issuing identification
numbers (which has been referred to as aadhaar number) to individuals
residing in India and to certain other classes of individuals and manner
of authentication of such individuals to facilitate access to benefits and

2
services to which they are entitled and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
B. Objectives and Salient Features of the Bill
4. The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010, introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 3rd December, 2010, inter-alia, seeks to provide:—
(a) for issue of aadhaar numbers to every resident by the
Authority on providing his demographic and biometric
information to it in such manner as may be specified by
regulations;
(b) for authentication of the aadhaar number of an aadhaar
number holder in relation to his demographic and biometric
information subject to such conditions and on payment of
such fees as may be specified by regulations;
(c) for establishment of the National Identification Authority of
India consisting of a Chairperson and two part-time Members;
(d) that the Authority to exercise powers and discharge functions
which, inter-alia,include—
(i) specifying the demographic and biometric information
for enrolment for an aadhaar number and the processes
for collection and verification thereof;
(ii) collecting demographic and biometric information from
any individual seeking an aadhaar number in such
manner as may be specified by regulations;
(iii) maintaining and updating the information of individuals
in the CIDR in such manner as may be specified by
regulations;
(iv) specify the usage and applicability of the aadhaar number
for delivery of various benefits and services as may be
provided by regulations;
(e) that the Authority shall not require any individual to give
information pertaining to his race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, income or health;
(f) that the Authority may engage one or more entities to establish
and maintain the CIDR and to perform any other functions
as may be specified by regulations;
(g) for constitution of the Identity Review Committee consisting
of three members (one of whom shall be the chairperson) to

3
ascertain the extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar
numbers across the country and prepare a report annually
in relation to the extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar
numbers along with its recommendations thereon and submit
the same to the Central Government;
(h) that the Authority shall take measures (including security
safeguards) to ensure that the information in the possession
or control of the Authority (including information stored in
the CIDR) is secured and protected against any loss or
unauthorized access or use or unauthorized disclosure
thereof; and
(i) for offences and penalties for contravention of the provisions
of the proposed legislation.
C. Evolution of the UIDAI
5. The concept of a Unique Identification (UID) scheme was first
discussed and worked upon since 2006 when administrative approval
for the scheme “Unique ID for BPL families” was given on 3rd March,
2006 by the Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology.
6. Subsequently, a Processes Committee was set up on 3rd July, 2006
to suggest processes for updation, modification, addition and deletion
of data fields from the core database to be created under the said
project. The Committee appreciated the need of a UID Authority to
be created by an executive order under the aegis of the Planning
Commission to ensure a pan-departmental and neutral identity for
the Authority.
7. Thereafter, since the Registrar General of India was engaged in the
creation of the National Population Register (NPR) and issuance of Multi-
purpose National Identity Cards to citizens of India, it was decided with
the approval of the Prime Minister, to constitute an Empowered Group
of Ministers (EGoM) to collate the two schemes – the NPR under the
Citizenship Act, 1955 and the UID scheme. The EGoM was also
empowered to look into the methodology and specific milestones for
early and effective completion of the scheme and take a final view on
these. The EGoM was constituted on 4th December, 2006 and a series
of meetings took place as follows:—
(a) First meeting of EGoM: 22nd November, 2007
• Recognized the need for creating an identity related
resident database regardless of whether the database is

4
created based on a de-novo collection of individual data
or is based on already existing data such as the voter list.
• Need to identify and establish institutional mechanism
that will own the database and be responsible for its
maintenance.
(b) Second meeting of EGoM: 28th January, 2008
• The proposal to establish UID Authority under the
Planning Commission was approved.
(c) Third meeting of EGoM: 7th August, 2008
• Referred certain matters raised with relation to the UIDAI
to a Committee of Secretaries for examination.
(d) Fourth meeting of EGoM: 4th November, 2008
• It was decided to notify UIDAI as an executive authority.
Decision on investing it with statutory authority would
be taken up later.
• UIDAI would be anchored in the Planning Commission
for five years after which a view would be taken as to
where the UIDAI would be located within Government.
8. The UIDAI was constituted on 28th January, 2009 under the
Chairmanship of Shri Nandan M. Nilekani as an attached office under
the aegis of the Planning Commission. The UIDAI was inter-aila given
the responsibility to lay down plan and policies to implement the UID
scheme, own and operate the UID database and be responsible for its
updation and maintenance on an ongoing basis. The Prime Minister‘s
Council of UIDAI and a Cabinet Committee on UIDAI (called CC-UIDAI)
were set up on 30th July, 2009 and 22nd October, 2009 respectively for
achieving the objectives of the Authority.
9. Asked why the matter of conferring statutory status to the UIDAI
was deferred, the Ministry of Planning have submitted their written
response as under:—
“Based on the proposal that formation of the UIDAI under the
Planning Commission would ensure better coordination with
different departments, it was decided that initially the UIDAI may
be notified as an executive authority under the Planning Commission
and the issue of investing the UIDAI with statutory authority and
the reconciliation of such statutory role with National Registration
Authority (NRA) can be considered at an appropriate time.”

5
10. Justifying the extension of the UID scheme, which is initially
intended for BPL families, to all residents and other categories of
individuals, the Ministry of Planning in their written response have
submitted as under:—
“The UID scheme was extended to all residents and other categories
of individuals to gradually do away the de novo exercises each time
for field level data collection. Simultaneously, it would also ensure
that links to more and more identity based databases are created
by inclusion of the UID number in their databases”.
11. In this regard, Dr. R. Ramakumar, Expert, in his post-evidence reply
has, among other things, added as follows:—
“…..it has been proven again and again that in the Indian
environment, the failure to enroll with fingerprints is as high as
15% due to the prevalence of a huge population dependent on
manual labour. These are essentially the poor and marginalised
sections of the society. So, while the poor do indeed need identity
proofs, aadhaar is not the right way to do that….”
12. The Ministry in their written reply have stated, among other things,
that:—
“While there may be a number of factors contributing to the failure
to enroll (like geography, age groups, occupasion etc.) and the
figures quoted…… may not hold good in all situations, failure to
enroll is a reality…. For enrolment purpose, UIDAI has already
built in processes to handle biometric exceptions.”
D. Issuance of Aadhaar Numbers pending passing the Bill by
Parliament
13. Justice Dr. M. Rama Jois, MP (Rajya Sabha) in his representation
addressed to the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance has inter-
alia pointed out since the NIDAI Bill is pending for consideration before
the Standing Committee on Finance, implementation of the provisions
of the Bill, issue of aadhaar numbers and incurring expenditure from the
exchequer by the Government is a clear circumvention of Parliament, and
therefore, should be kept in abeyance awaiting debate in and decision
of both Houses of Parliament.
14. On being asked about the legal basis under which the UIDAI is
functioning at present, and the mechanism that the UIDAI has adopted,
since its inception, to deal with any of the issues like security and
confidentiality of information and other offences related to issue of the

6
aadhaar numbers, the Ministry of Planning in a written reply have
inter-alia stated that:—
“….The matter about commencement of operation of the UIDAI
before a legal framework was put in place was referred to the
Ministry of Law and Justice wherein opinion was sought on the
issue whether in absence of a specific enabling law, would there
be any constraints in collecting the data (including biometrics) and
in issuing the UID numbers to residents in accordance with the
mandate given to the Authority. The Ministry of Law and Justice,
after examining the matter, had mentioned that it is a settled position
that powers of the Executive are co-extensive with the legislative
power of the Government and that the Government is not debarred
from exercising its executive power in the areas which are not
regulated by specific legislation. It had also been opined that till
the time such legislation is framed the Authority can continue to
function under the executive order issued by the Government and
the scheme that may be prepared by the UIDAI. It was also opined
that the Authority can collect information/data for implementation
of the UID scheme. Such implementation can be done by giving
wide publicity to the scheme and persuading the agencies/individual
to part with necessary information.
The UIDAI has not faced issues such as breach of security and
confidentiality, manipulation of biometrics, unauthorized access to
the CIDR or other related offences since its inception…..till the
time Parliament passes the Bill, these matters will be covered by
the relevant laws.”
15. The opinion of the Attorney-General of India on the above
mentioned issues as obtained by the Ministry of Law and Justice
(Department of Legal Affairs) is furnished below:—
“The competence of the Executive is not limited to take steps to
implement the law proposed to be passed by Parliament. Executive
Power operates independently. The Executive is not implementing
the provisions of the Bill. The Authority presently functioning under
the Executive Notification dated 28th January, 2009 is doing so
under valid authority and there is nothing in law or otherwise
which prevents the Authority from functioning under the Executive
Authorisation.
The power of Executive is clear and there is no question of
circumventing Parliament or the Executive becoming a substitute
of Parliament. On the contrary, what is sought to be done is to

7
achieve a seamless transition of the authority from an Executive
Authority into a statutory authority.
All the expenditure which is being incurred is sanctioned by
Parliament in accordance with the financial procedure set forth in
the Constitution. If the Bill is not passed by any reason and if
Parliament is of the view that the Authority should not function
and express its will to that effect, the exercise would have to be
discontinued. This contingency does not arise.
The present Bill being implemented without Parliaments’ approval
does not set a bad precedent in the Parliamentary form of
Government. On the contrary, the fact that the Authority is sought
to be converted from an Executive Authority to a statutory authority,
it underlines the supremacy of Parliament.”
16. On this issue, Dr. Usha Ramanathan, Expert, in her post-evidence
reply has inter-alia stated that:—
“ Article 73 of the Constitution delineates the extent of executive
power of the Union and describes it as extending to matters with
respect to which Parliament has power to make laws……
While the executive power of the Union, and of the States, is co-
extensive with the legislative power of the Union and the States,
this is a provision that sets out the limits of the power. These are
not provisions that are meant to make Parliament, or the legislatures,
redundant. While executive power cannot extend beyond the
legislative power of the Union and the States, Parliament and the
legislatures can, and routinely do, set out the terms on which the
executive is to function. This is also how ‘delegated legislation’ or
‘subordinate legislation’ has to be within the extent of the ‘parent
statute’…..
It is a plain misconception to think that the executive can do what
it pleases, including in relation to infringing constitutional rights
and protections for the reason that Parliament and legislatures have
the power to make law on the subject.”
E. UID Scheme
17. A resident who seeks to obtain an aadhaar number shall provide
his/her demographic and biometric information to enrolling agencies
appointed by Registrars. A resident who does not possess any
documentary proof of identity or proof of address can obtain an aadhaar
number by being introduced by an introducer.

8
18. The UIDAI has executed Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) with
the partners including all the States and Union Territories, 25 financial
institutions (including LIC) to act as Registrars for implementing the
scheme. The roles and responsibilities of the partners flow from the MoU.
19. The UIDAI requires only basic identity data such as name, age,
gender, address and relationship details in case of minors, for issue of
unique identity number. This is commonly known as “Know your Resident
(KYR).” The partner registrars are using this resident interface as an
opportunity to update their own selected data bases such as ration card
number, MGNREGS job card number, PAN card etc. This is commonly
known as “Know your Resident Plus” (KYR+). Collection of these
information is purely an initiative of respective Registrars and not
mandatory for issue of aadhaar number.
20. The UIDAI is collecting bare minimum demographic information
from the residents; any other kind of information, viz., rural, semi-urban
and urban areas, persons with disabilities, migrant unskilled and
unorganized workers, nomadic tribes and others who do not have any
permanent dwelling house, is not available with UIDAI. Asked how the
coverage of marginalized sections of population, without having the data
of aadhaar numbers issued to them, could be achieved, the Ministry has
submitted that the Authority proposes to cover the marginalized and
poor sections of the population through special enrolment camps
organized for them.
21. In a news item dated 6th September, 2011, it has been reported that
the Ministry of Home Affairs have identified flaws in the enrolment
process followed by the UIDAI, citing cases where people have got aadhaar
numbers on the basis of false affidavits.
22. Further, an expert has brought to the notice of the Standing
Committee on Finance that issues of liability and responsibility for
maintaining accuracy of data on the Register, conducting identity checks
and ensuring the integrity of the overall operation of the UID scheme
have not been resolved. On being asked to comment on this, the Ministry
of Planning have submitted a written reply as follows:—
“……Registrars have to put processes in place to ensure that the
data collected is accurate. It is also the responsibility of the Registrars
to appoint verifiers (for verifying the documents presented by the
resident) and introducers to handle cases where the residents do
not have any documents.”
23. It has been reported in a news item that the Ministry of Home
Affairs have alleged that some of the registrars have not adhered to the

9
laid down procedures under UIDAI. It has also been noticed that the
Government of Kerala vide G.O.(MS)No:16/2011/ITD dated 3rd June, 2011
has inter-alia  stated that the MoU was signed between UIDAI and
Government of Kerala for implemenation of the UID project subject to
condition that the clauses on the standards, protocol, criteria etc. in the
MoU shall be in accordance with the State IT policy.
F. Global Experience
24. It has been brought to the notice of the Standing Committee on
Finance that on the basis of the findings of London School of Economics
(LSE) report, the Government of United Kingdom has abandoned
its ID project (repealed its Identity Cards Act, 2006) citing a range of
reasons, which includes high cost, unsafe, untested and unreliable
technology, and the changing relationship between the State and the
citizen etc.
To a specific issue of relevance of any of the above mentioned
factors in the Indian context, it has been informed by the Ministry as
follows:—
“There are significant differences between the UK’s ID card project
and the UID project and to equate the two would not be appropriate.
The differences are as follows:—
(a) The UK system involved issuing a card which stored the
information of the individual including their biometrics on
the card. UID scheme involves issuing a number. No card
containing the biometric information is being issued. UK
already has the National insurance number which is used
often as a means to verify the identity of the individual.
(b) The statutory framework envisaged made it mandatory to
have the UK ID card. Aadhaar number is not mandatory.
(c) The data fields were large and required the individual to
provide accurate information of all other ID numbers such
as driver‘s license, national insurance number and other such
details thereby linking the UK ID card database to all other
databases on which the individual was registered. UID
Scheme collects limited information and the database is not
linked to other databases.
(d) In UK, the legislative framework and structure approached
it from a security perspective. The context and need in India
is different. The UID scheme is envisaged as a mean to
enhance the delivery of welfare benefits and services.”

10
25. When asked as to whether any analysis has been carried out on
the experience of countries where National IDs are in use as well as
countries where it has been discontinued, the Ministry have inter-alia
informed the Committee in a written reply as follows:—
“In some countries the use of smart cards to store significant data
about the resident added to concerns about ID fraud and
duplication…….
The comparisons between developed countries, which are looking
at additional ID forms from a security perspective, versus India,
a developing country which, like Brazil and Mexico, is attempting
to, build the basic identity and verification infrastructure essential
to delivering welfare benefits, and promoting inclusive growth, is
not a reasonable one.”
G. Existing identity forms v/s need for Aadhaar Number
26. A view has been expressed that adding another form of identity
(i.e. aadhaar number) without studying the possibility of using the existing
forms of identity, for example, Voter ID card, to solve the current problems
appears to be a waste of resources.
27. The Ministry of Planning in a written submission have inter-alia
stated the following:—
“…… in the current framework there is no single document
which is uniformly acceptable as proof of identity across India –
irrespective of age, gender and familial connections. Establishing
identity is a challenge for the poor, particularly when they move
from place to place as a consequence lack of proof of identity makes
it difficult for the poor to access benefits and services.
….. Aadhaar number is an enabler…... The benefits of aadhaar
number are:—
For residents: The aadhaar number will become the single source
of identity verification. Once residents enroll, they can use the
number multiple times – they would be spared the hassle of
repeatedly providing supporting identity documents each time they
wish to access services such as obtaining a bank account, passport,
driving license, and so on…. the number will also give migrants
mobility of identity.
For Registrars and enrollers: The UIDAI will only enroll residents
after de-duplicating records. This will help Registrars clean out

11
duplicates from their databases, enabling significant efficiencies
and cost savings. For Registrars focused on cost, the UIDAI‘s
verification processes will ensure lower Know Your Resident
(KYR) costs. For Registrars focused on social goals, a reliable
identification number will enable them to broaden their reach
into groups that till now, have been difficult to authenticate.
The strong authentication that the aadhaar number offers will
improve services, leading to better resident satisfaction.
For Governments: Eliminating duplication under various schemes
is expected to save the Government exchequer a substantial
amount. It will also provide Governments with accurate data
on residents, enable direct benefit programs, and allow
Government departments to coordinate investments and share
information.”
28. The Ministry have further added that:—
“….reason for starting the project is not for overriding existing
Ids…..All the above documents are relevant to a domain and for
a service. Aadhaar number is to be used as a general proof of
identity and proof of address.”
H. Identity and Eligibility
29. According to a news item dated 7th July, 2011, the operationa-
lisation of aadhaar, the unique identification number, will make it
possible to link entitlements to targeted beneficiaries. But it will not
ensure beneficiaries have been correctly identified. Thus, the old
problem of proper identification that bedevils the present system will
continue.
30. It has also been brought to the notice of the Standing Committee
on Finance that a key issue in targeted welfare schemes is said to be of
eligibility and not identity. Government entitlements are unavailable to
the poor, primarily due to the eligibility determination process having
many loopholes and lacunae. One identity like aadhaar number has
nothing to do with such entitlements.
31. Asked to furnish comments, the Ministry of Planning in a written
reply have stated that:—
“….With aadhaar number integration in various Government
schemes, the identity of the beneficiary gets established, by which
it is ensured that the government scheme benefits reach the intended
beneficiaries. Availability of identity and eligibility information

12
together provides an important tool to plug the loopholes in the
eligibility determination process, and in managing the eligibility
life cycle for a beneficiary.”
32. Dr. Reetika Khera, Expert, while deposing before the Committee
has inter-alia stated as follows:—
“………exclusion is more on account of poor coverage of these
schemes. Say, for instance, in the Public Distribution System, the
Planning Commission says that only ‘x’ per cent of the rural
population will get the BPL cards and because of that cap that is
set at the Central level, we find that lots of people are excluded.”
I. Aadhaar Number and National Population Register (NPR)
33. The Standing Committee on Finance, during briefing on the Bill
held on 11th February, 2011, raised inter-alia the issue of possibility of
dovetailing the UID exercise with the census operation. In this regard,
the Ministry of Planning in their written reply have, among other things,
stated as follows:—
“ ….the UIDAI is adopting a multiple registrar approach and the
Registrar General of India (RGI) will be one of the Registrars of
the UIDAI. To synergize the two exercises, an Inter Ministerial
Coordination Committee has been set up to minimize duplication.
The UIDAI is making all efforts to synergize with National
Population Register (NPR) exercise… .”
34. According to a news item dated 6th September, 2011, the Ministry
of Home Affairs said that it would not be preferable to rely entirely on
private sector players’ for biometric enrolments into the NPR since the
population register will form the basis on which citizenship would be
determined in the future. Unlike the UIDAI system, the NPR system
follows an elaborate procedure to verify and cover the entire population
of every area; and the data collected is subjected to ‘social vetting’; and
accountability can be fixed under the NPR system.
35. In an another news article it has been reported that while registration
to the NPR is compulsory and a National Identity Number is linked
to each name, the Citizenship (Registration of Citizens and Issue of
National Identity Cards) Rules, 2003 does not approve of linking
biometrics with personal information. However, according to, the annual
reports of the Ministry of Home Affairs, it said that integration of
photographs and finger biometrics of 17.2 lakh out of 20.6 lakh records
has been completed.

13
J. Coordination between the agencies involved in the UID Scheme
36. In a detailed note on the NIDAI Bill, the Ministry of Planning have
inter-alia submitted that:—
“Implementation of a project of this size is challenging. It involves
co-ordination with multiple stakeholders and effective monitoring
of implementation at every level…. .”
37. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), however,
while commenting on embedding aadhaar numbers in databases to enable
interaction have stated that:—
“It must be done urgently by single agency, perhaps NPR. Cabinet
has approved (22.7.2010) outlay of Rs. 3,023.01 crore inter-alia for
assistance for Information Communication Technology (ICT)
infrastructure of Rs. 450 crore for integrating/synergizing Aadhaar
numbers with existing databases. Concerned about lack of
coordination leading to duplication effort and expenditure with
atleast 6 agencies collecting information (NPR, MNREGA, BPL
Census, UID, RSBY and Bank Smart Cards).”
38. It has been reported in a news-item dated 3rd October, 2011 that
the UID project has become focus of the ire of various arms of the
Government for rather disparate reasons. Asked to furnish the comments
on the said news-item, the Ministry of Planning have submitted a written
reply as follows:—
Views reported in the news-item
1
….the Finance Ministry rejected
UIDAI’s request for Rs.14,000 crore
expenditure programme.…the planning commission too
jumped into the fray, suddenly
awakening to the deficiency in the
structure and functioning of the
Authority.
Comments of the Ministry of
Planning
2
It is not correct that the Finance
Ministry have rejected the budget
expenditure. The proposal for phase
III has been recommended by the EFC
on 15 September, 2011 after optimizing
the cost estimates with certain
stipulations to be complied with by the
UIDAI to achieve economy of scales,
avoid duplication and avail
convergence in the programme.
Aadhaar programme is a complex
project of its kind launched first time
in the country. EFC is an Inter-
Ministerial forum to appraise the
proposal rigorously to facilitate

14
Adding to the confusion were the
apparently negative comments made
by the Ministry of Home Affairs(MHA)
on the flaws in the enrolment process
and the security of the bio-metric data.
The Home Ministry’s apparently
nervous of the UIDAI’s efforts to
extend its aadhaar enrolment mandate,
as the office of the Registrar General
of India, an arm of the Ministry, is
simultaneously compiling a National
Population Register (NPR) which is a
comprehensive identity database, as a
part of the 2011 census operations
currently under way.
decision making by the Competent
Authority. Planning Commission is one
of the nodal apprising agencies to the
EFC forum. On approval by Planning
Commission some issues regarding
design parameters, cost estimates and
manner of implementation were
emerged, which could not be
visualized at project formulation stage.
These issues have been deliberated in
the EFC meeting and resolved through
certain stipulations to be adhered to
by UIDAI during execution of the
project.
While responding to the EFC memo of
the UIDAI, the RGI (MHA) have
observed as follows:—
A security audit of the entire process
of UIDAI including enrolment process
in UIDAI, the enrolment software, data
storage, data management, etc. should
be conducted by an appropriate
agency.
The Comments of the UIDAI on this
are:—
UIDAI is developing a monitoring and
evaluation framework to provide a
comprehensive mechanism for
continuously monitoring and
evaluating the UIDAI programme.
Considering that a formal structured
monitoring and evaluation framework
will form the cornerstone for
measuring the outcome of UIDAI
programme, a distinct component
‘Monitoring and evaluation’ has been
included in the current EFC
proposal. Some of the audits planned
on a periodic basis are: (i) Enrolment
Client Audit; (ii) Enrolment Process
(Field) Audits; (iii) ASDMSA
Application Audits; (iv) Authentication
User Agency Audits; (v) Data Center
Audits; (vi) Security Audits;
(vii) Impact Assessment (Grants in Aid
for Research); and (viii) Other Third
Party Audit Services.
1 2

15
K. Civil Liberties Perspective
39. In a detailed note on the Bill, the Ministry of Planning have stated
that issues like access and misuse of personal information, surveillance,
profiling, prohibiting other data bases from storing aadhaar numbers;
and securing confidentiality of information which is in the registrars
domain need to be addressed in larger data protection legislation. In this
connection, the Ministry have been asked to comment on the view that
the Bill in its current form appears to be unsafe in law as there is no
law at present on privacy, and data protection, therefore, it would be
appropriate to consider the Bill for legislation only after passing the
legislation on privacy, and data protection so as to ensure that there is
no conflict between these laws. The Ministry in a written reply have
inter-alia stated as under:—
“UIDAI has taken appropriate steps to ensure security and
protection of data under this law and has incorporated data
UIDAI has no comments to offer.
It is clarified that:—
(i) aadhaar is sufficient KYC for
opening all bank accounts now.
This includes no-frill accounts— as
per Reserve Bank’s circular dated
January 27, 2011 – and any bank
account as per September 28,
2011 circular.
(ii) Banks may ask for additional
proof of residence if the current
residence is not the same as the
address given on the aadhaar
document. This procedure is
consistent with bank policies
applicable to all other officially
valid documents including
passport, driving license and is
not specific to aadhaar.
The confusion about the turf of UIDAI
and the MHA is rather surprising,
given the fact that an EGoM was
constituted as early as 2006 to collate
the two schemes, namely the NPR and
the unique identification number, as
aadhaar was then known.
RBI made the waters murkier by first
going against the Finance Ministry
notification that was issued in 2010 to
permit the use of Know Your Customer
(KYC) norms by limiting the use of
aadhaar numbers to “small accounts”.
It then retracted, by allowing use of
aadhaar numbers to all bank accounts
without any limitations, but only after
again insisting that the banks must
satisfy themselves about the current
address of the customer. RBI’s
reluctance to fully accept the aadhaar
numbers for the KYC norms is
surprising, given that more than a
dozen leading banks in the country are
partnering with UIDAI to deliver
aadhaar numbers to the citizens, and
also when the aadhaar number have
been accepted by the insurance
companies and SEBI for meeting KYC
norms.
1 2

16
protection principles within its policy and implementation
framework……
Since appropriate steps have been taken, there is no dependency
on the general data protection law…… when the data protection
framework comes into place the Authority will follow the same
since a national data protection law will apply to all agencies and
institutions collecting information.
Collection of information without a privacy law in place does not
violate the right to privacy of the individual…. There is no bar on
collecting information, the only requirement to be fulfilled with
respect to the protection of the privacy of an individual is that care
should be taken in collection and use of information, consent of
individual would be relevant, information should be kept safe and
confidential…
…..The proposed Privacy law should also seek to strike a balance
between the legitimate demands of protecting individual liberties
while recognizing the need for larger public interest to prevail in
certain well defined circumstances.”
40. Responding to a suggestion received from PRS Legislative Branch
that the existence of a unique identifier may facilitate record linkages
across separate databases, the Ministry in a written reply have submitted
that issues of linking and matching of databases need to be addressed
through a data protection legislation which is currently being considered
by the Department of Personnel.
41. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), on being asked
to comment on the implications of the provisions of the Bill on the
individual’s right to privacy, has inter-alia informed the Committee in
their post-evidence reply as follows:—
….the right of privacy presupposes that such information relating
to an individual which he would not like to share with others will
not be disclosed. It may be mentioned that the right of privacy is
not an absolute right……”
42. On the same issue, Dr. Usha Ramanathan, expert, in her post-
evidence reply has stated that:—
“….The right to dignity, the right to privacy, personal security and
safety, the protection against surveillance, are constitutionally
protected. The production of a number accompanied by the use
of methods such as fingerprinting and iris scanning is even more

17
invasive than is permitted to be applied to alleged offenders.
Article 20 (3) provides protection against compulsory extraction of
personal information. Denying services, and rights, to persons because
they are unwilling to part with the information in a manner that is
more than likely to result in convergence and commodification of their
personal information, surveillance, profiling, tagging and tracking
is compulsory extraction that clearly reduces the constitutional rights
of an ordinary citizen to less than that of an alleged offender. And
that this is being done without the protection of law renders the
exercise, per se, illegal. Apart from its ‘uses’, the potential for abuse
is undeniable. In a similar context, another court – the Philippines
Supreme Court – said: ……the data may be gathered for gainful
and useful Government purposes; but the existence of this vast
reservoir of personal information constitutes a covert invitation to
misuse, a temptation that may be too great for some of our
authorities to resist.”
L. Financial Implications
(i) Feasibility Study
43. The Ministry of Planning in a detailed note on the Bill have stated
that aadhaar number is cost-effective compared to other alternate targeted
solutions to the problems identified in delivering services and benefits
such as eliminating duplicate and fake identities. The Detailed Project
Report (DPR) of the UID scheme has been prepared and submitted by
M/s. Ernst and Young Pvt. Ltd. in April, 2011.
44. Asked whether any committee has been set up to study the financial
implications of the UID scheme; and also to furnish the details of feasibility
study carried out, if any, covering all aspects of the UID scheme such
as setting up of the proposed NIDAI, and cost-benefit analysis, the
Ministry in a written reply have, among other things, submitted that:—
“No committee has been set up to study the financial implications
of the UID scheme. As per laid down guidelines/procedure the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) reviews project proposals
and its financial implications wherein the views of all stakeholders/
ministries are taken into account…
…..deliberations were held with all relevant stakeholders including
Planning Commission, Registrar General of India, Election
Commission of India, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of
Urban Development and State Governments. A Proof of Concept
study was undertaken in the States of Gujarat, Karnataka, U.P. and

18
Odisha in four rural and one urban locations to establish the
feasibility of linking UID with partner-databases and to validate
the possibility of one-time linkage which once established would
be maintained on an ongoing basis by the UIDAI. An assessment
study was carried out in 10 Central Ministries and their respective
departments in four States (Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and
West Bengal).”
(ii) Estimated cost of the UID scheme
45. The UID scheme is a Central Sector Scheme. The estimated cost
of the Phase-I and Phase-II of the scheme spread over five years is
Rs. 3170.32 crore (Rs. 147.31 crore for Phase-I and Rs. 3023.01 crore for
Phase-II). The estimated cost includes scheme components for issue of
10 crore UID numbers by March, 2011 and recurring establishment costs
for the entire scheme up to March, 2014. The Budget for Phase-III of the
scheme to the tune of Rs. 8861 crore has been approved.
46. According to news-items, the total cost of the UID scheme may
run up to Rs. 1,50,000 crore. Even after the commitment of such levels
of expenditures, the uncertainty over the technological options and
ultimate viability of the scheme remains.
(iii) Com parative cost of aadhaar number and existing ID documents
47. Asked to furnish the details of comparative cost of existing ID
documents (per individual), namely, Voter Id card, PAN card, driving
licence and aadhaar number, the Ministry has inter-alia informed the
Committee in a written reply that the comparative costs of the documents
mentioned above are not available.
(iv) Fundi ng of other bio-metric projects
48. It is noticed that a project namely, Bharatiya — Automated Finger
Print Identification System (AFSI), was launched in January, 2009, being
funded by the Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology, for collection of bio-metric
information of the people of the country.
49. Asked to clarify as to whether the bio-metric information (finger
prints) being collected under the Bharatiya – AFSI project could also be
used by the UIDAI, the Ministry have submitted that:—
“The bio-metrics required for the aadhaar project are iris, ten finger
prints and photograph. To ensure uniqueness of the individual, it

19
is essential that the bio-metrics captured are as per the specifications
laid down by the Bio-metrics Standards Committee. The quality,
nature and manner of collection of bio-metric data by other bio-metric
projects may not be of the nature that can be used for the purpose
of the aadhaar scheme and hence it may not be possible to use the
fingerprints captured under the Bharatiya—AFSI project.”
(v) Revenue model of the UIDAI
50. According to a detailed note on the bill furnished by the Ministry
of Planning, demographic data and address verification will be provided
free of cost till a separate pricing policy is announced in due course.
51. However, in a news-item dated 6th September, 2011, it has been
reported that the Ministry of Home Affairs pointed out uncertainties in
the UIDAI’s revenue model.
M. Technology
52. The Bio-metrics Standards Committee set up by the UIDAI has
recognized in its report that a fingerprints-based bio-metric system shall
be at the core of the UIDAI’s de-duplication efforts. It has further noted
that it is:—
“…conscious of the fact that de-duplication of the magnitude
required by the UIDAI has never been implemented in the world.
In the global context, a de-duplication accuracy of 99% has been
achieved so far, using good quality fingerprints against a database
of up to fifty million. Two factors however, raise uncertainty about
the accuracy that can be achieved through fingerprints. First,
retaining efficacy while scaling the database size from fifty million
to a billion has not been adequately analyzed. Second, fingerprint
quality, the most important variable for determining de-duplication
accuracy, has not been studied in depth in the Indian context.”
53. Asked to explain the reliability of technical architecture of the UID
scheme, the Ministry of Planning in a detailed note on the NIDAI Bill
have, among other things, stated as follows:—
“The UID project is a complex technology project. Nowhere in the
world has such a large bio-metric database of a billion people being
maintained. The frontiers of technology in bio-metrics are being
tested and used in the project…...
The technical architecture of the UID scheme is at this point, is
based on high-level assumptions. The architecture has been

20
structured to ensure clear data verification, authentication and
de-duplication, while ensuring a high level of privacy and information
security…..
The project team is learning and adapting to the challenges and
ensuring that the solutions that are being offered are the best in
the world to achieve the task…. .”
54. Further asked as to given the high degree of assumptions on the
reliability of technology adopted by the UIDAI and probability of system
failures of different degrees, whether incurring huge costs on the UID
scheme is prudent and affordable, the Ministry have stated in a written
reply, among other things, as follows:—
“…..UIDAI is cognizant of the fact that biometric matching (which
is a patterns matching) by its very nature will suffer from inaccuracy.
However, these inaccuracy levels are less than 1%. This cannot be
a reason for not attempting to use the technology.
It is well acknowledged that there will be failures in authentication
for various reasons. After Proof of Concept studies on authentication,
appropriate policies and processes will be developed to take care
of situations where failure occurs for various reasons…..The choice
of using the authentication services is left to the third party service
provider…..Concerned agencies will have to develop policies and
procedures to handle such exceptional situations…...”
55. In a news article, one of the representatives of the UIDAI has
admitted that the quality of fingerprints is bad because of the rough
exterior of fingers caused by hardwork, and this poses a challenge for
later authentication.
N. National Security v/s the UID Scheme
(i) Illegal residents
56. A concern over the possibility of illegal residents getting aadhaar
numbers, and the safeguards in this regard has been raised by the Standing
Committee on Finance during the sitting held on 11 February, 2011. In
a written reply, the Ministry of Planning have stated as under:—
“ Aadhaar number is not a proof of citizenship or domicile [Clause
6 of  the Bill]. It only confirms identity and that too subject to
authentication [Clause 4(3)]. This is clearly mandated in the NIDAI
Bill and the communication being sent to the resident.

21
It is the responsibility of the Registrars to enroll a resident after
due verification as per the procedure laid down by the UIDAI. If
a person is not a resident as per the Bill, the Authority is being
vested with the power to omit/deactivate the aadhaar number
[Clause 23 (2) (g)]. Subsequent attempts to enter the system can
be detected”.
(ii)  I nvolvement of Private agencies
57. On the issue of security of proposed data of UIDAI, an unstarred
question (no.2989) was raised in Rajya Sabha. The Minister of State in
the Ministry of Planning and Minister of State in the Ministry of
Parliamentary Affairs tabled the answer to the above said question in
Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2010 as follows:—
“National Informatics Centre (NIC) had pointed out that the issues
relating to privacy and security of UID data, in case the data is
not hosted in a Government data centre may be taken into
consideration.
UIDAI is of the opinion that the hosting of data in a private data
centre does not necessarily lead to a violation of privacy or security.
Appropriate contractual arrangement shall be put in place with the
data centre space provider to ensure security and privacy of the
data.
At present, UIDAI does not have its own permanent facility to
house its data centre. Therefore, 75 sq.ft of data centre space has
been hired from M/s. ITI Ltd. for proof of concept and pilot on
a rental basis”.
58. The Ministry of Home Affairs, according to a news item, have
questioned the security of citizens’ biometric data in UIDAI’s ‘outsourced
service oriented infrastructure’ model.
59. To a specific query as to could outside agencies be allowed
to partake in the UID scheme when doubts have been expressed
on possible compromise with the interests of the national security,
the Ministry of Planning in a written reply have inter alia stated
that:—
“….the UIDAI has followed government procurement process and
engaged the appropriate agencies for the implementation of the
UID scheme….The UIDAI has also implemented a comprehensive
information security policy…..”

22
60. It is, however, reported in various news articles as late as dated
26th November, 2011 that controversies between the Ministry of Home
Affairs and the UIDAI over the issues such as manner and processes
followed by the UIDAI, duplication of efforts between National Population
Register and aadhaar, and security of data remain unresolved.

23
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee have carefully examined the written information
furnished to them and heard the views for and against the National
Identification Authority of India (NIDAI) Bill from various quarters
such as the Ministry of Planning, the Unique Identification Authority
of India (UIDAI), the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)
and experts. The clearance of the Ministry of Law and Justice for
issuing aadhaar numbers, pending passing the Bill by Parliament, on
the ground that powers of the Executive are co-extensive with the
legislative power of the Government and that the Government is not
debarred from exercising its Executive power in the areas which are
not regulated by the legislation does not satisfy the Committee. The
Committee are constrained to point out that in the instant case, since
the law making is underway with the bill being pending, any executive
action is as unethical and violative of Parliament’s prerogatives as
promulgation of an ordinance while one of the Houses of Parliament
being in session.
2. The Committee are surprised that while the country is on one
hand facing a serious problem of illegal immigrants and infiltration
from across the borders, the National Identification Authority of India
Bill, 2010 proposes to entitle every resident to obtain an aadhaar number,
apart from entitling such other category of individuals as may be
notified from time to time. This will, they apprehend, make even illegal
immigrants entitled for an aadhaar number. The Committee are unable
to understand the rationale of expanding the scheme to persons who
are not citizens, as this entails numerous benefits proposed by the
Government. The Committee have received a number of suggestions
for restricting the scope of the UID scheme only to the citizens and
for considering better options available with the Government by issuing
Multi-Purpose National Identity Cards (MNICs) as a more acceptable
alternative.
3. The Committee observe that prima facie  the issue of unique
identification number, which has been referred to as “aadhaar
number” to individuals residing in India and other classes of
individuals under the Unique Identification (UID) Scheme is

24
riddled with serious lacunae and concern areas which have been
identified as follows:—
(a) The UID scheme has been conceptualized with no clarity
of purpose and leaving many things to be sorted out during
the course of its implementation; and is being implemented
in a directionless way with a lot of confusion. The scheme
which was initially meant for BPL families has been
extended for all residents in India and to certain other
persons. The Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM),
constituted for the purpose of collating the two schemes
namely, the UID and National Population Register (NPR),
and to look into the methodology and specifying target for
effective completion of the UID scheme, failed to take
concrete decision on important issues such as (a) identifying
the focused purpose of the resident identity database;
(b) methodology of collection of data; (c) removing
the overlapping between the UID scheme and NPR;
(d) conferring of statutory authority to the UIDAI since
its inception; (e) structure and functioning of the UIDAI;
(f) entrusting the collection of data and issue of unique
identification number and national identification
number to a single authority instead of the present
UIDAI and its reconciliation with National Registration
Authority;
(b) The need for conferring of statutory authority to the UIDAI
felt by the Government way back in November, 2008, but
was deferred for more than two years for no reason. In this
regard, the Ministry of Planning have informed the
Committee that till the time Parliament passes the NIDAI
Bill, crucial matters impinging on security and
confidentiality of information will be covered by the
relevant laws. The Committee are at a loss to understand
as to how the UIDAI, without statutory power, could address
key issues concerning their basic functioning and initiate
proceedings against the defaulters and penalize them;
(c) The collection of biometric information and its linkage with
personal information of individuals without amendment
to the Citizenship Act, 1955 as well as the Citizenship
(Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity
Cards) Rules, 2003, appears to be beyond the scope of
subordinate legislation, which needs to be examined in
detail by Parliament;

25
(d)  Continuance of various existing forms of identity and the
requirement of furnishing ‘other documents’ for proof of
address, even after issue of aadhaar number, would render
the claim made by the Ministry that aadhaar number is to
be used as a general proof of identity and proof of address
meaningless;
(e) In addition to aadhaar numbers being issued by the UIDAI,
the issuance of smart cards containing information of the
individuals by the registrars is not only a duplication but
also leads to ID fraud as prevalent in some countries; and
(f) The full or near full coverage of marginalized sections for
issuing aadhaar numbers could not be achieved mainly
owing to two reasons viz. (i) the UIDAI doesn’t have the
statistical data relating to them; and (ii) estimated failure
of biometrics is expected to be as high as 15% due to a
large chunk of population being dependent on manual
labour.
4. The Committee regret to observe that despite the presence of
serious difference of opinion within the Government on the UID scheme
as illustrated below, the scheme continues to be implemented in an
overbearing manner without regard to legalities and other social
consequences:—
(i) The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have
expressed concern that lack of coordination is leading to
duplication of efforts and expenditure among at least six
agencies collecting information (NPR, MGNREGS, BPL
census, UIDAI, RSBY and Bank Smart Cards);
(ii) The Ministry of Home Affairs are stated to have raised
serious security concern over the efficacy of introducer
system, involvement of private agencies in a large scale in
the scheme which may become a threat to national security;
uncertainties in the UIDAI’s revenue model;
(iii) The N ational Informatics Centre (NIC) have pointed out
that the issues relating to privacy and security of UID data
could be better handled by storing in a Government data
centre;
(iv) The M inistry of Planning have expressed reservation over
the merits and functioning of the UIDAI; and the necessity
of collection of iris image;

26
(v) Involvement of several nodal appraising agencies which
may work at cross-purpose; and
(vi) Several Government agencies are collecting biometric(s)
information in the name of different schemes.
5. The Committee are also unhappy to observe that the UID scheme
lacks clarity on many issues such as even the basic purpose of
issuing aadhaar number. Although the scheme claims that obtaining
aadhaar number is voluntary, an apprehension is found to have
developed in the minds of people that in future, services/benefits
including food entitlements would be denied in case they do not have
aadhaar number.
It is also not clear as to whether possession of aadhaar number
would be made mandatory in future for availing of benefits and
services. Even if the aadhaar number links entitlements to targeted
beneficiaries, it may not ensure that beneficiaries have been correctly
identified. Thus, the present problem of proper identification would
persist.
It is also not clear that the UID scheme would continue beyond
the coverage of 200 million of the total population, the mandate given
to the UIDAI. In case, the Government does not give further mandate,
the whole exercise would become futile.
6. Though there are significant differences between the identity
system of other countries and the UID scheme, yet there are lessons
from the global experience to be learnt before proceeding with the
implementation of the UID scheme, which the Ministry of Planning
have ignored completely. For instance, the United Kingdom shelved
its Identity Cards Project for a number of reasons, which included:—
(a) huge cost involved and possible cost overruns; (b) too complex;
(c) untested, unreliable and unsafe technology; (d) possibility of risk
to the safety and security of citizens; and (e) requirement of high
standard security measures, which would result in escalating the
estimated operational costs. In this context, the Report of the
‘London School of Economics’ Report on UK’s Identity Project inter-
alia States that “…..identity systems may create a range of new and
unforeseen problems……the risk of failure in the current proposals

27
is therefore magnified to the point where the scheme should be
regarded as a potential danger to the public interest and to the legal
rights of individuals”. As these findings are very much relevant and
applicable to the UID scheme, they should have been seriously
considered.
7. The UID scheme facilitates the UIDAI and the registrars to create
database of information of people of the country. Considering the huge
database size and possibility of misuse of information, the Committee
are of the view that enactment of national data protection law, which
is at draft stage with the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions, is a pre-requisite for any law that deals with large scale
collection of information from individuals and its linkages across
separate databases. In the absence of data protection legislation, it
would be difficult to deal with the issues like access and misuse of
personal information, surveillance, profiling, linking and matching of
data bases and securing confidentiality of information etc.
8. The Committee note that the Ministry of Planning have admitted
that (a) no Committee has been constituted to study the financial
implications of the UID scheme; and (b) comparative costs of the
aadhaar number and various existing ID documents are also not
available. The Committee also note that Detailed Project Report (DPR)
of the UID Scheme has been done much later in April, 2011. The
Committee thus strongly disapprove of the hasty manner in which the
UID scheme has been approved. Unlike many other schemes/projects,
no comprehensive feasibility study, which ought to have been done
before approving such an expensive scheme, has been done involving
all aspects of the UID scheme including cost-benefit analysis,
comparative costs of aadhaar number and various forms of existing
identity, financial implications and prevention of identity theft, for
example, using hologram enabled ration card to eliminate fake and
duplicate beneficiaries.
9. The Committee are afraid that the scheme may end up being
dependent on private agencies, despite contractual agreement made by
the UIDAI with several private vendors. As a result, the beneficiaries
may be forced to pay over and above the charges to be prescribed by
the UIDAI for availing of benefits and services, which are now available
free of cost.

28
10. The Committee find that the scheme is full of uncertainty in
technology as the complex scheme is built up on untested, unreliable
technology and several assumptions. Further, despite adverse
observations by the UIDAI’s Biometrics Standards Committee on error
rates of biometrics, the UIDAI is collecting the biometric information.
It is also not known as to whether the proof of concept studies and
assessment studies undertaken by the UIDAI have explored the
possibilities of maintaining accuracy to a large level of enrolment of
1.2 billion people. Therefore, considering the possible limitations in
applications of technology available now or in the near future, the
Committee would believe that it is unlikely that the proposed objectives
of the UID scheme could be achieved.
11. The Committee feel that entrusting the responsibility of
verification of information of individuals to the registrars to ensure
that only genuine residents get enrolled into the system may have far
reaching consequences for national security. Given the limitation of
any mechanism such as a security audit by an appropriate agency that
would be setup for verifying the information etc., it is not sure as to
whether complete verification of information of all aadhaar number
holders is practically feasible; and whether it would deliver the intended
results without compromising national security. As the National Identity
Cards to citizens of India are proposed to be issued on the basis of
aadhaar numbers, the possibility of possession of aadhaar numbers by
illegal residents through false affidavits/introducer system cannot be
ruled out.
12. The Committee take note that the Ministry of Home Affairs have
alleged that some of the registrars have not adhered to the laid down
procedures under UIDAI which renders the Memoranda of
Understanding (MoU) signed between the UIDAI and the registrars
meaningless; and it compromises the security and confidentiality of
information of aadhaar number holders. Even, according to the latest
media reports, controversies between the Ministry of Home Affairs
and the UIDAI over issues such as the manner and processes followed
by the UIDAI, duplication of efforts between NPR and aadhaar, and
security of data still remain unresolved.

29
13. In view of the afore-mentioned concerns and apprehensions about
the UID scheme, particularly considering the contradictions and
ambiguities within the Government on its implementation as well as
implications, the Committee categorically convey their unacceptability
of the National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 in its present
form. The data already collected by the UIDAI may be transferred to
the National Population Register (NPR), if the Government so chooses.
The Committee would, thus, urge the Government to reconsider and
review the UID scheme as also the proposals contained in the Bill in
all its ramifications and bring forth a fresh legislation before Parliament.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
11 December, 2011 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

30
APPENDIX I
NOTE OF DISSENT
Shri Raashid Alvi, MP
I do not agree with the paragraph “13” of the draft Report on “The
National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010”.
I suggest to delete “this para”.
Sd/-
Dated: 7 December, 2011 (RAASHID ALVI)

31
NOTE OF DISSENT
Prem Das Rai, MP
The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010
At the outset I do not believe that the bill should be rejected in
the manner it has been. Since I have been inducted into the Committee
recently I do not have the inputs that went in when the stakeholders and
other Government departments were giving witness. I also do not know
whether we gave enough time to the UID implementers to give evidence
and present their point of view.
Hence, I would like to place on record that the issue of giving out
Aadhaar numbers under the UID scheme, I believe, is one of the greatest
import for social and economic inclusion in this country. I personally am
privy to the kind of work that is needed at the grassroots as I was part
of an organisation that did such work in the North East of India and
other backward regions using some form of technology to bring in
inclusion.
The linking of a person to a number and then being able to make
give access to the right to that person is transformational. It is the next
phase of transformation that technology can bring about in our own
country. This has never been done anywhere in the world and we should
be rightly proud of this.
I do agree there may be serious issues that need to be factored in
which my esteemed colleagues have pointed out.
I recommend that the Bill may be discussed in Parliament bringing
about some of the changes so desired and do not concur that the Bill
be brought fresh.
Sd/-
Dated: 8 December, 2011 (PREM DAS RAI)

32
NOTE OF DISSENT
Manicka Tagore, MP
I could not attend this meeting on adoption of the draft report on
the National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 because a very
important discussion on the price rise was going on in the Lok Sabha.
The Government of India with a view to ensure that the benefits of
centrally sponsored schemes reaches to right persons and not misused,
they had decided to issue unique identification numbers to all residents
in India and to certain other persons the basic idea was to identification
of the persons. The Aadhar programme has been launched first time in
India. The UIDAI officials had taken all possible precautions to make the
exercise safe and secure. Both demographic and biometric datas were
collected and its method of collecting datas were approved by the
Demographic Data Standards and Verification Procedure Committee.
It is surprising to know that the committee members have not yet
recognized the value of UID. This system will cut down fraud and
corruption in every area of administration.
I dissent the observation and recommendation of the Standing
Committee on Finance regarding the Draft Report on the National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010. I request the Chairman that
the UID bill may kindly be considered by the Government with our
views and not rejected.
Sd/-
Dated: 10 December, 2011 (MANICKA TAGORE)

33
NOTE OF DISSENT
Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy, MP
I am writing this letter as a Dissent Note to the Draft Report on
the National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 which was adopted
in the meeting held on 8.12.11. I could not attend the meeting fully since
I was required to attend to Lok Sabha proceedings as my Congress Party
had issued a Three Line Whip for 8.12.11 and left after signing.
After the meeting having gone into the matter again, I understand
the Standing Committee have adopted the Draft Report with the
recommendation as:—
“considering the contradictions and ambiguities within the
Government on its implementation as well as implications, the
Committee categorically convey their unacceptability of the National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 in its present form. The
Committee would, thus, urge the Government to reconsider and
review the UID Scheme as also the proposals contained in the Bill
in all its ramifications and bring forth a fresh legislation before
Parliament.”
I personally feel that instead the Bill may be considered in all its
merits and the Draft Report may be modified accordingly. More extensive
deliberations are therefore required to examine the Bill more thoroughly.
This may therefore be treated as my Dissent Note to the Draft Report.
Sd/-
Dated: 14 December, 2011 (MAGUNTA SREENIVASULU REDDY)

34
APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 11th February, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Smt. Jaya Prada Nahata
4. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
5. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
6. Shri Manicka Tagore
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
9. Shri Piyush Goyal
10. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary

35
WITNESSES
Ministry of Planning
1. Ms. Sudha Pillai, Member-Secretary
2. Shri Pronab Sen, Pr. Adviser
3. Shri Chaman Kumar, Addl. Secretary and FA
4. Shri C. Muralikrishna Kumar, Sr. Adviser
5. Shri T.K. Pandey, Joint Secretary (Admn.)
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
1. Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman
2. Shri R.S. Sharma, Director-General
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Planning and Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) in
connection with the examination of the National Identification Authority
of India Bill, 2010. Major issues discussed with the representatives
included, need for providing statutory status to the Unique Identification
Authority of India (UIDAI); Definition of ‘Resident’; provision for de-
activating the Aadhaar Number; collection of demographic information
and biometric information; nature of enrolment and special measures for
enrolment of weaker sections. The Chairman directed the representatives
to furnish replies to the points raised during the sitting within one week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

36
MINUTES OF THE NINTEENTH SI TTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th June, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Acting Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
10. Shri Dharam Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Moinul Hassan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

37
PART-I
(1130 HRS. TO 1145 HRS.)
2. In the absence of the Chairman, the Committee chose
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P. to chair the sitting under Rule 258(3) of
the Rules of Procedure.
3. *** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
PART-II
(1145 hrs. to 1215 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)
1. Shri Rajiv Sharma — Secretary-General
2. Shri A.K. Garg — Registrar (Law)
3. Shri J.P . Meena — Joint Secretary (P&A)
4. The Committee heard the representatives of the National Human
Rights Commission on “The National Identification Authority of India
Bill, 2010”. The major issues discussed during the sitting broadly related
to nature, objective and beneficiaries of aadhaar number; possible
discrimination and specific provisions that are required to be built in;
safeguards needed for securing the stored information by the proposed
National Identification Authority of India; implications of the provisions
of the Bill on the individual’s right to privacy, etc. The Chairman directed
the representatives of the National Human Rights Commission to furnish
replies to the points raised by the Members during the discussion within
a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-III
(1215 hrs. to 1300 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
1. Shri M.D. Mallya — Chairman
2. Dr. K. Ramakrishnan — Chief Executive
3. Shri M.R. Umarji — Chief Advisor-Legal

38
5. Subsequently, the Committee heard the representatives of the Indian
Banks’ Association (IBA) on “The National Identification Authority of
India Bill, 2010”. The major issues discussed during the sitting broadly
related to stipulations prescribed by the Ministry of Finance and the
Reserve Bank of India for using aadhaar numbers for opening bank
accounts; new account holders added through aadhaar numbers; and
utility of aadhaar number in financial inclusion, social sector lending, etc.
The Chairman directed the representatives of Indian Banks’ Association
(IBA) to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the
discussion within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-IV
(1300 hrs. to 1400 hrs.)
W
ITNESS
Dr. Reetika Khera, Visitor, Centre for Development Economics,
Delhi School of Economics.
6. The Committee then heard Dr. Reetika Khera, on “The National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010”. The major issues discussed
broadly related to nature of Aadhaar number; existing ID proof documents
and need for aadhaar number; usage and benefits of aadhaar number
particularly in Mahatama Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme, Public Distribution System, implications of the UID programme;
relevance of Report of London School of Economics on UK’s Identity Act,
2006 in the context of aadhaar number etc. The Chairman directed the
expert to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the
discussion within a week.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witness then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned at 1400 hours.

39
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th July, 2011 from 1100 hrs.
to 1715 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Manicka Tagore
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
12. Shri Moinul Hassan
13. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
16. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao

40
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
PART-I
(1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs.)
2. *** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
PART-II
(1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs.)
3. *** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
PART-III
(1400 hrs. to 1715 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
1. Mr. Arun Duggal,
Vice Chairman, International Asset Reconstruction Company
(IARC) and Chairman, Shriram Capital Limited
2. Mr. Chirag Jain,
Chief Operating Officer
Canara HSBC Oriental Bank of Commerce Life Insurance
Company Limited
3. Mr. Ravi Gandhi, VP ,
Corporate Regulatory Affairs
Bharti Airtel
4. Mr. Rameesh Kailasam,
Program Director
IBM India Pvt. Limited
4. The Committee heard the representatives of Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII) in connection with examination of ‘The National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010’. The major issues discussed

41
included, existing ID proof documents and the rationale and necessity
of aadhaar number; usage, benefits and objects of aadhaar number; role
of aadhaar number in planning and formulation of social policies;
collection of biometric and demographic information; measures for
enrolment of certain categories like persons with disability; exploration
of alternate and economical identity system; opening up of Registrars
and enrolment agencies to private sector; technological issues involved
in the UID project; financial implications of the UID project; impact of
the provisions of the Bill on the individual’s right to privacy; potential
of possible use of aadhaar numbers by illegal residents; lessons learnt
from global practice and failures experienced in different countries in
establishment of identity system similar to aadhaar number especially
relevance of report of London School of Economics on UK Identity Act,
2006; legality of implementation of the UID project before the law is
enacted by the Parliament; making the penal provisions of the Bill in line
with IT Act, 2000 etc. The Chairman directed the representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) to give suggestions clause-by-
clause alongwith the replies to the points raised by the Members within
ten days.
The witnesses then withdrew.
W
ITNESSES
Experts
1. Dr. Usha Ramanathan,
Independent Law Researcher on the jurisprudence on Law,
Poverty and Rights, New Delhi
2. Dr. R. Ramakumar,
Associate Professor,
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai
3. Shri Gopal Krishna,
Member, Citizen Forum for Civil Liberties, New Delhi
5. The Committee then heard the experts on “The National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010”. The major issues discussed
broadly related to beneficiaries of aadhaar number including the eligibility
of children; feasibility study on the UID project; costs and benefits analysis
of the UID project; global experience in creation of a national data base
of its citizens with biometrics; convergence of data, its usage and its
consequences; functioning of the UIDAI under Executive order and
implementation of the UID project before an enactment of law; impact
of the provisions of the Bill on civil rights and liberties; implications of

42
the provisions of the Bill on RTI Act, 2005; responsibilities of ‘Introducer’
and liability of the UIDAI; outsourcing of works by the UIDAI and its
responsibilities; alternate system of identification etc. The Chairman
directed the experts to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members
during the discussion within ten to fifteen days.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

43
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 8th December, 2011 from
1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Prem Das Rai
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
12. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
13. Shri Yashvir Singh
14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
15. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
17. Shri Raashid Alvi

44
18. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
19. Shri Moinul Hassan
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
21. Shri Mahendra Mohan
22. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
23. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
24. Shri Yogendra P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration
and adoption:—
(i) The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2008;
(ii) The Banking Laws (Amendment) B ill, 2011; and
(iii) The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010.
3. The Committee adopted the above draft reports with some minor
modifications/changes as suggested by Members. The Committee
authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the
modifications suggested and present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

45
APPENDIX III
AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. LXXV of 2010
THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY OF INDIA
BILL, 2010
_____
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
_____
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
AADHAAR N UMBERS
3. Aadhaar number.
4. Properties of aadhaar number.
5. Authentication of aadhaar number.
6. Aadhaar number not evidence of
citizenship or domicile, etc.
7. Central Identities Data Repository.
8. Updation of certain information.
9. Prohibition on requiring certain
information.

46
10. Special measures for issuance of
aadhaar number to certain categories
of persons.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL I DENTIFICATION A UTHORITY OF I NDIA
11. Establishment of Authority.
12. Composition of Authority.
13. Qualifications for appointment of
Chairperson and Members of
Authority.
14. Term of office and other conditions
of service of Chairperson and
Members.
15. Removal of Chairperson and
Members.
16. Restrictions on Chairperson or
Members on employment after
cessation of office.
17. Functions of Chairperson.
18. Meetings.
19. Vacancies, etc. not to invalidate
proceedings of Authority.
20. Officers and other employees of
Authority.
21. Functions of chief executive officer
of Authority.
22. Transfer of assets, liabilities of
Authority.
23. Powers and functions of Authority.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
24. Grants by Central Government.
25. Other fees and revenue.

47
CLAUSES
26. Accounts and audit.
27. Returns and annual report, etc.
CHAPTER V
IDENTITY R EVIEW C OMMITTEE
28. Review Committee.
29. Functions of Review Committee.
CHAPTER VI
PROTECTION OF I NFORMATION
30. Security and confidentiality of
information.
31. Alteration of demographic informa-
tion or biometric information.
32. Access to own information and
records of requests for authentication.
33. Disclosure of information in certain
cases.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND P ENALTIES
34. Penalty for impersonation at time of
enrolment.
35. Penalty for impersonation of aadhaar
number holder by changing
demographic information or
biometric information.
36. Penalty for impersonation.
37. Penalty for disclosing identity
information.
38. Penalty for unauthorised access
to the Central Identities Data
Repository.

48
39. Penalty for tampering with data in
Central Identities Data Repository.
40. Penalty for manipulating biometric
information.
41. General penalty.
42. Offences by companies.
43. Act to apply for offence or contraven-
tion committed outside India.
44. Power to investigate offences.
45. Penalties not to interfere with other
punishments.
46. Cognizance of offences.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47. Power of Central Government to
supersede Authority.
48. Members, officers, etc., to be public
servants.
49. Power of Central Government to
issue directions.
50. Delegation.
51. Protection of action taken in good
faith.
52. Power of Central Government to
make rules.
53. Power of Authority to make
regulations.
54. Laying of rules and regulations
before Parliament.
55. Application of other laws not barred.
56. Power to remove difficulties.
57. Savings.

49
AS I NTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. LXXV of 2010
THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AUTHORITY
OF INDIA BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National
Identification Authority of India for the purpose of
issuing identification numbers to individuals residing
in India and to certain other classes of individuals
and manner of authentication of such individuals to
facilitate access to benefits and services to such
individuals to which they are entitled and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National
Identification Authority of India Act, 2010.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir and save as
otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to
any offence or contravention thereunder
committed outside India by any person.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

50
may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the commencement of that
provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a)   “aadhaar number” means the
identification number issued to an individual
under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(b)  “aadhaar number holder” means an
individual who has been issued an aadhaar
number under this Act;
(c) “authentication” means the process
wherein, aadhaar number along with other
attributes (including biometrics) are
submitted to the Central Identities Data
Repository for its verification and such
Repository verifies the correctness thereof on
the basis of information or data or documents
available with it;
(d)  “ Authority” means the National
Identification Authority of India established
under sub-section (1) of section 11;
(e) “biometric information” means a set
of such biological attributes of an individual
as may be specified by regulations;
(f) “Central Identities Data Repository”
means a centralised database in one or more
locations containing all aadhaar numbers
issued to aadhaar number holders along with
the corresponding demographic information
and biometric information of such
individuals and other information related
thereto;
(g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson
of the Authority appointed under section 12;
Definitions.

51
(h) “demographic information” includes
information relating to the name, age,
gender and address of an individual (other
than race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity,
language, income or health), and such other
information as may be specified in the
regulations for the purpose of issuing an
aadhaar number;
(i) “enrolling agency” means an agency
appointed by the Authority or by the
Registrars, as the case may be, for collecting
information under this Act;
(j) “enrolment” means such process, as
may be specified by regulations, to collect
demographic information and biometric
information from individuals by the enrolling
agencies for the purpose of issuing of
aadhaar number to such individuals under
this Act;
(k) “identity information” in respect of
an individual means biometric information,
demographic information and aadhaar
number of such individuals;
(l) “Member” includes the Chairperson
and a part-time Member of the Authority
appointed under section 12;
(m) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notified” with its cognate
meanings and grammatical variations shall
be construed accordingly;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(o)  “Registrar” means any entity
authorised or recognised by the Authority
for the purpose of enrolling the individuals
under this Act;

52
(p) “regulations” means the regulations
made by the Authority under this Act;
(q)  “resident” means an individual
usually residing in a village or rural area or
town or ward or demarcated area
(demarcated by the Registrar General of
Citizen Registration) within a ward in a town
or urban area in India;
(r)  “Review Committee” means the
Identification Review Committee constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 28.
CHAPTER II
A
ADHAAR N UMBERS
3. (1) Every resident shall be entitled to obtain
an aadhaar number on providing of his
demographic information and biometric
information to the Authority in such manner as
may be specified by regulations:—
Provided that the Central Government may,
from time to time, notify such other category of
individuals who may be entitled to obtain an
aadhaar number.
(2)  On receipt of the demographic
information and biometric information under
sub-section (1), the Authority shall, after verifying
the information, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations, issue an aadhaar number
to such resident.
4. (1)  An aadhaar number, issued to an
individual shall not be re-assigned to any other
individual.
(2) An aadhaar number shall be a random
number and bear no attributes or identity data
or part thereof, relating to the aadhaar number
holder.
Aadhaar
number.
Properties
of
aadhaar
number.

53
(3) An aadhaar number shall, subject to
authentication, be accepted as proof of identity
of the aadhaar number holder.
5. (1)  The Authority shall perform
authentication of the aadhaar number of a
aadhaar number holder in relation to his
biometric information and demographic
information subject to such conditions and on
payment of such fees and in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
(2)  The Authority shall respond to an
authentication query with a positive or negative
response or with any other appropriate response
excluding any demographic information and
biometric information.
6. The aadhaar number or the authentication
thereof shall not, by itself, confer any right of or
be proof of citizenship or domicile in respect of
an aadhaar number holder.
7. The Authority may engage one or more
entities to establish and maintain the Central
Identities Data Repository and to perform any
other functions as may be specified by
regulations.
8. The Authority may require the aadhaar
number holders to update their demographic
information and biometric information, from time
to time, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations so as to ensure continued accuracy
of their information in the Central Identities Data
Repository.
9. The Authority shall not require any
individual to give information pertaining to his
race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language,
income or health.
10. The Authority shall take special measures to
issue aadhaar number to women, children, senior
citizens, persons with disability, migrant unskilled
Authentica-
tion
of aadhaar
number.
Aadhaar
number not
evidence of
citizenship
or domicile,
etc.
Central
Identities
Data
Repository.
Updation of
certain
information.
Prohibition
on requir-
ing
certain
information.
Special
measures
for issuance
of aadhaar

54
and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to
such other persons who do not have any
permanent dwelling house and such other
categories of individuals as may be specified by
regulations.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL I DENTIFICATION A UTHORITY OF I NDIA
11. (1)  The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish an Authority to be known
as the National Identification Authority of India
to exercise the powers conferred on it and to
perform the functions assigned to it under this
Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate
by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power,
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said
name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be
in the National Capital Region referred to in
clause (f) of section 2 of the National Capital
Region Planning Board Act, 1985.
(4)  The Authority may, with the prior
approval of the Central Government, establish
its offices at other places in India.
12. The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson
and two part-time Members to be appointed by
the Central Government.
13. The Chairperson and Members of the
Authority shall be persons of ability, integrity
and outstanding calibre having experience and
knowledge in the matters relating to technology,
governance, law, development, economics,
finance, management, public affairs or
administration.
number
to certain
categories
of persons.
Establish-
ment of
Authority.
Composi-
tion of
Authority.
Qualifica-
tions for
appoint-
ment of
Chairperson
and
Members of
Authority.
2 of 1985.

55
14. (1)  The Chairperson and the Members
appointed under this Act shall hold office for a
term of three years from the date on which they
assume office and shall be eligible for
reappointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as
a Chairperson or Member after he has attained
the age of sixty-five years:
Provided further that the Chairperson of the
Unique Identification Authority of India
appointed before the commencement of this Act
by notification A-43011/02/2009-Admn. I (Vol. II)
dated the 2nd July, 2009 shall continue as a
Chairperson of the Authority under this Act for
the term for which he had been appointed.
(2) The Chairperson and every Member shall,
before entering upon their office, make and
subscribe to, an oath of office and of secrecy, in
such form and in such manner and before such
Authority as may be prescribed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Chairperson or Member
may—
(a) relinquish his office, by giving in
writing to the Central Government, a notice
of not less than thirty days; or
(b)  be removed from his office in
accordance with the provisions of section 15.
(4) The Chairperson shall not hold any other
office during the period of holding his office in
the Authority as such.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service of,
the Chairperson and allowances or remuneration
payable to part-time Members shall be such as
may be prescribed:
Term of
office and
other
conditions
of service
of Chairper-
son and
Members.

56
Provided that the salary, allowances and
the other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson shall not be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment.
15. (1) The Central Government may remove
from office the Chairperson, or a Member,
who—
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged
as an insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as the Chairperson or, as
the case may be, a Member;
(c) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as the Chairperson or, as the case
may be, a Member; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central
Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental
to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson, or a Member shall not
be removed under clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-
section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
16. The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to
hold office as such, shall not, without previous
approval of the Central Government,—
(a)  accept any employment in, or
connected with the management or
administration of, any person which has been
associated with any work under the Act, for
a period of three years from the date on
which they cease to hold office:
Removal of
Chairperson
and
Members.
Restrictions
on Chair-
person or
Members
on employ-
ment after
cessation of
office.

57
Provided that nothing contained in this
clause shall apply to any employment under
the Central Government or a State
Government or local authority or in any
statutory authority or any corporation
established by or under any Central, State or
provincial Act or a Government Company,
as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956;
(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or
organisation in connection with any specific
proceeding or transaction or negotiation or
a case to which the Authority is a party and
with respect to which the Chairperson or such
Member had, before cessation of office, acted
for or provided advice to, the Authority;
(c) give advice to any person using
information which was obtained in his
capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and
being unavailable to or not being able to be
made available to the public;
(d) enter, for a period of three years from
his last day in office, into a contract of service
with, accept an appointment to a board of
directors of, or accept an offer of employment
with, an entity with which he had direct and
significant official dealings during his term
of office as such.
17. The Chairperson shall have powers of general
superintendence, direction in the conduct of the
affairs of the Authority and he shall, in addition
to presiding over the meetings of the Authority,
and without prejudice to any of the provisions
of this Act, exercise and discharge such other
powers and functions of the Authority as may be
prescribed.
18. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times
and places and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business
Functions
of Chairper-
son.
Meetings.
1 of 1956.

58
at its meetings (including quorum at such
meetings) as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason, he
is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority,
the senior most Member shall preside over the
meetings of the Authority.
(3) All questions which come up before any
meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a
majority of votes by the Members present and
voting and in the event of an equality of votes,
the Chairperson or in his absence the Member
presiding over shall have a second or casting vote.
(4) All decisions of the Authority shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson
or any other Member authorised by the Authority
in this behalf.
(5) If any Member, who is a director of a
company and who as such director, has any direct
or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter
coming up for consideration at a meeting of the
Authority, he shall, as soon as possible after
relevant circumstances have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at
such meeting and such disclosure shall be
recorded in the proceedings of the Authority, and
the Member shall not take part in any deliberation
or decision of the Authority with respect to that
matter.
19. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall
be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Authority;
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person as a Member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the Authority not affecting the merits of the
case.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of
Authority.

59
20. (1) There shall be a chief executive officer of
the Authority, not below the rank of the
Additional Secretary to the Government of India,
who shall be the Member-Secretary of the
Authority, to be appointed by the Central
Government.
(2) The Authority may, with the approval of
the Central Government, determine the number,
nature and categories of other officers and
employees required to the Authority in the
discharge of its functions.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service of,
the chief executive officer and other officers and
other employees of the Authority shall be such
as may be specified by regulations with the
approval of the Central Government.
21. (1) The chief executive officer shall be the
legal representative of the Authority and shall be
responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the
Authority;
(b) implementing the work programmes
and decisions adopted by the Authority;
(c)  drawing up of proposal for the
Authority’s work programmes;
(d) the preparation of the statement of
revenue and expenditure and the execution
of the budget of the Authority.
(2) Every year, the chief executive officer shall
submit to the Authority for approval—
(a) a general report covering all the
activities of the Authority in the previous
year;
(b) programmes of work;
Officers
and other
employees
of
Authority.
Functions
of chief
executive
officer of
Authority.

60
(c) the annual accounts for the previous
year; and
(d) the budget for the coming year.
(3) The chief executive officer shall have
administrative control over the officers and other
employees of the Authority.
22. On and from the establishment of the
Authority—
(1) all the assets and liabilities of the Unique
Identification Authority of India, established vide
notification of the Government of India in the
Planning Commission number A-43011/02/2009-
Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall stand
transferred to, and vested in, the Authority.
Explanation. — The assets of such Unique
Identification Authority of India shall be deemed
to include all rights and powers, and all
properties, whether movable or immovable,
including, in particular, cash balances, deposits
and all other interests and rights in, or arising
out of, such properties as may be in the
possession of such Unique Identification
Authority of India and all books of account and
other documents relating to the same; and
liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts,
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;
(2) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1), all data and information collected
during enrolment, all details of authentication
performed, debts, obligations and liabilities
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters
and things engaged to be done by, with or for
such Unique Identification Authority of India
immediately before that day, for or in connection
with the purpose of the said Unique Identification
Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been
incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by,
with or for, the Authority;
Transfer
of assets,
liabilities of
Authority.

61
(3) all sums of money due to the Unique
Identification Authority of India immediately
before that day shall be deemed to be due to the
Authority; and
(4) all suits and other legal proceedings
instituted or which could have been instituted
by or against such Unique Identification
Authority of India immediately before that day
may be continued or may be instituted by or
against the Authority.
23. (1) The Authority shall develop the policy,
procedure and systems for issuing aadhaar
numbers to residents and perform authentication
thereof under this Act.
(2)  Without prejudice to the provisions
contained in sub-section (1), the powers and
functions of the Authority may, inter alia, include
all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) specifying, by regulation, demogra-
phic information and biometric information
for enrolment for an aadhaar number and
the processes for collection and verification
thereof;
(b) collecting demographic information
and biometric information from any indivi-
dual seeking an aadhaar number in such
manner as may be specified by regulations;
(c) appointing of one or more entities to
operate the Central Identities Data
Repository;
(d) generating and assigning aadhaar
numbers to individuals;
(e) performing authentication of the
aadhaar numbers;
(f)  maintaining and updating the
information of individuals in the Central
Powers and
functions of
Authority.

62
Identities Data Repository in such manner as
may be specified by regulations;
(g)  omitting and deactivating of an
aadhaar number and information relating
thereto in such manner as may be specified
by regulations;
(h) specify the usage and applicability of
the aadhaar number for delivery of various
benefits and services as may be provided by
regulations;
(i) specifying, by regulation, the terms
and conditions for appointment of Registrars,
enrolling agencies and service providers and
revocation of appointments thereof;
(j) establishing, operating and maintain-
ing of the Central Identities Data Repository;
(k) sharing, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations, the information of
aadhaar number holders, with their written
consent, with such agencies engaged in
delivery of public benefits and public services
as the Authority may by order direct;
(l) calling for information and records,
conducting inspections, inquiries and audit
of the operations for the purposes of this Act
of the Central Identities Data Repository,
Registrars, enrolling agencies and other
agencies appointed under this Act;
(m) specifying, by regulation, various
processes relating to data management,
security protocols and other technology
safeguards under this Act;
(n)  specifying, by regulation, the
conditions and procedures for issuance of
new aadhaar number to existing aadhaar
number holder;

63
(o) levy and collect the fees or authorise
the Registrars, enrolling agencies or other
service providers to collect such fees for the
services provided by them under this Act in
such manner as may be specified by
regulations;
(p) appoint such committees as may be
necessary to assist the Authority in discharge
of its functions for the purposes of this Act;
(q) promote research and development
for advancement in biometrics and related
areas, including usage and applications of
aadhaar numbers through appropriate
mechanisms;
(r) specifying, by regulation, the policies
and practices for Registrars, enrolling
agencies and other service providers;
(s) setting up facilitation centres and
grievance redressal mechanisms for redressal
of grievances of residents, Registrars,
enrolling agencies and other service
providers;
(t) such other powers and functions as
may be prescribed.
(3) The Authority may,—
(a)  enter into a Memorandum of
Understanding or agreement, as the case may
be, with Central Government or State
Governments or Union territories or other
agencies for the purpose of performing any
of the functions in relation to collecting,
storing, securing or processing of information
or performing authentication;
(b) by notification, appoint such number
of Registrars, engage and authorise such
agencies to collect, store, secure, process

64
information or do authentication or perform
such other functions in relation thereto,
as may be necessary for the purposes of this
Act.
(4)  The Authority may engage such
consultants, advisors and other persons as may
be required for efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act on such allowances or
remuneration and terms and conditions as may
be specified by regulations.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANTS, A CCOUNTS AND A UDIT AND
ANNUAL R EPORT
24. The Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, make to the Authority, grants of such sums
of money as the Central Government may think
fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
25. The fees or revenue collected by the
Authority shall be credited to the Consolidated
Fund of India and the entire amount so credited
be transferred to the Authority.
26. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare
an annual statement of accounts in such form as
may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be
audited annually by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may
be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable
by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Other fees
and
revenue.
Accounts
and audit.

65
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and
any person appointed by him in connection with
the audit of the accounts of the Authority under
this Act shall have the same rights and privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as
the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally
has in connection with the audit of Government
accounts, and in particular, shall have the right
to demand production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and
papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the
Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or any
other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government
by the Authority and the Central Government
shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon
as may be after it is received, before each House
of Parliament.
27. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central
Government at such time and in such form and
manner as may be prescribed or as the Central
Government may direct, such returns and
statements and particulars in regard to any matter
under the jurisdiction of the Authority, as the
Central Government may from time to time
require.
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once in every
year, and in such form and manner and at such
time as may be prescribed, an annual report
giving—
(a) a description of all the activities of
the Authority for the previous years;
(b) the annual accounts for the previous
year; and
(c) the programmes of work for coming
year.
Returns and
annual
report, etc.

66
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-
section (2)  shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER V
IDENTITY R EVIEW C OMMITTEE
28. (1)  The Central Government may, by
notification, constitute the Identity Review
Committee to discharge functions specified under
sub-section (1) of section 29 in respect of any
matter connected with the usage of the aadhaar
numbers.
(2) The Review Committee shall consist of
three members (one of whom shall be chairperson
designated as such by the Central Government)
who are persons of eminence, ability, integrity
and standing in public life having knowledge and
experience in the fields of technology, law,
administration and governance, social service,
journalism, management or social sciences.
(3) The members of the Review Committee
shall be appointed by the Central Government
on the recommendations of a committee
consisting of—
(a) the Prime Minister, who shall be the
Chairperson of the committee;
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the
Lok Sabha; and
(c)  a Union Cabinet Minister to be
nominated by the Prime Minister.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that where the Leader of the
Opposition in the House of the People has not
been recognised as such, the Leader of the single
largest group in Opposition of the Government
Review
Committee.

67
in the House of the People shall be deemed to
be the Leader of the Opposition.
(4) The member of the Review Committee
shall not be a Member of Parliament or Member
of the Legislature of any State or Union territory,
as the case may be, or a member of any political
party.
(5) The members of the Review Committee
shall hold office for a term of three years from
the date on which they enter upon office and
shall not be eligible for reappointment.
(6) The Central Government may by order
remove from office any member of the Review
Committee, who—
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged
as an insolvent;
(b) has become physically or mentally
incapable of acting as a member;
(c) has been convicted of an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude;
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as a member; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central
Government, so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental
to the public interest:—
Provided that a Member shall not be removed
under clause (d) or clause (e) unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
the matter.
29. (1) The Review Committee shall ascertain the
extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar
numbers across the country and prepare a report
Functions
of Review
Committee.

68
annually in relation to the extent and pattern of
usage of the aadhaar numbers along with its
recommendations thereon and submit the same
to the Central Government.
(2) The manner of preparation of the report
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as may
be determined by the Review Committee.
(3) A copy of the report along with the
recommendations of the Review Committee shall
be laid by the Central Government, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROTECTION OF I NFORMATION
30. (1) The Authority shall ensure the security
and confidentiality of identity information and
anthentication records of individuals.
(2)  The Authority shall take measures
(including security safeguards) to ensure that the
information in the possession or control of the
Authority (including information stored in the
Central Identities Data Repository) is secured and
protected against any loss or unauthorised access
or use or unauthorised disclosure thereof.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law and save as otherwise provided in
this Act, the Authority or any of its officer or
other employee or any agency who maintains
the Central Identities Data Repository shall not,
whether during his service as such or thereafter,
reveal any information stored in the Central
Identities Data Repository to any person:—
Provided that an aadhaar number holder may
request the Authority to provide access to his
identity information in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
Security
and
confidenti-
ality of
information.

69
31. (1) In case any demographic information
relating to an aadhaar number holder is found
incorrect or changes subsequently, the aadhaar
number holder shall request the Authority to alter
such demographic information in his record in
the Central Identities Data Repository in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) In case any bio-metric information of
aadhaar number holder is lost or changes
subsequently for any reason, the aadhaar number
holder shall request the Authority to make
necessary alteration in his record in the Central
Identities Data Repository in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
(3) On receipt of any request under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2), the Authority may,
if it is satisfied, make such alteration as may be
required in the record relating to such aadhaar
number holder and intimate such alteration to
the concerned aadhaar number holder.
32. (1) The Authority shall maintain details of
every request for authentication of the identity
of every aadhaar number holder and the response
provided thereon by it in such manner and for
such time as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Every aadhaar number holder shall be
entitled to obtain details of request for
authentication of his aadhaar number and the
response provided thereon by the Authority in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.
33. Nothing contained in sub-section (3) of
section 30 shall apply in respect of—
(a)  any disclosure of information
(including identity information or details of
authentication) made pursuant to an order
of a competent court; or
(b)  any disclosure of information
(including identity information) made in the
Alteration
of demo-
graphic
information
or bio-metric
information.
Access to
own
information
and records
of requests
for
authentica-
tion.
Disclosure
of informa-
tion in
certain cases.

70
interests of national security in pursuance of
a direction to that effect issued by an officer
or officers not below the rank of Joint
Secretary or equivalent in the Central
Government specifically authorised in this
behalf by an order of the Central
Government.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND P ENALTIES
34. Whoever impersonates or attempts to
impersonate another person, whether dead or
alive, real or imaginary, by providing any false
demographic information or bio-metric
information shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and with a fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees.
35. Whoever, with the intention of causing
harm or mischief to a aadhaar number holder,
or with the intention of appropriating the
identity of a aadhaar number holder changes
or attempts to change any demographic
information or bio-metric information of a
aadhaar number holder by impersonating or
attempting to impersonate another person,
dead or alive, real or imaginary, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and shall be
liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
36. Whoever, not being authorised to collect
identity information under the provisions of this
Act, by words, conduct or demeanour pretends
that he is authorised to do so, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years or with a fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a
company, with a fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees or with both.
Penalty for
impersona-
tion at
time of
enrolment.
Penalty for
impersona-
tion of
aadhaar
number
holder by
changing
demo-
graphic
information
or bio-metric
information.
Penalty for
impersona-
tion.

71
37. Whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits,
copies or otherwise disseminates any identity
information collected in the course of enrolment
or authentication to any person not authorised
under this Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with a fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company,
with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees
or with both.
38. Whoever, not being authorised by the
Authority, intentionally,—
(a) accesses or secures access to the
Central Identities Data Repository; or
(b) downloads, copies or extracts any data
from the Central Identities Data Repository
or stored in any removable storage medium;
or
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced
any virus or other computer contaminant in
the Central Identities Data Repository; or
(d) damages or causes to be damaged the
data in the Central Identities Data Repository;
or
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of the
access to the Central Identities Data Repository;
or
(f) denies or causes a denial of access
to any person who is authorised to access
the Central Identities Data Repository;
or
(g) provides any assistance to any person
to do any of the acts aforementioned; or
(h)  destroys, deletes or alters any
information stored in any removable storage
media or in the Central Identities Data
Penalty for
disclosing
identity
information.
Penalty for
unauthorised
access to
the Central
Identities
Data
Repository.

72
Repository or diminishes its value or utility
or effects it injuriously by any means; or
(i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or
causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy
or alter any computer source code used by
the Authority with an intention to cause
damage,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall
be liable to a fine which shall not be less than
one crore rupees.
Explanation. — For the purposes of this
section, the expressions “computer contaminant”,
“computer virus” and “damage” shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Explanation to section 43 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000.
39. Whoever, not being authorised by the
Authority, uses or tampers with the data in the
Central Identities Data Repository or in any
removable storage medium with the intent of
modifying information relating to aadhaar
number holder or discovering any information
thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years and
shall be liable to a fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees.
40. Whoever gives or attempts to give any
bio-metric information which does not pertain to
him for the purpose of getting an aadhaar number
or authentication or updating his information,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or with a fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with
both.
41. Whoever, commits an offence under this Act
for which no penalty is provided elsewhere than
in this section, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
Penalty for
tampering
with data
in Central
Identities
Data
Repository.
Penalty for
manipulat-
ing
bio-metric
information.
General
penalty.
21 of 2000.

73
three years or with a fine which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees or, in the case of a
company, with a fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees or with both.
42. (1) Where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a company, every person
who at the time the offence was committed
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act if he proves
that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act
has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to, any neglect on the part of any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation. — For the purposes of this
section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate
and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means
a partner in the firm.
Offences by
companies.

74
43. (1)  Subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), the provisions of this Act shall apply
also to any offence or contravention committed
outside India by any person, irrespective of his
nationality.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the
provisions of this Act shall apply to any offence
or contravention committed outside India by any
person, if the act or conduct constituting the
offence or contravention involves the Central
Identities Data Repository.
44. Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a police officer
not below the rank of Inspector of Police shall
investigate any offence under this Act.
45. No penalty imposed under this Act shall
prevent the imposition of any other penalty or
punishment under any other law for the time
being in force.
46. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Act, save on a
complaint made by the Authority or any officer
or person authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall try any offence punishable under
this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government
is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the Authority, it is
unable to discharge the functions or perform
the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act; or
Act to apply
for offence
or contra-
vention
committed
outside
India.
Power to
investigate
offences.
Penalties
not to
interfere
with other
punishments.
Cognizance
of offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Authority.
2 of 1974.

75
(b) that the Authority has persistently
defaulted in complying with any direction
given by the Central Government under this
Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by
or under the provisions of this Act and as a
result of such default the financial position
of the Authority or the administration of the
Authority has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render
it necessary in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification,
supersede the Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in
the notification and appoint a person or
persons as the President may direct to
exercise powers and discharge functions
under this Act:—
Provided that before issuing any such
notification, the Central Government shall give
a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to make
representations against the proposed supersession
and shall consider the representations, if any, of
the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section (1)  superseding the
Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other members
shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate
their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on
behalf of the Authority shall, until the
Authority is reconstituted under sub-
section (3), be exercised and discharged by
the person or persons referred to in sub-
section (1); and

76
(c) all properties owned or controlled by
the Authority shall, until the Authority is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in
the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period
of supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section (1), the Central Government
shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh
appointment of its Chairperson and other
members and in such case any person who had
vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section
(2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for
reappointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a
copy of the notification issued under sub-section
(1) and a full report of any action taken under
this section and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before each House of Parliament
at the earliest.
48. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other
employees of the Authority shall be deemed,
while acting or purporting to act in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
49. Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its
powers or the performance of its functions under
this Act be bound by such directions on questions
of policy, other than those relating to technical
and administrative matters, as the Central Govern-
ment may give, in writing to it, from time to time:—
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as
practicable, be given an opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under this
sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government,
whether a question is one of policy or not, shall
be final.
Members,
officers,
etc.,
to be
public
servants.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
45 of 1860.

77
50. The Authority may, by general or special
order in writing, delegate to any Member, officer
of the Authority or any other person, subject to
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in
the order, such of its powers and functions under
this Act (except the power under section 53) as
it may deem necessary.
51. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the Central Government or the
Authority or the Chairperson or any Member or
any officer, or other employees of the Authority
for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done under this Act or the rule
or regulation made thereunder.
52. (1)  The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which and
the Authority before whom the oath of office
and of secrecy is to be subscribed by the
Chairperson and Members under sub-section
(2) of section 14;
(b) the salary and allowances payable
to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and the
allowances or remuneration payable to
Members of the Authority under sub-section
(5) of section 14;
(c) the other powers and functions of the
Chairperson of the Authority under section
17;
(d) the other powers and functions of the
Authority under clause (t) of sub-section (2)
of section 23;
Delegation.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.

78
(e) the form of annual statement of
accounts to be prepared by the Authority
under sub-section (1) of section 26;
(f) the form and the manner in which
and the time within which returns and
statements and particulars are to be furnished
under sub-section (1) of section 27;
(g) the form and the manner and the
time at which the Authority shall furnish
annual report under sub-section (2)  of
section 27;
(h) any other matter which is required to
be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of
which provision is to be or may be made by
rules.
53. (1) The Authority may, by notification, make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules
made thereunder, for carrying out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a)  the biometric information under
clause (e) and the demographic information
under clause (h) of section 2;
(b) the process of collecting demographic
information and biometric information from
the individuals by enrolling agencies under
clause (j) of section 2;
(c)  the manner of furnishing the
demographic information and biometric
information by the resident under sub-section
(1) of section 3;
(d)  the manner of verifying the
demographic information and biometric
Power of
Authority
to make
regulations.

79
information for issue of aadhaar number
under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(e) the conditions, fees and manner of
authentication of the aadhaar number under
sub-section (1)  of section 5;
(f) the other functions to be performed
by Central Identities Data Repository under
section 7;
(g) the manner of updating biometric
information and demographic information
under section 8;
(h) the other categories of individuals
under section 10 for whom the Authority
shall take special measures for issue of
aadhaar number;
(i) the time and places of meetings of the
Authority and the procedure for transaction
of business to be followed by it (including
the quorum) under sub-section (1) of section
18;
(j) the salary and allowances payable to,
and other terms and conditions of service of,
the chief executive officer, officers and other
employees of the Authority under sub-section
(3) of section 20;
(k) the demographic information and
biometric information and process for their
collection and verification under clause (a)
and the manner of their collection under
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(l)  the manner of maintaining and
updating the information of individuals in
the Central Identities Data Repository under
clause (f) of sub-section  (2)  of section 23;
(m) the manner of omitting and deactivating
an aadhaar number and information relating

80
thereto under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(n) the usage and applicability of the
aadhaar number for delivery of various
benefits and services under clause (h) of sub-
section (2) of section 23;
(o)  the terms and conditions for
appointment of Registrars, enrolling agencies
and other service providers and the
revocation of appointments thereof under
clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 23;
(p) the manner of sharing information of
aadhaar number holder under clause (k) of
sub-section (2) of section 23;
(q) various processes relating to data
management, security protocol and other
technology safeguards under clause (m) of
sub-section (2) of section 23;
(r) the procedure for issuance of new
aadhaar number to existing aadhaar number
holder under clause (n) of sub-section  (2) of
section 23;
(s) manner of authorising Registrars,
enrolling agencies or other services providers
to collect such fees for services provided by
them under clause (o) of sub-section (2) of
section 23;
(t) policies and practices to be followed
by the Registrar, enrolling agencies and other
service providers under clause (r) of sub-
section (2)  of section 23;
(u) the allowances or remuneration and
terms and conditions of consultants, advisors
and other persons under sub-section (4) of
section 23;

81
(v) the manner in which an aadhaar
number holder can access his identity infor-
mation under sub-section (3) of section 30;
(w)  the manner of alteration of
demographic information under sub-section
(1) and biometric information under sub-
section (2) of section 31;
(x)  the manner of and the time for
maintaining the details of request for
authentication and the response thereon
under sub-section (1) of section 32;
(y) the manner of obtaining, by the
aadhaar number holder, the records of
request for authentication of his aadhaar
number and response thereon under sub-
section (2) of section 32;
(z) any other matter which is required to
be, or may be, specified, or in respect of which
provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
54. Every rule and every regulation made under
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree
that the rule or regulation should not be made,
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
55. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition
to, and not in derogation of, any other law for
the time being in force.
Laying of
rules and
regulations
before
Parliament.
Application
of other
laws not
barred.

82
56. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to
the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty:—
Provided that no such order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament.
57. Anything done or any action taken by the
Central Government under the Resolution of the
Government of India, Planning Commission
bearing notification number A-43011/02/2009-
Admin. I, dated the 28th January, 2009, shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Savings.

83
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Government had decided to issue unique identification
numbers to all residents in India and to certain other persons. The scheme
of unique identification involves collection of demographic information
and biometric information from individuals for the purpose of issuing
of unique identification numbers to such individuals. The biometric
information would involve taking of a set of biological attributes of such
individuals.
2. The Central Government, for the purposes of issue of the unique
identification numbers, constituted,  vide its notification dated the
28th January, 2009 being of executive in nature, the Unique Identification
Authority of India, which is at present functioning under the Planning
Commission.
3. It has been observed and assessed that the issue of unique
identification numbers may involve certain issues, such as (a) security
and confidentiality of information, imposition of obligation of disclosure
of information so collected in certain cases, (b) impersonation by
certain individuals at the time of enrolment for issue of unique
identification numbers, (c) unauthorised access to the Central Identities
Data Repository, (d) mainpulation of biometric information, (e) investiga-
tion of certain acts constituting offence, and (f) unauthorised disclosure
of the information collected for the purposes of issue of the unique
identification numbers which should be addressed by law and attract
penalties.
4. In view of the foregoing paragraph, it has been felt necessary to
make the said Authority as a statutory authority for carrying out the
functions of issuing identification numbers to the residents in India in
an effective manner. It is, therefore, proposed to enact the National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010 to provide for the establish-
ment of the National Identification Authority of India for the purpose
of issuing identification numbers (which has been referred to as
aadhaar number) to individuals residing in India and to certain
other classes of individuals and manner of authentication of such
individuals to facilitate access to benefits and services to such individuals
to which they are entitled and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.

84
5. The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010, inter alia,
seeks to provide—
(a) for issue of aadhaar numbers to every resident by the
Authority on providing his demographic information and
biometric information to it in such manner as may be specified
by regulations;
(b) for authentication of the aadhaar number of an aadhaar
number holder in relation to his biometric information and
demographic information subject to such conditions and on
payment of such fees as may be specified by regulations;
(c) for establishment of the National Identification Authority of
India consisting of a Chairperson and two part-time Members;
(d) that the Authority to exercise powers and discharge functions
which, inter alia , include—
(i) specifying the demographic information and biometric
information for enrolment for an aadhaar number and
the processes for collection and verification thereof;
(ii) collecting demographic information and biometric
information from any individual seeking an aadhaar
number in such manner as may be specified by
regulations;
(iii) appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central
Identities Data Repository;
(iv) maintaining and updating the information of individuals
in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner
as may be specified by regulations;
(v) specify the usage and applicability of the aadhaar number
for delivery of various benefits and services as may be
provided by regulations;
(e) that the Authority shall not require any individual to give
information pertaining to his race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, income or health;
(f) that the Authority may engage one or more entities to
establish and maintain the Central Identities Data Repository
and to perform any other functions as may be specified by
regulations;
(g) for constitution of the Identity Review Committee consisting
of three members (one of whom shall be the chairperson) to

85
ascertain the extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar
numbers across the country and prepare a report annually
in relation to the extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar
numbers along with its recommendations thereon and submit
the same to the Central Government;
(h) that the Authority shall take measures (including security
safeguards) to ensure that the information in the possession
or control of the Authority (including information stored in
the Central Identities Data Repository) is secured and
protected against any loss or unauthorised access or use or
unauthorised disclosure thereof;
(i) for offences and penalties for contravention of the provisions
of the proposed legislation.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; MANMOHAN SINGH
The 8th November, 2010.

86
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.— This clause contains definitions of certain words and
expressions used in the proposed legislation. These definitions, inter alia,
include the definitions of “aadhaar number”, “authentication”, “Central
Identities Data Repository”, “demographic information”, “Identity
information”, “resident”, “Review Committee”, etc.
Clause 3.— This clause provides for entitlement to obtain an aadhaar
number by every resident. It proposes that every resident shall be entitled
to obtain an aadhaar number after providing his demographic information
and biometric information to the Authority in such manner as specified
by regulations. It further provides that the Central Government may from
time to time notify the other category of individuals who may be entitled
to obtain an aadhaar number. It also provides that the Authority after
verifying the demographic information and biometric information
provided by the resident, issue an aadhaar number to such resident.
Clause 4.— This clause deals with the properties of aadhaar number.
It provides that any aadhaar number issued to an individual shall not
be re-assigned to any other individual; it shall be a random number and
bear no attributes or identity data relating to the aadhaar number holder.
It further provides that the aadhaar number can be accepted as proof of
identity of its holder but subject to authentication.
Clause 5.—This clause empowers the Authority to perform
authentication of the aadhaar number of a aadhaar number holder in
relation to his biometric information and demographic information subject
to such conditions and on payment of such fees and in such manner as
specified by regulations. It further empowers the Authority to respond
to an authentication query with a positive or negative response or with
any other appropriate response excluding any demographic information
and biometric information.
Clause 6.—This clause lays down that the aadhaar number or the
authentication thereof shall not, by itself, confer any right of or be proof
of citizenship or domicile in respect of an aadhaar number holder.
Clause 7.—This clause empowers the Authority to engage one or
more entities to establish and maintain the Central Identities Data Repository
and to perform any other functions as provided under regulations.

87
Clause 8.— This clause deals with the updating of the demographic
information and biometric information of the aadhaar number holders,
from time to time, in such manner as specified by regulations so as to
ensure continued accuracy of their information in the Central Identities
Data Repository.
Clause 9.— This clause prohibits the Authority from requiring any
individual to give information pertaining to his race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, income or health.
Clause 10.—This clause empowers the Authority to take special
measures to issue aadhaar number to women, children, senior citizens,
persons with disability, migrant un-skilled and unorganised workers,
nomadic tribes or to such other persons who do not have any permanent
dwelling house and such other categories of individuals which are
specified by regulations.
Clause 11.— This clause provides for establishment of the National
Identification Authority of India, by the Central Government, to exercise
the powers conferred on it and to perform the functions assigned to it
under the proposed legislation. The said Authority shall be a body
corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power,
subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and
shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. It further provides for the location
of the head office of the Authority in the National Capital Region and
with the prior approval of the Central Government, to establish its offices
at other places in India.
Clause 12.—This clause lays down the composition of the Authority
consisting of a Chairperson and two part-time Members to be appointed
by the Central Government.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for qualifications for appointment
of Chairperson and Members of the Authority. It provides that persons
of ability, integrity and outstanding calibre having experience and
knowledge in the matters relating to technology, governance, law,
development, economics, finance, management, public affairs or
administration shall be qualified as Chairperson and Members of the
Authority.
Clause 14.— This clause provides for term of office and other
conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. It provides that the
Chairperson and the Members shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date on which they assume office and shall be eligible for
reappointment. It also provides that the Chairperson or Member of the

88
Authority shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age of
sixty-five years.
It also provides that the Chairperson of the Unique Identification
Authority of India appointed before the commencement of the proposed
legislation by notification A-43011/02/2009-Admn.I (Vol.II) dated the
2nd July, 2009 shall continue as a Chairperson of the Authority under
the proposed legislation for the term for which he had been appointed.
It also provides that the Chairperson and every Member shall, before
entering upon their office, make and subscribe to, an oath of office and
of secrecy, in such form and in such manner and before such Authority
as may be prescribed.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-clause (1), the Chairperson or Member may relinquish his office, by giving
in writing to the Central Government, a notice of not less than thirty
days; or be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions
of clause 15. It also provides that the Chairperson shall not hold any
other office during the period of holding their office in the Authority
as such.
It also provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and
allowances or remuneration payable to part-time Members shall be such
as may be prescribed by the Central Government but neither the salary,
allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson shall be varied to his disadvantages after his appointment.
Clause 15.— This clause provides for removal of Chairperson and
Members of the Authority. It provides that the Central Government may
remove from office the Chairperson or a Member of the Authority on
any of the grounds enumerated in this clause.
It further provides that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be
removed from his office on the grounds specified in item (d) or (e) of
sub-clause (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in respect of those charges.
Clause 16.— This clause prohibition as to holding of offices by the
Chairperson or a Member on ceasing to be such Chairperson or a Member
of the Authority. It provides that on ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson
or Member of the Authority, as the case may be, shall subject to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, be ineligible, for further
employment in, or, connected with the management or administration
of, any person which has been associated with any work under the Act,

89
for a period of three years. It also provides that the clause shall not apply
to any employment under the Central Government or a State Government
or local authority or in any statutory authority or any corporation
established by or under any Central, State or provincial Act or a
Government Company, as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act,
1956.
It also provides prohibition to act, for or on behalf of any person
or organisation in connection with any specific proceeding or transaction
or negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and with
respect to which the Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation
of office, acted for or provided advice to, the Authority; to give advice
to any person using information which was obtained in his capacity as
the Chairperson or a Member and being unavailable to or not being able
to be made available to the public; to enter, for a period of three years
from his last day in office, into a contract of service with, accept an
appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of employment
with, an entity with which he had direct and significant official dealings
during his term of office as such.
Clause 17.— This clause lays down the functions of the Chairperson.
It provides that the Chairperson shall have powers of general
superintendence, direction in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority
in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Authority and without
prejudice to any of the provisions of the proposed legislation, to exercise
and discharge such powers and functions of the Authority as may be
prescribed.
Clause 18.— This clause empowers the Authority to determine the
procedure for the transaction of business in its meetings including times
and places of such meetings. It provides that the Chairperson, or, if for
any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, the senior
most Member shall preside over the meetings of the Authority.
It further provides that all questions which come up before any
meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority of votes by the
Members present and voting and in case of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence the Member presiding over shall have a
second or casting vote and all such decisions of the Authority shall be
authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson or any other Member
authorised by the Authority in this behalf.
It also provides that any Member, who is a director of a company
and who as such director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest
in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Authority,

90
he shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to
his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and
such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Authority,
and the Member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of
the Authority with respect to that matter.
Clause 19.—This clause enumerates the circumstances under which
the acts or proceedings of the Authority shall not be invalidated. It
provides that no act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely
by reason of, any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the
Authority; any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of
the Authority; or any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 20.—This clause makes provision for appointment of officers
and other employees of Authority. It provides for the appointment of a
chief executive officer of the Authority by the Central Government, who
shall act as the Member-Secretary of the Authority. It also provides for
determining the number, nature and categories of other officers and
employees required to the Authority in the discharge of its functions.
It also provides for the determination of the salaries and allowances
and the other terms and conditions of service of, the chief executive
officer and other officers and other employees of the Authority lay
regulation with the approval of the Central Government.
Clause 21.—This clause lays down functions of the chief executive
officer. The functions of the chief executive officer, who shall be the legal
representative of the Authority, inter alia , shall be the day-to-day
administration and implementing the work programmes and decisions
adopted by the Authority; drawing up of proposal for the Authority’s
work programmes; the preparation of the statement of revenue and
expenditure and the execution of the budget of the Authority; submitting,
every year a general report covering all the activities of the Authority
in the previous year and programmes of work; and the annual accounts
for the previous year and the budget for the coming year.
It further lays down that the chief executive officer shall have
administrative control over the officers and other employees of the
Authority.
Clause 22.—This clause makes provision for transfer of assets,
liabilities of the Authority. It provides that on and from the establishment
of the Authority, all the assets and liabilities of the Unique Identification
Authority of India, established vide notification of the Government of India

91
in the Planning Commission number A-43011/02/2009-Admin.I, dated the
28th January, 2009, shall stand transferred to and vested in the Authority
to be established under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that all data and information collected during
enrolment, all details of authentication performed, debts, obligations and
liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for such Unique Identification Authority
of India for or in connection with the purpose of the said Unique
Identification Authority of India, shall be deemed to have been incurred,
entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Authority and
all sums of money due shall be deemed to be due to the Authority and
all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been
instituted by or against such Unique Identification Authority of India
may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Authority.
Clause 23.— This clause lays down the powers and functions of
Authority. It provides that the Authority shall develop the policy,
procedure and systems for issuing aadhaar numbers to residents and
perform authentication thereof under this Act. If further specifies the
powers and functions of the Authority which, inter alia , include;
specifying, by regulation, demographic information and biometric
information for enrolment for an aadhaar number and the processes for
collection and verification thereof; collecting demographic information
and biometric information from any individual seeking an aadhaar number
in such manner as may be specified by regulations; appointing of one
or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data Repository;
generating and assigning aadhaar numbers to individuals; performing
authentication of the aadhaar numbers; maintaining and updating the
information of individuals in the Central Identities Data Repository in
such manner as may be specified by regulations; specify the usage and
applicability of the aadhaar number for delivery of various benefits and
services as may be provided by regulations; specifying, by regulation,
the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, enroling agencies
and service providers and revocation of appointments thereof; establishing,
operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data Repository;
calling for information and records, conducting inspections, inquiries
and audit of the operations for the purposes of the proposed legislation
of the Central Identities Data Repository, Registrars, enroling agencies
and other agencies appointed under this Act; specifying, by regulation,
the conditions and procedures for issuance of new aadhaar number to
existing aadhaar number holder; levy and collect the fees or authorise
the Registrars, enroling agencies or other service providers to collect
such fees for the services provided by them under the proposed legislation
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.

92
It also empowers the Authority to enter into a Memorandum of
Understanding or agreement, as the case may be, with the Central
Government or State Governments or Union territories or other agencies
for the purpose of performing any of the functions in relation to collecting,
storing, securing or processing of information or performing
authentication; and appoint by notification, such number of Registrars,
engage and authorise such agencies to collect, store, secure, process
information or do authentication or perform such other functions in
relation thereto, as may be necessary for the purposes of the proposed
legislation or to engage such consultants, advisors and other persons as
may be required for efficient discharge of its functions under this Act
on such allowances or remuneration and terms and conditions as may
be specified by regulations.
Clause 24.—This clause makes provision for grants by the Central
Government. It provides that after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law the Central Government may make grants of such sums of money
as it may think fit to the Authority for being utilised for the purposes
of the proposed legislation.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for other fees and revenue. It
provides that fees or revenue collected by the Authority shall be credited
to the Consolidated Fund of India and entire amount so credited shall
be transferred to the Authority.
Clause 26.—This clause makes provision for accounts and audit. It
provides that the Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
It further provides that the accounts of the Authority shall be audited
annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals
as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
It also provides that the accounts of the Authority, as certified by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority and the
Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for returns and annual report, etc.
It provides that the Authority shall furnish to the Central Government

93
at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as
the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements and
particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Authority,
as the Central Government may from time to time require.
It further provides that the Authority shall prepare, once in every
year, and in such form and manner and at such time as may be prescribed,
an annual report giving a description of all the activities of the Authority
for the previous years; the annual accounts for the previous year; and
the programmes of work for coming year. A copy of such report shall
be laid by the Central Government before each House of Parliament.
Clause 28.— This clause provides for the Review Committee. It
provides that the Central Government may, by notification, constitute the
Identity Review Committee, consisting of three members (one of whom
shall be the chairperson as such designated by the Central Government)
who are persons of eminence, ability, integrity and standing in public
life having knowledge and experience in the fields of technology, law,
administration and governance, social service, journalism, management
or social sciences, to discharge functions specified under sub-clause (1)
of clause 29 in respect of any matter connected with the usage of the
aadhaar numbers.
It further provides that the members of the Review Committee
shall be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations
of a committee consisting of the Prime Minister, who shall be the
chairperson of the committee; the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha;
and a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister.
It also provides that the member of the Review Committee shall
not be a Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State
or Union territory, as the case may be, or a member of any political party.
A member of the Review Committee shall hold office for a term of three
years from the date on which they enter upon office and shall not be
eligible for reappointment and may be removed by the Central
Government on the grounds specified under sub-clause (6).
Clause 29.—This clause makes provision for functions of the Review
Committee. It provides that the Review Committee shall ascertain the
extent and pattern of usage of the aadhaar numbers across the country
and prepare a report annually in relation to the extent and pattern of
usage of the aadhaar numbers along with its recommendations thereon
and submit the same to the Central Government. This clause further
empowers the Review Committee to determine the manner of preparation
of the report. It also provides that a copy of the report along with the

94
recommendations of the Review Committee shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House
of Parliament.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for security and confidentiality of
information. It provides that the Authority shall ensure the security and
confidentiality of identity information and authentication records of
individuals and take measures (including security safeguards) to ensure
that the information in the possession or control of the Authority (includ-
ing information stored in the Central Identities Data Repository) is secured
and protected against any loss or unauthorised access or use or
unauthorised disclosure thereto.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force and save as otherwise provided in
the proposed legislation, the Authority or any of its officer or other
employee or any agency who maintains the Central Identities Data
Repository shall not reveal any information stored in the Central Identities
Data Repository to any person but an aadhaar number holder may request
the Authority to provide access to his identity information in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 31.—This clause makes provision relating to alteration of
demographic information or biometric information. It provides that in
case any demographic information relating to an aadhaar number holder
is found incorrect or it changes subsequently, and in case any biometric
information of aadhaar number holder is lost or changes subsequently
for any reason, then the aadhaar number holder shall request the Authority
to alter such demographic information or biometric information in his
record in the Central Identities Data Repository in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
It further provides that on receipt of any request for alteration of
demographic information or biometric information, the Authority may,
if it is satisfied, make such alteration as may be required in the record
relating to such aadhaar number holder and intimate such alteration to
the concerned aadhaar number holder.
Clause 32.—This clause makes provision for access to own
information and records of requests for authentication. It provides that
the Authority shall maintain details of every request for authentication
of the identity of every aadhaar number holder and the response provided
thereon by it in such manner and for such time as may be specified by
regulations. It further provides that every aadhaar number holder shall
be entitled to obtain details of request for authentication of his aadhaar

95
number and the response provided thereon by the Authority in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for disclosure of information in
certain cases. It provides that provisions of sub-clause (3) of clause 30
which impose restrictions on providing information shall not apply in
respect of any disclosure of information (including identity information
or details of authentication) made pursuant to an order of a competent
court; or any disclosure of information (including identity information)
made in the interests of national security in pursuance of a direction to
that effect issued by an officer or officers not below the rank of Joint
Secretary or equivalent in the Central Government specifically authorised
in this behalf by an order of the Central Government.
Clause 34.—This clause provides for penalty for impersonation at
time of enrolment. It provides that whoever impersonates or attempts
to impersonate another person, whether dead or alive, real or imaginary,
by providing any false demographic information or biometric information
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years and with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 35.—This clause provides for penalty for impersonation of
Aadhaar number holder by changing demographic information or
biometric information. It provides that whoever, with the intention of
causing harm or mischief to a aadhaar number holder, or with the intention
of appropriating the identity of a aadhaar number holder changes or
attempts to change any demographic information or biometric information
of a aadhaar number holder by impersonating or attempting to
impersonate another person, dead or alive, real or imaginary, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and shall be liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees.
Clause 36.—This clause provides for penalty for impersonation. It
provides that whoever, not being authorised to collect identity information
under the provisions of this Act, by words, conduct or demeanour pretends
that he is authorised to do so, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or with a fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 37.—This clause provides for penalty for disclosing identity
information. It provides that whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits,
copies or otherwise disseminates any identity information collected in
the course of enrolment or authentication to any person not authorised

96
under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees or with both.
Clause 38.— This clause provides for penalty for unauthorised access
to the Central Identities Data Repository. It provides that whoever, not
being authorised by the Authority, intentionally, (a) accesses or secures
access to the Central Identities Data Repository or (b) downloads, copies
or extracts any data from the Central Identities Data Repository; or stored
in any removable medium; or (c) introduces or causes to be introduced
any virus or other computer contaminant; in the Central Identities Data
Repository; or (d) damages or causes to be damaged the data in the
Central Identities Data Repository; (e) disrupts or causes disruption of
the access to the Central Identities Data Repository; or (f) denies or causes
a denial of access to any person who is authorised to access the Central
Identities Data Repository; or (g) provides any assistance to any person
to do any of the acts aforementioned; (h) destroys, deletes or alters any
information stored in any removable storage media or in the Central
Identities Data Repository or diminishes its value or utility or effects it
injuriously by any means; (i) steals, conceals, destroys or alters or causes
any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any computer source code
used by the Authority with an intention to cause damage, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years and shall be liable to a fine which shall not be less than one crore
rupees.
It further defines the expressions “computer contaminant”,
“computer virus” and “damage” to have the same meanings for the
purposes of this clause as are respectively assigned to them in the
Explanation to section 43 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Clause 39.—This clause provides for penalty for tampering with
data in Central Identities Data Repository. It provides that whoever, not
being authorised by the Authority, uses or tampers with the data in the
Central Identities Data Repository or in any removable storage medium
with the intent of modifying information relating to aadhaar number
holder or discovering any information thereof shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall be
liable to a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
Clause 40.— This clause provides for penalty for manipulating
biometric information. It provides that whoever gives or attempts to give
any biometric information which does not pertain to him for the purpose
of getting an aadhaar number or authentication or updating his

97
information, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or with a fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees or with both.
Clause 41.— This clause provides for general penalty. It provides
that whoever, commits an offence under the proposed legislation for
which no penalty is provided elsewhere than in this clause, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with a fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees
or, in the case of a company, with a fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees or with both.
Clause 42.— This clause deals with the offences by companies. It
provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation has been
committed by a company then every person who at the time when the
alleged offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It further provides that if any such person proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence, then he shall not
be liable for the said punishment.
It also provides that where any offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 43.— This clause makes provision for application of the
proposed legislation in relation to offence or contravention committed
outside India. It provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall apply also to any offence or contravention committed outside India
by any person, irrespective of his nationality, if the act or conduct
constituting the offence or contravention involves the Central Identities
Data Repository.
Clause 44.— This clause provides for power to investigate offences.
It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, a police officer not below the rank of Inspector
of Police shall investigate any offence under the proposed legislation.

98
Clause 45.— This clause relates to penalties not to interfere with
other punishments. It provides that no penalty imposed under the
proposed legislation shall prevent the imposition of any other penalty
or punishment under any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 46.— This clause provides for cognizance of offences. It
provides that any court shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable
under the proposed legislation, save on a complaint made by the Authority
or any officer or person authorised by it.
It further provides that any court inferior to that of a Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall not try any
offence punishable under the proposed legislation.
Clause 47.— This clause empowers the Central Government to
supersede Authority. It provides that the Central Government may after
satisfying on the grounds mentioned under this clause supersede the
Authority by issuing a notification for such period not exceeding six
months and appoint a person or persons as the President may direct to
exercise powers and discharge functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that before issuing any such notification, the
Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority
to make representations against the proposed supersession and shall
consider the representations, if any, of the Authority.
It also provides that upon the publication of a notification
superseding the Authority, (a) the Chairperson and other members shall,
as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such; (b) all the
powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority
shall, until the Authority is reconstituted be exercised and discharged by
the person or persons referred to in sub-clause (1); and (c) all properties
owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
It also provides that the Central Government shall reconstitute the
Authority, before the expiration of the period of supersession, by a fresh
appointment of its Chairperson and other members and in such case any
person who had vacated his office due to supersession of the Authority
shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
It also provides that the Central Government shall cause a copy
of the notification and a full report of any action taken under this clause
and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House
of Parliament at the earliest.

99
Clause 48.— This clause provides that Members, officers, etc., to be
public servants. It provides that the Chairperson, Members, officers and
other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, while acting or
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of the proposed
legislation, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue
directions. It provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions
of the proposed legislation, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers
or the performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on
questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and
administrative matters, as the Central Government may give, in writing
to it, from time to time.
It further provides that the Authority shall, as for as practicable,
be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this clause. It also provides that the decision of the Central
Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.
Clause 50.— This clause provides for delegation. It provides that
the Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any
Member, officer of the Authority or any other person, subject to such
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers
and functions under this Act (except the power under clause 53 relating
to making of regulations) as it may deem necessary.
Clause 51.— This clause provides for protection of action taken in
good faith. It provides that any suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall not lie against the Central Government or the Authority or the
Chairperson or any Member or any officer, or other employees of the
Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made
thereunder.
Clause 52.— This clause empowers the Central Government to make
rules. It provides that the Central Government may, by notification, make
rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. It further
specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
Clause 53.— This clause empowers the Authority to make
regulations. It provides that the Authority may, by notification, make
regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation
consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder.
It further specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may
be made.

100
Clause 54.— This clause provides for laying of rules and regulations
before Parliament. It provides that every rule and every regulation made
under the proposed legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 55.— This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
Clause 56.— This clause makes provision for removal of difficulties.
It provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of the proposed legislation then the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent
with the provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty.
It further provides that any such order for removal of difficulty
shall be made under this section within a period of two years from the
commencement of the proposed legislation.
It also provides that every order made under this clause shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 57.— This clause provides for savings. It provides that
anything done or any action taken by the Central Government under the
Resolution of the Government of India, Planning Commission bearing
notification number A-43011/02/2009-Admin.I, dated the 28th January,
2009, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of the proposed legislation.

101
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 provides for establishment of the National Identification
Authority of India which shall be a body corporate having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose
of property and sue or be sued with the head office in the National
Capital Region and may establish its offices at other places in India.
Clause 12 provides that Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and two
part-time Members. Sub-clause (5) of clause 14 makes provision for salaries
and allowances payable to the Chairperson and allowances or
remuneration payable to part-time Members. Sub-clause (3) of clause 20
makes provision for salaries and allowances payable to the chief executive
officer and other officers and other employees of the Authority.
2. Item (j) of sub-clause (2) of clause 23 provides for establishment,
operation and maintenance of the Central Identity Data Repository.
3. Clause 24 provides that the Central Government may after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the
Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may
think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation.
4. Clause 25 of the Bill provides that the fees or revenue collected
by the Authority shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and
the entire amount so credited will be transferred to the Authority.
5. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately
Rs. 3023.01 crore in phase two of the scheme. Out of this, an amount
of Rs. 477.11 crore would be towards recurring establishment expenditure
and Rs. 2,545.90 crore would be towards non-recurring project related
expenditure. The estimated cost for the first phase of the scheme was
Rs. 147.31 crore towards the setting up necessary infrastructure for offices
at headquarters and regional headquarters, creating testing facilities for
running the pilots and proof of concept studies, initital work of creating
standards in various areas of operations, and setting up of a project
management unit and hiring of consultants.
6. The Bill does not envisage any other expenditure of recurring or
non-recurring nature.

102
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 52 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make, by notification, rules to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect
of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia , include:
(a) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom the
oath of office and of secrecy is to be subscribed by the Chairperson and
Members under sub-clause (2) of clause 14; (b) the salary and allowances
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson
and the allowances or remuneration payable to Members of the Authority
under sub-clause (5) of clause 14; (c) the other powers and functions of
the Chairperson of the Authority under clause 17; (d) the other powers
and functions of the Authority under item(t) of sub-clause (2) of clause
23; (e) the form of annual statement of accounts to be prepared by
Authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 26; (f) the form and the manner
in which and the time within which returns and statements and particulars
are to be furnished under sub-clause (1) of clause 27; (g) the form and
the manner and the time at which the Authority shall furnish annual
report under sub-clause (2) of clause 27; (h) any other matter which is
required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision
is to be or may be made by rules.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 of the Bill empowers the National
Identification Authority of India to make, by notification, regulations to
carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation consistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder.
Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations
may be made. These matters, inter alia , include: (i) the biometric
information under sub-clause (e); the demographic information under
sub-clause (h); the process of collecting demographic information and
biometric information from the individuals by enrolling agencies under
sub-clause (j) of clause 2; (ii) the manner of furnishing the demographic
information and biometric information by the resident under sub-clause
(1) of clause 3; and the manner of verifying the demographic information
and biometric information for issue of aadhaar number under sub-clause
(2) of clause 3; (iii) the procedure for authentication of the aadhaar number
under sub-clause (1) of clause 5; (iv) the other functions to be performed
by Central Identities Data Repository under clause 7; (v) the manner of
updating biometric information and demographic information under
clause 8; (vi) the other categories of individuals under clause 10 for whom

103
the Authority shall take special measures for allotment of aadhaar number;
(vii) the time and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure
for transaction of business to be followed by it (including the quorum)
under sub-clause (1) of clause 18; (viii) the salary and allowances payable
to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the chief executive officer,
officers and other employees of the Authority under sub-clause (3) of
clause 20; (ix) various matters specified under clause 23; (x) the manner
of accessing the identity information by the aadhaar number holder under
sub-clause (3) of clause 30; (xi) the manner of alteration of demographic
information under sub-clause (1) and biometric information under sub-
clause (2) of clause 31; (xii) the manner of and the time for maintaining
the request for authentication and the response thereon under sub-section
(1) and the manner of obtaining, by the aadhaar number holder, the
records of request for authentication and response thereon under sub-
clause (2) of clause 32; (xiii) any other matter which is required to be,
or may be, specified, or in respect of which provision is to be or may
be made by regulations.
3. Clause 54 provides that every rule and every regulation made under
the proposed legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made
are matter of procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power
is therefore of a normal character.

104
RAJYA SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of the National Identification Authority
of India for the purpose of issuing identification numbers to
individuals residing in India and to certain other classes
of individuals and manner of authentication
of such individuals to facilitate access to
benefits and services to such individuals
to which they are entitled and for
matter connected therewith
or incidental
thereto.
_______
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Planning
and Parliamentary Affairs)