FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Thirty-fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Planning]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 22.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)


COF No. 46
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 34
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 35
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 37
ANNEXURE
I. Work status under MGNREGA (FY 2010-11) .................... 38
II. Financial Performance under MGNREGA (FY 2010-11) .... 40
III. MGNREGA Performance in LWE affected districts......... 42
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
19 December, 2011 .................................................................... 45
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report
of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Planning ................... 47
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi Chanabasappa
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda

(iv)
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Forty-sixth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Planning.
2. The Thirty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 August, 2011. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 14 October, 2011.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 19 December, 2011.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Planning, which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 2 August, 2011 and simultaneously laid in Rajya
Sabha on the same day.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 13 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analysed and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13
(Total: 12)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Nil
(Total: Nil)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation No. 6
(Total: 1)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
(Total: Nil)
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Targeted Subsidies to the Poor
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
5. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee note that targeted PDS is in place through which
subsidized foodgrain is distributed. However, the present system
is not without flaws. The Committee further note that the
Government propose to replace existing method of fertilizer subsidy
payment through industry to direct payment to the poor farmers
below the poverty line by March, 2012. They find that a Taskforce
has been set up to work out the modalities for the same. The
Committee emphasize that the interest of the bargadaars or
share-croppers should be adequately taken care of in the new
method of fertilizer subsidy.
In this connection, with regard to other items on which direct
cash transfer is proposed, the Committee are not convinced that
this would be a panacea for all ills of the present distribution
system. They fear that the proposed system may also not be free
from leakages and manipulations. Moreover, the Committee are
informed that many State Governments are implementing Universal
PDS successfully, thus there is no reason why it should not be
tried out at the Central level. Therefore, the Committee would
recommend the Government to consider universalisation of PDS
in a phased manner.”
6. The Government, in their action taken reply stated as follows:
“The subject matter comes within the purview of the Department
of Food and Public Distribution. According to information obtained
from them, the concept of universal Public Distribution System
was in vogue prior to the year 1997. However, due to various
limitations, it was replaced by the Targeted Public Distribution
System (TPDS) since June 1997 with a view to target the benefits
to the poor sections of the society in a more effective manner.

3
Presently, formulation of the National Food Security Bill is being
deliberated by the Government. As per the draft bill discussed in
Empowered Group of Ministers meeting held in July 2011, the
coverage of population is proposed at 75% in rural areas and 50%
in urban areas.
A Task Force on direct subsidy in respect of kerosene, LPG &
fertilizers has been set up under the chairmanship of Shri Nandan
Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI to examine and implement a solution
for transfer of subsidy directly to the farmers. The mandate of the
Department of Fertilizers is to make available fertilizers to the
farmers at affordable prices. The Task Force is expected to give
implementable solution on how the direct transfer of subsidy to
the beneficiary can take place. An Interim Report of the Task Force
has been submitted to the Government on 5th July, 2011 and is
available on the website of Ministry of Finance. In addition, the
Task Force mandate has also been extended to include an
implementable solution for targeted PDS system and the Interim
Report is expected by the end of August, 2011.
In respect of fertilizers, the Task Force has recommended a three
stage approach to the issue of direct subsidy. Phase-I is to capture
the information availability regarding fertilizers at the farm gate
level, wherein the availability at the last point of sale will be
captured. In Phase-II, which will be implemented after the
Phase-I stabilizes, the subsidy is expected to be transferred to the
last point sale and in Phase-III, when the Phase-I & II stabilizes,
the subsidy is expected to be transferred directly to the intended
beneficiary once the AADHAR Nos. are given to the beneficiaries
and AADHAR enabled payment bridges are in place. The roll out
of Phase-I will be in December 2011 and the roll out of Phase-II
in June 2012. Phase-III will take place after AADHAR Nos. are
given to all the eligible beneficiaries.”
7. The Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry‘s reply that
a Task Force on direct subsidy in respect of Kerosene, LPG &
Fertilizers has been set up and its interim report submitted to the
Government. In addition, the Task Force mandate has also been
extended to include an implementable solution for targeted PDS
system. The subsidy is expected to be transferred directly to the
needed beneficiary once the AADHAR number are given to the
beneficiaries and AADHAR enabled payment bridges are in place.
Since the AADHAR numbers have its own limitation in covering
the marginalized section of the society, the concept of Food Security

4
will not be achieved. Further, the scheme of AADHAR being riddled
with innumerable contradictions, the Committee expect the Ministry
to work out an alternative mode of transfer of subsidies to obviate
the further delays. The Ministry’s silence with regard to
universalisation of PDS surprises the Committee. The Committee
reiterate that direct cash transfer would not be a panacea for all ills
of the present Public Distribution System (PDS) and the proposed
system may also not be free from leakages and manipulations and
recommend that the Government should consider universalisation of
PDS in a phased manner. The Committee also emphasize that the
interest of the bargadaars or share-croppers should be adequately
taken care of in the new method of fertilizer subsidy.
B. Backward Regions
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
8. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee note that one of the basic objectives of the
planning in India is to reduce inequalities and raise the level of
economic development in the country in a balanced manner. It is,
however, indeed saddening to note that even after lapse of more
than six decades, there are 250 backward districts, out of which 60
Selected Tribal and Backward districts in the country are affected
by left-wing extremism. It is surprising that the Planning
Commission has not yet conducted a study on impact of additional
central assistance provided under various special area programmes
and efforts made by the State Governments to redress the imbalance
in development of the backward regions within the States.
Alarmingly, the Planning Commission, an advisory planning body
at the apex level, is depending on World Bank study on this vital
issue. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Planning
Commission to set up an Expert Group/Task Force for evaluating
the impact of measures initiated towards development of backward
regions and for formulating a roadmap to achieve the same in a
focused and time-bound manner. In this regard, the Committee
would like to emphasize that due share should be given to the
backward States in the Annual Plan allocation. The Committee
also disapprove of the Ministry’s failure to maintain the data on
funds spent exclusively on rural infrastructure. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that expenditure data on rural infrastructure
should be maintained and monitored in centralized manner to
enable analysis of the progress made in this regard. The Committee
further recommend that convergence of BRGF, MGNREGS and IAP
should be done, followed by a well-defined district plan for
development of backward regions.”

5
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Planning have stated
as under:
“Regarding evaluation of Area Programmes, the Programme
Evaluation Organization (PEO) of Planning Commission had
commissioned an Evaluation Study of Hill Areas Development
Programme (HADP) which has been completed and the report has
been placed in the public domain i.e. in the Planning Commission
website (planningcommission.gov.in). Further, PEO has
commissioned an evaluation study of Backward Regions Grant
Fund (BRGF) recently. The evaluation of Border Area Development
Programme (BADP) is also going to be conducted by the PEO.
The Planning Commission is currently in the process of formulation
of the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17). Various Steering Committees
and Working Groups have been constituted for this purpose. A
Steering Committee for Rural Livelihoods and Rural Governance
has been set up to provide a critical review of, inter-alia, MGNREGA
and BRGF during the Eleventh Five Year Plan and suggest
strategies, priorities and allocations for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
A Working Group on Area Programmes has also been constituted
to review the performance of various Area Programmes viz. BRGF,
BADP , & HADP/WGDP to bring out achievements and failures, if
any, together with necessary remedial measures and to suggest
strategies, priorities and allocations for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
The Steering Committee for Rural Livelihood and Rural Governance
would consider the inputs from evaluation studies and the Report
of the Working Group on Area Programmes and suggest strategies,
priorities and allocations for the area programmes in the Twelfth
Five Year Plan.”
10. The Committee are surprised at Ministry's silence on their
recommendation on maintenance of expenditure data on rural
infrastructure, considering its vital importance in assessing the
progress made in this regard. Since the maintenance and monitoring
of expenditure data on rural infrastructure is pre-requisite for analysis
of the progress made in backward rural regions, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation that expenditure data on rural
infrastructure should be maintained and monitored in a centralized
manner to evaluate the progress made in this regard. The Committee
further recommend that convergence of BRGF, MGNREGS and IAP
should be done, followed by a well-defined district plan for
development of backward regions.

6
C. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
11. The Committee recommended as under:
“As regards the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), the Committee note from the data
furnished that the shortfall in utilization of total funds available
was as much as Rs. 3250.20 crore (27%) in 2006-07, Rs. 3448.72 crore
(18%) in 2007-08, Rs. 5146.96 crore (27%) in 2008-09 and
Rs. 11,673.96 crore (24%) in 2009-10. In 2010-11, of the total available
funds amounting to Rs. 38,595.73 crore, the utilization by the States
has only been to the extent of Rs. 18979.25 (49% till November,
2010) leaving a significant amount to be spent in the last quarter.
The average days of employment and wages per household
provided under the scheme work out to only 43 days and Rs. 65
in 2006-07, 42 days and Rs. 75 in 2007-08, 48 days and Rs. 84 in
2008-09, 54 days and Rs. 90 in 2009-10 and 35 days and Rs. 98 in
2010-11 (till November, 2010), which is way below the mandate of
providing 100 days of employment and a minimum wage of
Rs. 100. The Committee are further dismayed that the percentage
of works completed against the total works taken up has been
consistently below 50 per cent during the last four years with
45.98% in 2006-07, 45.97% in 2007-08, 43.74% in 2008-09, 48.29% in
2009-10, and in 2010-11 it is expected to be much less as only
4.02% (till November, 2010) works have been completed. As
emphasized by the Committee in their previous Reports, the issues
of concern relating to the MGNREGS, which include shortfall in
utilization of budgeted amounts, huge spending in the last quarter,
inability to provide the mandated days of employment and wages,
non-completion of works taken up etc., need to be thoroughly
looked into for taking appropriate corrective steps. The Committee
would like to emphasize here that the Government should ensure
that the MGNREGS provides a supplementary means of livelihood
for the rural people, primarily during their lean periods and it
should not cause shortage of labourers for the main agricultural
activities. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the status
of implementation of the scheme in left-wing extremism hit districts.
The Committee further recommends that a comprehensive study
on impact of the MGNREGS on agricultural productivity and assets
created under the scheme should be carried out.”

7
12. In their action taken note the Ministry of Planning have
submitted as below:
“Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is demand based legislation. The Act
provides a legal guarantee for at least 100 days of wage
employment to every rural household in every financial year for
doing unskilled manual work on demand. There are no
pre-determined targets for employment as well as for utilization
of funds under the Act. Implementation of the Act is done by the
State Governments/UT Administrations while funds are provided
by the Central Government as per the provisions of the Act.
As regards providing 100 days employment under the Act, since
it is demand based, members of a household are required to submit
a written application for work. Further, number of days of
employment availed by a household in a year depends upon the
demand for work and availability of other employment
opportunities in the area. The mandate under the Act is to provide
at least 100 days of wage employment for doing unskilled manual
work based on demand for work by the households. The average
person days demanded has been around 50 days a year since the
inception of MGNREGA. In 2010-11, the average person days per
household was 47 and average wages per person days was
Rs. 99.89.
Completion of works under MGNREGA in 2010-11 was 50.80%.
From the financial year 2010-11, all States have been asked to
furnish information on MIS. It takes time to digitize the entire
information and place it on the website and there is a time lag
before data is updated on the web site because of different level
of adaptability of MIS by the States. There is a lag between physical
and financial closure of works due to late submission of Project
Completion Report (PCR) and squaring of accounts at different
levelsGram Panchayats and Block level. Some works are abandoned
due to nonfeasibility encountered at a later stage e.g. detection of
hard rock boulder in digging of Wells. Since works are subject to
audit only after their completion, there is a tendency on part of
the implementing agencies not to close them to avoid audit. A
circular has been issued to all the States/UTs in January, 2011 to
complete on-going works with in a given time-frame and indicate
progress of works taken up and completed in the labour budget
proposal. The details of completion of works under MGNREGA in
2010-11 are given in Annexure-I.

8
Funds available with the States/UTs which remain un-utilized in
a financial year are carried forward to the next financial year to
be used for meeting the labour demand in subsequent year. As
the Act provides that work has to be provided to an applicant
within 15 days of the demand failing which unemployment
allowance becomes payable, funds have to be kept upfront in order
to meet any sudden spurt in the labour demand in an area.
During the last 5 years of implementation of MGNREGA, the
expenditure has always been more than 70% and therefore, funds
have not been underutilized. As explained above, funds have to
be kept upfront and a good quantum of which remain in the
pipeline keeping in view the nature of the programme. The details
of availability of funds and expenditure in 2010-11 are given in
Annexure-II.
With a view to strengthen the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi
NREGA and to ensure that more and more of the rural population
is benefited, the Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken
the following measures:
(i) Awareness generation among rural population has been
taken up through intensive IEC activities involving both
print as well as electronic media.
(ii) Administrative expenditure has been enhanced from 4% to
6% to enable the implementing agencies to appoint dedicated
staff for effective implementation of the Act.
(iii) ICT based MIS has been made operational to make data
available to public scrutiny. The data includes Job cards,
Muster rolls, Employment demanded and allocated, number
of days worked, shelf of works, Funds available/funds spent
and funds released to various implementing agencies, Social
Audit findings, registering grievances and generating alerts
for corrective action.
(iv) In the light of the shortcomings in social audit under
MGNREGA, the Ministry of Rural Development has
published The MGNREG Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 in
the Gazette on 30.6.2011 for the purpose of much needed
transparency under MGNREGA.
(v) Payment of wages to MGNREGA workers has been made
mandatory through their accounts in Banks/Post Office to
infuse transparency in wage disbursement. An amendment
to this effect has been made in para 31 of Schedule-II of
the Act.

9
(vi) Rolling out Biometric based ICT enabled real time
transactions of MGNREGA workers to eliminate fake
attendance and false payments.
(vii) Periodic reviews in the Performance Review Committee
meetings held on quarterly basis. State specific reviews are
also undertaken.
(viii) Independent Monitoring and verification by National Level
Monitors and Eminent Citizens.
(ix) V isit by members of Central Employment Guarantee Council.
(x) State and district level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
have been set up and instructions have been issued for
holding regular meetings of the Committees.
(xi) Instructions have been issued directing all States to appoint
Ombudsman at district level for grievance redressal in a
time bound manner.
The Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides for supplementary wage
employment to ensure livelihood security. Productive absorption
of under employed and surplus labour force in the rural sector
has always been a major focus of planning for rural development.
The situation of unemployment has been compounded by the
absence of any social security mechanism. Mahatma Gandhi
NREGA intends to provide the social security mechanism for the
days which is beyond the period of engagement in agriculture
without creating competitive disadvantage towards agricultural
productivity.
Status of implementation of MGNREGA in naxal-affected districts
is at Annexure-III.
An Evaluation Study on the programme MGNREGA has been
entrusted to the Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO),
Planning Commission. The proposed study envisage to cover
various objectives of the MGNREGA including impact of the
programme on agricultural activities, number of assets created,
assessment of quality of assets and how these assets are benefiting
the villagers. In this regard, a Steering Committee has been
constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah, Member,
Planning Commission. Two meetings of this Committee have so
far been held. As per decision taken in the meetings of the
Committee, the study will be launched in 100 districts of the
country covering the three phases of implementation of
MGNREGA.”

10
13. The Committee note that though the Government has
undertaken number of measures to strengthen the implementation
of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,
still it has failed to provide the mandated days of employment and
wages to intended beneficiaries. In 2010- 11, the average person days
per household was 47 days and the average wages per person days
was Rs. 99.89. Completion of works under MGNREGA in 2010-11
was pegged at 50.80%. The Committee are dismayed at such a sorry
state of affairs. They are unhappy to observe the casual reply of the
Government regarding fixing of targets as well as utilisation of funds
for employment under the Scheme. They wonder as to how without
predetermined targets, the benefits could be extended to the
beneficiaries in an effective way.
14. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Rural
Development has undertaken certain measures to ensure the proper
functioning of the scheme. The Committee are of the opinion that
these measures, if carried out in right earnest would facilitate the
normal functioning of the scheme. The Committee would expect that
they may be apprised of the outcome of the measures taken by the
Ministry of Rural Development on quarterly basis.
15. The Committee further note that an Evaluation Study on
MGNREGA has been entrusted to the Programme Evaluation
Organization (PEO), Planning Commission to assess the impact of
the MGNREGA on agricultural activities, number of assets created,
assessment of quality of assets and how these assets are benefiting
the villagers. The Committee express their doubt on the feasibility
of this evaluation study as the Programme Evaluation Organization
is itself suffering from shortage of manpower and the Committee
wondered as to how they would be able to conduct this evaluation
study. Moreover, no time limit/timeframe has been fixed by the
Government regarding completion of evaluation study. The
Committee time and again have recommended that the issues of
concern relating to the MGNREGA which included shortfall in
utilisation of budgeted amounts, huge spending in the last quarter,
inability to provide the mandated days of employment and wages,
non-completion of works taken up etc. need to be thoroughly looked
into for taking appropriate steps. A time frame should be fixed for
completion of the evaluation study to be conducted by the
Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO). The Committee also
reiterate their earlier demand to Government to provide a
supplementary means of livelihood for the rural people primarily
during lean period.

11
D.  Skill Development
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
16. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee regret to note the fact, as deposed by the
Member-Secretary, Planning Commission before the Committee, that
given the size of younger population, the infrastructure available
for skill development such as ITI etc. is not adequate. As conceded
by the Member-Secretary , Planning Commission, a legislation to
make mandatory for the industry to run the training centres for
improving the skills should be brought in to redressing the
mismatch between demand and supply of skilled workers. The
Committee also desire that the vocationalisation of education should
be done on priority especially at school level, say from 8th to
12th standards, so that the envisaged target of achieving 500 million
skilled people by 2022 can be achieved.”
17. The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply stated as
follows:
“Government of India has been implementing Craftsmen Training
Scheme and Apprenticeship Training Scheme to train the people.
Under the Craftsmen Training Scheme, number of initiatives have
been taken to involve the private sector with the objective of
bringing about synergy in the market demand and availability of
supply such as upgradation of 1396 ITIs in the PPP , creation of
Centres of Excellence through World Bank assistance and Skill
Development Initiative—Modular Employable Skill Programme
implemented through number of private vocational training
providers. In addition, the Apprenticeship Training Pogramme is
covered by Apprenticeship Act, 1961 wherein industry trains the
apprentices in accordance with the provision of the Act.
As regards vocationalisation of education from 8th to 12th
standards, it is submitted that as per Selected Education Statistics
(2008-09) of Ministry of Human Resource Development, the number
of students in Upper Primary level (Classes VI-VIII) were
5.55 crore, however, their number at Secondary level (Classes IX-X)
and Higher Secondary level (Classes XI-XII) was 2.90 crore and
1.67 crore, respectively as compared to the projected population of
4.84 crore and 4.87 crore for the age group 14-15 and 16-17 years
respectively. Thus there is a wide gap between enrolment and
projected population at Secondary and Higher Secondary level.

12
Therefore, it would be beneficial if these dropped out children, as
also a large number of children who may not have the competency,
but are compelled to pursue academic courses in the absence of
any other option, as well as those with an inclination towards
vocational skills, to be channelized into vocational education. It
would be much appropriate to have pre-vocational courses
(optional) at Classes IX & X and vocational education at Higher
Secondary level with appropriate certification by accrediting
agencies. The Department of School Education & Literacy, MHRD
is implementing a scheme of Vocational Education at 10+2 stage.
The existing scheme had many problems, including inflexible
curriculum and duration, lack of need based courses and trained
teachers, poor vertical mobility and linkage with industry etc. The
scheme is being restructured and will now aim at preparing
educated employable and competitive human resources for various
sectors of economy and the global market, enhancing the
employability of youth through competency—based modular
vocational courses, providing multi entry and exit learning
opportunities, horizontal and vertical mobility. The Mid-Term
appraisal of the XI Five Year Plan has emphasized that in vocational
education, curriculum revision, appropriate certification by
accrediting agencies, facility for horizontal and vertical mobility
and linkage with industry for self employment/employment should
be prioritized. A National Vocational Education Qualification
Framework (NVEQF) has been prepared focusing on students from
class IX onwards. The scheme of vocationalisation of Secondary
Education is under approval stage.”
18. The Committee are constrained to note that the Government
has shown its apathy towards redressing the mismatch between
demand and supply of skilled workers in the country. As conceded
by the Member Secretary, Planning Commission before the
Committee that a legislation to make mandatory for the industry to
run the training centers for improving the skills should be brought
in. However, the Government is silent on this issue in their action
taken reply. The Committee recommend that the Government should
bring a legislation in this regard at the earliest so that the target of
achieving 500 million skilled people by 2022 could be achieved. They
also reiterate their earlier recommendation to ensure vocationalisation
of education at school level on priority basis. The Committee further
desire that National Vocational Education Qualification Framework
(NVEQF) should be implemented in the 12th Five Year Plan itself
so that year-wise funding could be done on the same.

13
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2011-12)
The Committee’s examination of the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Planning reveals that the formulation of budget for plan
programmes and schemes has been reduced to an exercise of unrealistic
estimates, under-utilization of funds and huge spending in the last
quarter. For instance, the plan provision in 2009-10 of Rs. 452.00 crore
at BE was substantially reduced in RE to Rs. 109.00 crore but only
Rs. 86.33 crore was spent, of which Rs. 49.67 crore (57.52%) was spent
in the last quarter. Similarly, the plan allocation of Rs. 2000.00 crore in
BE 2010-11 was reduced to Rs. 1045.00 crore (RE). But, the Ministry
could spend only Rs. 219.68 crore (till 11 March, 2011), of which
Rs. 139.84 crore (63.65%) was incurred in the last quarter. In spite of
the norms stipulated by the Ministry of Finance that not more than
331/3% will be spent in the last quarter, incurring such large scale
expenditure to the tune of almost 60% in the last quarter of the year
clearly shows lack of financial discipline and accountability. As a result,
the plan programmes and schemes have been badly affected with
substantial shortfall in utilization of funds year-after-year. In the case
of scheme, “New Initiative in Skill Development through PPP”, the
shortfall in utilization of budgeted expenditure was as much as
79% in 2009-10 and 70% in 2010-11 (expected). There has also been
substantial under-utilization of funds allocated for schemes namely,
“Modernisation of Office System” and “Strengthening Evaluation
Capacity in Government”. The shortfall in utilization under the scheme,
“Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)”, is 74% in 2009-10
and 96.5% in 2010-11. The Ministry has attributed the shortfall in
2010-11 to under-utilization of funds in UIDAI for reasons, which
include, delay in setting up of regional offices and finalization of
proposal for hiring of UID Biometrics Centre of Competence (UBCC).
The Committee had in their 13th Report on Demands for Grants for
the year 2010-11 commented upon the Ministry’s failure in regard to
appropriate projection of fund requirements in formulating budget
estimates for programmes and schemes. It is evident that the efforts
that have been made by the Ministry in this regard have been found

14
to be ineffective. The Committee expect the Ministry of Planning is
supposed to be a role model for other Central Ministries/Departments
in preparation of realistic budget estimates and utilization of allocated
funds. They would, therefore, once again emphasize that a more
stringent system of budget planning and control be put in place which
will be subjected to effective monitoring at the highest level in the
Ministry.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee on Finance
have been noted for compliance. While preparing Budget Estimates
for financial year 2011-12, projections of fund requirement for schemes
were based on the provisions as projected by concerned Divisions/
respective spending authorities and the past trend of expenditure.
Trends of expenditure of various schemes are proposed to be monitored
closely during the year to ensure timely utilization of budgeted
allocations and to avoid incurring of expenditure beyond 33
1/3% of
the Budget Estimates in the last quarter. As recommended by the
Standing Committee, utilization of allocated funds would be reviewed
at the level of Principal Adviser (PC&MD)/Member Secretary, Planning
Commission with all the spending authorities and Divisions of Planning
Commission entrusted with the responsibility of executing the Plan
Schemes. With these measures, situation is expected to improve
significantly in 2011-12 and coming years.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Mid-Term Appraisal of the 11th Plan
Objective of the 11th Plan
While the 11th Plan objective was to achieve faster and more
inclusive growth at a targeted GDP growth rate of 9 percent per
annum with growth rate of 4 percent in the agriculture sector, the
mid-term appraisal projects GDP growth rate of 8.1 percent. The
Committee are dismayed that during the first four years of Plan period,
while the agriculture sector has faced a substantial decline in growth
rate with the average growth rate of 2.9 percent, industry and services
sector have registered an average growth rates of 7.55 percent and
10.02 percent respectively, which are lower than the targets envisaged.
The Committee are anguished that despite policy measures that have
been spelt out in the Plan document, the 11th Plan has failed to achieve
the targets in respect of each sector of the economy. The Committee

15
are concerned that inordinate delay took place in the Mid-Term
appraisal itself, which was completed in December, 2010, leaving the
Government with no time to take the remedial measures and achieve
the targets. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to create a
conducive policy environment for each sector of the economy to attain
the targeted level of growth as to take the economy to higher growth
path in the 12th Plan.
Reply of the Government
The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) had set a GDP growth target
of 9 percent per year on average, over the 5 years of the Plan. This
was an increase from the GDP growth target of 8 percent that had
been set for the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07). The higher target was
entirely consistent with the strong performance of the economy during
the last two years of the Tenth Plan which had recorded growth in
excess of 9.5 percent. The levels of investment and saving that are
necessary for achieving 9 percent growth in GDP had already been
achieved to a great extent by the end of the Tenth Plan.
The first year of the Eleventh Plan (2007-08) experienced high GDP
growth estimated at 9.3 percent supported by the savings rate of 36.9%
and an investment rate of 38.1%. Thus the savings and investment
rate realized during the first year (2007-08) of the Eleventh Plan
surpassed the target set at 34.8% for savings and 36.7% for investment.
The global economic and financial crisis that developed during
2007-08 and blew up into a crisis in 2008-09 undermined the ability of
the Indian economy to achieve the 9 percent growth trajectory.
The growth rate fell from 9.3 percent in 2007-08 to 6.8 percent in
2008-09. The slowdown in the GDP growth was not entirely due to
global economic crisis. Negative agricultural growth caused by
extremely unfavourable monsoon also contributed substantially to the
economic slowdown in 2008-09. However, the economy bounced back
in the year 2009-10 in spite of continued negative growth in agriculture
Sector.
The economy has recovered faster than expected due to its strong
macro-economic fundamentals as evidenced by the Revised Estimates
of National Income, 2010-11 released by Central Statistical Office (CSO)
on 31st May, 2011. These estimates indicate a GDP growth rate of
8.0 percent for the year 2009-10 and 8.5 percent for the year 2010-11.
Co-ordinated policy regime, stimulus packages like expansionary
fiscal and monetary policy helped the economy to recover fast. The
Mid-Term Appraisal (MTA) of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, had recast

16
the likely achievement of the economy during the plan at an annual
average GDP growth of 8.1 percent. However, in view of a global
financial crisis and negative growth rate of agriculture sector during
2008-09, the achievement of higher than 8 percent GDP growth rate
on an average during the first four years of the Eleventh Five Year
Plan is quite significant.
Mid-term evaluation of the Eleventh Five Year Plan was initiated
in July, 2009, i.e. just around two and a half years of the operation of
the Plan. Since evaluation is a routine exercise, inputs received at
various stages and discussions held during the mid-term evaluations
were enlisted appropriately for policy interventions concurrently. These
were formally documented in the mid-term appraisal report.
As for creating conducive policy environment for each sector of
the economy to attain the targeted level of growth and take the
economy to higher growth trajectory in the 12th Plan, Sector specific
Steering Committees and Working Groups have been set up by the
Planning Commission. These Steering Committees and Working Groups
would inter alia look into the sectoral constraints and suggest measures
that could be taken during the 12th Plan period to create more
conducive policy environment for specific sectors so as to help achieve
higher targeted growth in the Twelfth Plan.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Formulation of the 12th Plan (2012–17)
The Committee note that the preparation of the 12th Plan is being
delayed for want of National Development Council’s approval of the
Approach Paper to the Plan. The Committee cannot but deprecate that
the Planning Commission has failed to perform its basic function, as
the 12th Plan, which should have been finalized by this time, is yet
to see the light of the day. The Committee, while emphasizing the
need for completing the procedural formalities at the earliest, urge
upon the Planning Commission to ensure that the Approach Paper to
the 12th Plan is fmalized and placed in public domain without any
further delay. In this regard, the Committee would like to emphasize
that the Planning Commission, instead of dissipating its efforts on so
many fronts, gives focused attention to important/key areas.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission has undertaken wide ranging
consultations with all stakeholders for preparing the Approach to the
Twelfth Plan so as to ensure inclusiveness since inception of the Plan.

17
Towards this exercise, Planning Commission has held five regional
consultations with all the States and Union Territories, Panchayati Raj
Institutions, Civil Societies, Industry, academia and other stakeholders.
In addition, efforts were made to reach out to as many stakeholders
as possible through use of innovative media like committed web-site
for the 12th Five Year Plan. The wide ranging consultative process,
which attempted to provide all concerned stakeholders an option of
voicing their views and concerns, took more time than anticipated.
Based on these consultations and in-house discussions, the objectives,
goals and directions that may be pursued during the 12th Five Year
Plan have broadly been agreed. These have also been approved by the
Full Planning Commission. As the broad objective and direction has
already been identified/agreed, the process of preparing the 12th Five
Year Plan has already been initiated. The Sector specific Steering
Committees and Working Groups to make suitable recommendations
for the 12th Five Year Plan have already been set up. This would give
them adequate time to make appropriate recommendations for the
12th Five Year Plan and also facilitate adherence to the time-lines. The
Approach to the 12th Five Year Plan has been approved by the Cabinet
and the same is being placed before the NDC for its approval, in its
meeting scheduled for 22nd October, 2011.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
Agriculture Sector
The Committee note with serious concern that the country has not
been able to overcome the plateau status reached in agriculture for
more than a decade. The 11th Plan had commenced with the slogan,
“Faster and More Inclusive Growth”, to achieve inter-alia an important
sectoral target of raising the rate of growth in agriculture to 4 percent
from 2.5 percent in the Tenth Plan. However, the average of the annual
growth rates of agriculture and allied sectors during first four years of
the 11th Plan has been 2.9 percent, thereby adversely impacting the
livelihood of more than 60% of Indians who still depend on agriculture.
The Committee are given to understand that the targeted growth of
agriculture in remaining period of the Plan is 3 to 3.5 percent, for
which the Government has put in place various schemes and
programmes such as Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) , etc. But,
the Committee are not convinced that in the remaining period of the
11th Plan the growth rate could be achieved. The Committee are of
the view that in a country where 60% of the population is dependent

18
on agriculture, the target of achieving 4 per cent growth, should not
remain a mere slogan. This is an area which needs to be addressed
urgently and sympathetically. The Committee while emphasizing the
need of radical change in the approach towards the agriculture sector
for fast-track growth, are of the view that in addition to various
schemes launched by the Government to spur agricultural growth,
payment of fair and adequate remunerative prices to the farmers of
their produce is sine quo non for the agriculture growth rate. The
Committee desires the Ministry to make concerted efforts in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Since submission of earlier reply , the Central Statistical Organisation
have released the revised GDP estimates on 31st May 2011. The revised
estimates place the growth of agriculture, forestry and fishing sector
during the year 2010-11 at 6.6% which is slightly higher than the
earlier estimate of 5.4% which was released in February 2011. Taking
the revised estimates into account the average annual growth of
agriculture, forestry and fishing sector during first four years of the
Eleventh Plan goes upto 3.2 percent. In view of such performance in
first four years of the Eleventh Plan, achievement by the end of the
Plan is expected to be between 3 and 3.5%.
As mentioned in the previous reply remunerative prices to farmers
require efficient and competitive functioning of the agriculture markets
for which several strategies are being pursued which include
(i) legislative reforms like persuading the States to reform their
respective Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee Acts, (ii) the
policy of announcing Minimum Support Prices and market intervention
schemes, (iii) information dissemination on arrival and prices of
agricultural commodities in various markets through use of mass media
and information technology, and (iv) strengthening agricultural
marketing and post-harvest infrastructure like storage, cold storage
and food processing to save farmers from distress sale and for value
addition. In addition to the other on-going programmes in this regard,
the Finance Minister has announced in his budget speech this year,
“To attract investment in this sector, henceforth, capital investment in
the creation of modern storage capacity will be eligible for viability
gap funding scheme of the Finance Ministry. It is also proposed to
recognize cold chains and post-harvest storage as an infrastructure
sub-sector.”
As regards the course of action to be followed in the Twelfth Five
Year Plan, a Steering Committee and Eleven Working Groups have
been constituted to examine in-depth and recommend the policies and

19
programmes in agriculture and allied sectors covering the specific areas.
The terms of reference of the one of Working Groups set up to examine
matters relating to agriculture marketing include some specific terms
such as, “To identify the bottlenecks in the internal agricultural trade
and make recommendations for development of agricultural marketing”
and “To review the working of agricultural markets, wholesale mandis
and commodity boards, agricultural produce marketing committees,
the facilities provided in these markets and the overall supply chain
management of different agricultural commodities and suggest measures
to improve their functioning to safeguard the interests of the farmers,
especially small and marginal farmers.”
Based on the recommendations of the Steering Committee and the
Working Groups further policy steps and other initiatives will be taken
during the Twelveth Five-Year Plan for higher price to the farmers for
their produce.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Agriculture Sector
Another disquieting aspect that concerns agriculture growth is flow
of inadequate funds to agriculture and allied sectors. Of the total Gross
Capital Formation (GCF) in agriculture and allied sectors of Rs. 138597
crore in 2008-09, the contribution from public sector constitutes only
17.64% (Rs. 24452 crore) as compared to 82.35% (Rs. 114145 crore)
from private sector. While the capital investment in agriculture and
allied sectors has not been satisfactory, the budgetary allocation to
agriculture sector in 2011-12 is less than adequate. For instance, the
allocation for the sub-schemes of the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY) extending Green Revolution in the Eastern Region is Rs. 400.00
crore and Rs. 300.00 crore each for increasing production of pulses, oil
palm, vegetables and coarse cereals. Similarly, though sixty per cent of
land is unirrigated, the budgetary allocation for irrigation in 2011-12 is
meager. The Committee deprecate this tokenism on the part of the
Government. Since the agriculture sector occupies center-stage to
promote inclusive growth, enhanced rural incomes and sustained food
security, the Committee expect that the Planning Commission, which
is currently engaged in the exercise of preparation of the 12th Plan,
would address the issues affecting agriculture and allied sectors with
due seriousness and formulate appropriate remedial schemes/sectoral
policies which is also conducive for private sector investment and
participation, so that the revival in agriculture sector can be achieved.

20
Reply of the Government
Gross Capital Formation (GCF) in agriculture and allied activities,
which was around 8 per cent of GDP from agriculture and allied
activities during nineties, has since increased to 20 per cent in
2009-10 showing a significant improvement. Since 2005-06 the Public
Sector GCF in agriculture and allied activities has grown at an average
annual rate of 11 percent and GCF in private sector at over 16 percent
as per the National Accounts Statistics, 2010. Higher Gross Capital
Formation in the private sector has been facilitated by the policies
conducive to participation of the private sector including increased
credit flow to the sector.
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana was launched in 2007-08 with Revised
Budget Estimate of Rs. 1263 crore. Allocation to RKVY has been
increased to Rs. 7860 crore in 2011-12 which is over 6 fold increase in
its outlay in 4 years. The allocation for the sub-schemes of the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) extending Green Revolution in the Eastern
Region (Rs. 400.00 crore) and for increasing production of pulses, oil
palm, vegetables and coarse cereals (Rs. 300.00 crore) is a part of the
total allocation of Rs. 7860 crore which is earmarked for these special
purposes. The allocation for these purposes will be supplemented by
the other normal allocation from the RKVY, the other programmes of
the Central Government as well as by the plan outlay of the State
Governments.
Further, the Government has provided increase at an average rate
of 15 per cent per annum during the 11th Five-Year Plan to the Central
Plan Outlay for Agriculture and Allied sector the details of which are
presented in the following table:
Central Plan Outlay (BE) for Agriculture and Allied Activities
during Eleventh Five-Year Plan
Sl.No. Year Budget Estimate Growth over
(Rs. in crore) Previous Year (%)
1. 2007-08 8558.07 15.8
2. 2008-09 10074.51 17.7
3. 2009-10 10628.81 5.5
4. 2010-11 12308.47 15.8
5. 2011-12 14744.14 19.8

21
As regards the course of action to be followed in the Twelveth-
Five Year Plan, a Steering Committee and eleven Working Groups
have been constituted to examine in-depth and recommend the policies
and programmes in agriculture and allied sectors covering the specific
areas, viz., Crop Husbandry, Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries,
Agricultural Research & Education, Natural Resources Management,
Institutional Finance and cooperatives, Marketing, Agricultural
Extension, Decentralized Planning and Disadvantaged Groups. These
Steering Committee and Working Groups are represented by the
eminent experts in their respective fields, the State Government officers,
the NGOs and other stakeholders. The Working Groups have initiated
discussions on their respective subjects. The Chairmen of the Working
Groups have held meeting with the State Government representatives
to take into account their views in order to assess the growth potential
and critical gaps and obtain States' perspective in the formulation of
the Twelth Plan. Based on the recommendations of the Steering
Committee and the Working Groups further policy measures and other
initiatives will be taken during the Twelveth Five-Year Plan to achieve
higher agricultural growth as well as to promote private sector
investment and participation in agriculture and allied sectors.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Backward Regions
The Committee note that one of the basic objectives of the planning
in India is to reduce inequalities and raise the level of economic
development in the country in a balanced manner. It is, however,
indeed saddening to note that even after lapse of more than six
decades, there are 250 backward districts, out of which 60 Selected
Tribal and Backward districts in the country are affected by left-wing
extremism. It is surprising that the Planning Commission has not yet
conducted a study on impact of additional central assistance provided
under various special area programmes and efforts made by the
State Governments to redress the imbalance in development of the
backward regions within the States. Alarmingly, the Planning
Commission, an advisory planning body at the apex level, is depending
on World Bank study on this vital issue. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Planning Commission to set up an Expert Group/
Task Force for evaluating the impact of measures initiated towards
development of backward regions and for formulating a roadmap to
achieve the same in a focused and time-bound manner. In this regard,

22
the Committee would like to emphasize that due share should be
given to the backward States in the Annual Plan allocation. The
Committee also disapprove of the Ministry’s failure to maintain the
data on funds spent exclusively on rural infrastructure. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that expenditure data on rural infrastructure
should be maintained and monitored in centralized manner to enable
analysis of the progress made in this regard. The Committee further
recommend that convergence of BRGF, MGNREGS and IAP should be
done, followed by a well-defined district plan for development of
backward regions.
Reply of the Government
Regarding evaluation of Area Programmes, the Programme
Evaluation Organization (PEO) of Planning Commission had
commissioned an Evaluation Study of Hill Areas Development
Programme (HADP) which has been completed and the report has
been placed in the public domain i.e. in the Planning Commission
website (planningcommission.gov.in). Further, PEO has commissioned
an evaluation study of Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) recently.
The evaluation of Border Area Development Programme (BADP) is
also going to be conducted by the PEO.
The Planning Commission is currently in the process of formulation
of the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-17). Various Steering Committees
and Working Groups have been constituted for this purpose. A Steering
Committee for Rural Livelihoods and Rural Governance has been set
up to provide a critical review of, inter-alia, MGNREGA and BRGF
during the Eleventh Five Year Plan and suggest strategies, priorities
and allocations for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. A Working Group on
Area Programmes has also been constituted to review the performance
of various Area Pogrammes viz. BRGF, BADP , & HADP/WGDP to
bring out achievements and failures, if any, together with necessary
remedial measures and to suggest strategies, priorities and allocations
for the Twelfth five Year Plan. The Steering Committee for Rural
Livelihood and Rural Governance would consider the inputs from
evaluation studies and the Report of the Working Group on Area
Programmes and suggest strategies, priorities and allocations for the
area programmes in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 10 of the Chapter I)

23
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
Strengthening Evaluation Capacity in Government
The Committee are distressed to note that the scheme,
“Strengthening Evaluation Capacity in Government”, which is intended
to evaluate the progremmes and schemes of the Government has
consistently failed to deliver owing to substantial shortfall in utilization
of funds to the extent of 88% in 2008-09, 86% in 2009-10 and 82% in
2010-11. The underutilization of funds has been attributed to shortage
of manpower and delay in completion of evaluation studies outsourced.
The Committee in their 3rd Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10)
had urged upon the Government to fill up the vacancies in PEO. It is
evident that no improvement has taken place because of lack of
co-ordination between the Ministry of Planning and Department of
Economic Affairs in this regard. Even, the much-awaited Independent
Evaluation Organisation (IEO) is yet to take off due to procedural
complexities. The Committee while emphasizing that the Ministry
should take up the issue at the highest level to fill up the vacancies
in PEO, the procedures involved in outsourcing of studies should be
simplified for better response.
Reply of the Government
The action that has been taken in respect of the Report of Standing
Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants 2011-12 of the Ministry
of Planning is as under:
(1) Planning Commission Administration has taken up the
matter with the Deptt. of Economic Affairs (DEA) Ministry
of Finance and Ministry of Statistics & Programme
Implementation to fill up the vacancies at PEO Hqrs. and
in the field units (7 Regional Evaluation Offices/8 Project
Evaluation Offices) of PEO.
(2) In order to enhance the scope of outsourcing of evaluation
studies, steps have already been initiated to revise the
existing list of empanelled Research Institutions/NGOs
accommodating more capable Research Institutions/NGOs
of the country so that quality evaluation studies could be
undertaken within the given time schedule.
(3) The outsourcing procedure has been simplified to speed up
the outsourcing process of the evaluation studies.
(4) The Government has approved the establishment of
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) and a notification in
this regard has been issued. Process for the appointment of

24
staff, including that of Director General, IEO has already
been initiated and it is expected that the IEO will start
functioning by the beginning of 2012.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS)
As regards the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), the Committee note from the data
furnished that the shortfall in utilization of total funds available was
as much as Rs. 3250.20 crore (27%) in 2006-07, Rs. 3448.72 crore (18%)
in 2007-08, Rs. 5146.96 crore (27%) in 2008-09 and Rs. 11,673.96 crore
(24%) in 2009-10. In 2010-11, of the total available funds amounting to
Rs. 38,595.73 crore, the utilization by the States has only been to the
extent of Rs. 18979.25 (49% till November, 2010) leaving a significant
amount to be spent in the last quarter. The average days of employment
and wages per household provided under the scheme work out to
only 43 days and Rs. 65 in 2006-07, 42 days and Rs. 75 in 2007-08,
48 days and Rs. 84 in 2008-09, 54 days and Rs. 90 in 2009-10 and
35 days and Rs. 98 in 2010-11 (till November, 2010), which is way
below the mandate of providing 100 days of employment and a
minimum wage of Rs. l00. The Committee are further dismayed that
the percentage of works completed against the total works taken up
has been consistently below 50% during the last four years with 45.98%
in 2006-07, 45.97% in 2007-08, 43.74% in 2008-09, 48.29% in 2009-10,
and in 2010-11 it is expected to be much less as only 4.02%
(till November, 2010) works have been completed. As emphasized by
the Committee in their previous Reports, the issues of concern relating
to the MGNREGS, which include shortfall in utilization of budgeted
amounts, huge spending in the last quarter, inability to provide the
mandated days of employment and wages, non-completion of works
taken up etc., need to be thoroughly looked into for taking appropriate
corrective steps. The Committee would like to emphasize here that the
Government should ensure that the MGNREGS provides a
supplementary means of livelihood for the rural people, primarily
during their lean periods and it should not cause shortage of labourers
for the main agricultural activities. The Committee also desire to be
apprised of the status of implementation of the scheme in left-wing
extremism hit districts. The Committee further recommends that a
comprehensive study on impact of the MGNREGS on agricultural
productivity and assets created under the scheme should be carried
out.

25
Reply of the Government
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA is demand based legislation. The Act
provides a legal guarantee for at least 100 days of wage employment
to every rural household in every financial year for doing unskilled
manual work on demand. There are no pre-determined targets for
employment as well as for utilization of funds under the Act.
Implementation of the Act is done by the State Governments/UT
Administrations while funds are provided by the Central Government
as per the provisions of the Act.
As regards providing 100 days employment under the Act, since
it is demand based, members of a household are required to submit
a written application for work. Further, number of days of employment
availed by a household in a year depends upon the demand for work
and availability of other employment opportunities in the area. The
mandate under the Act is to provide at least 100 days of wage
employment for doing unskilled manual work based on demand for
work by the households. The average person days demanded has been
around 50 days a year since the inception of MGNREGA. In 2010-11,
the average person days per household was 47 and average wages
per person days was Rs. 99.89.
Completion of works under MGNREGA in 2010-11 was 50.80%.
From the financial year 2010-11, all States have been asked to furnish
information on MIS. It takes time to digitize the entire information
and place it on the website and there is a time lag before data is
updated on the website because of different level of adaptability of
MIS by the States. There is a lag between physical and financial closure
of works due to late submission of Project Completion Report (PCR)
and squaring of accounts at different levels-Gram Panchayats and Block
level. Some works are abandoned due to non-feasibility encountered
at a later stage e.g. detection of hard rock boulder in digging of Wells.
Since works are subject to audit only after their completion, there is
a tendency on part of the implementing agencies not to close them to
avoid audit. A Circular has been issued to all the States/UTs in January,
2011 to complete on-going works with in a given time-frame and
indicate progress of works taken up and completed in the labour
budget proposal. The details of completion of works under MGNREGA
in 2010-11 are given in Annexure-I.
Funds available with the States/UTs which remain un-utilized in
a financial year are carried forward to the next financial year to be
used for meeting the labour demand in subsequent year. As the Act

26
provides that work has to be provided to an applicant within 15 days
of the demand failing which unemployment allowance becomes
payable, funds have to be kept upfront in order to meet any sudden
spurt in the labour demand in an area.
During the last 5 years of implementation of MGNREGA, the
expenditure has always been more than 70% and therefore, funds have
not been underutilized. As explained above, funds have to be kept
upfront and a good quantum of which remain in the pipeline keeping
in view the nature of the programme. The details of availability of
funds and expenditure in 2010-11 are given in Annexure-II.
With a view to strengthen the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi
NREGA and to ensure that more and more of the rural population is
benefited, the Ministry of Rural Development has undertaken the
following measures:
(i) Awareness generation among rural population has been
taken up through intensive IEC activities involving both
print as well as electronic media.
(ii) Administrative expenditure has been enhanced from 4% to
6% to enable the implementing agencies to appoint dedicated
staff for effective implementation of the Act.
(iii) ICT based MIS has been made operational to make data
available to public scrutiny. The data includes Job cards,
Muster rolls, Employment demanded and allocated, number
of days worked, shelf of works, funds available/funds spent
and funds released to various implementing agencies, Social
Audit findings, registering grievances and generating alerts
for corrective action.
(iv) In the light of the shortcomings in social audit under
MGNREGA, the Ministry of Rural Development has
published the MGNREGA Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 in
the Gazette on 30.6.2011 for the purpose of much needed
transparency under MGNREGA.
(v) Payment of wages to MGNREGA workers has been made
mandatory through their accounts in Banks/Post Office to
infuse transparency in wage disbursement. An amendment
to this effect has been made in para 31 of Schedule-II of
the Act.
(vi) Rolling out Biometric based ICT enabled real time
transactions of MGNREGA workers to eliminate fake
attendance and false payments.

27
(vii) Periodic reviews in the Performance Review Committee
meetings held on quarterly basis. State specific reviews are
also undertaken.
(viii) Independent Monitoring and verification by National Level
Monitors and Eminent Citizens.
(ix) V isit by members of Central Employment Guarantee Council.
(x) State and district level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
have been set up and instructions have been issued for
holding regular meetings of the Committees.
(xi) Instructions have been issued directing all States to appoint
Ombudsman at district level for grievance redressal in a
time bound manner.
The Mahatma Gandhi NREGA provides for supplementary wage
employment to ensure livelihood security. Productive absorption of
under employed and surplus labour force in the rural sector has always
been a major focus of planning for rural development. The situation
of unemployment has been compounded by the absence of any social
security mechanism. Mahatma Gandhi NREGA intends to provide the
social security mechanism for the days which is beyond the period of
engagement in agriculture without creating competitive disadvantage
towards agricultural productivity.
Status of implementation of MGNREGA in naxal affected districts
is at Annexure-III.
An Evaluation Study on the programme MGNREGA has been
entrusted to the Programme Evaluation Organization (PEG), Planning
Commission. The proposed study envisage to cover various objectives
of the MGNREGA including impact of the programme on agricultural
activities, number of assets created, assessment of quality of assets
and how these assets are benefitting the villagers. In this regard, a
Steering Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of
Dr. Mihir Shah, Member, Planning Commission. Two meetings of this
Committee have so far been held. As per decision taken in the meetings
of the Committee, the study will be launched in 100 districts of the
country covering the three phases of implementation of MGNREGA.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para Nos. 13, 14 and 15 of the Chapter I)

28
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
Indira Awaas Yojana
The Committee note with serious concern that the Government
has not increased the financial assistance of Rs. 45,000/- in plain areas
and Rs. 48,500/- in hilly/difficult areas provided for construction of
dwelling units for the poor under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) to cover
the actual construction cost. Instead, the Government should have
considered other option like constructing permanent houses under
reverse hypothecation in liberal and easy installments for repaying the
loan amount by the beneficiaries. As emphasised by the Committee in
their earlier Reports, it may not be feasible for the poor people from
below the poverty line to raise the balance of the construction cost by
way of loan of Rs. 20,000 at the interest rate of 4%. The Committee
would, therefore, like to emphasise that IAY should be suitably
redesigned so as to ensure that the beneficiaries do not suffer for
want of funds.
Reply of the Government
In the past three years, the unit assistance has been enhanced
twice—firstly on 1st April, 2008 from Rs. 25,000/- and Rs. 27,500/-
(for hilly and difficult areas) to Rs. 35,000/- and Rs. 37,500/- (for hilly
and difficult areas) respectively and again as on 1st April, 2010 to
Rs. 45,000/- and Rs. 48,500/-. In addition to unit assistance under IAY,
a beneficiary can avail funds for construction of a toilet from the Total
Sanitation Campaign programme. lAY beneficiary can also avail loan
up to Rs. 20,000/- under the Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) scheme.
Considering the inflationary impact in the cost of construction, efforts
are being made to enhance this assistance further.
A Committee on concrete Bankable schemes for rural housing was
set up by the Ministry of Rural Development which has submitted its
final recommendations to the Ministry. It has also formulated a few
Bankable Schemes which will be discussed with all stakeholders as
part of new initiatives for 12th Five Year Plan.
As per reports/feedback received from the States/DRDAs, many
IAY beneficiaries are availing DRI facility. However, the uptake of the
scheme is slow due to either banks not willing to extend the credit or
the procedural requirements of the banks involved. As on 11.7.2011,
103655 number of beneficiaries have availed of this facility.
The Ministry is in the process of redesigning IAY as a critical
contribution to achieving the national target of eradicating homelessness
by the end of the XII Five Year Plan. Further in order to provide

29
additional financial assistance to the IAY beneficiary for better house
construction, as mentioned earlier, a Committee on Bankable scheme
for rural housing was constituted and the Committee has given its
recommendations which are being examined. The recommendations
inter-alia include addressing housing micro credit scheme through
composite loan mechanism, partnership management/MoUs with select
Banks, NGOs, MFls and other select delivery channels which would
enable lAY beneficiaries to access additional funds for house
construction.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
New Initiative in Skill Development through PPP
The Committee believe that the prosperity of a Nation rests with
the skills of the People. The Committee are, however, disturbed at the
way the scheme, “New Initiative in Skill Development“, has been dealt
with since its conceptualization. The utilisation of funds under the
scheme, “New Initiative in Skill Development through PPP”, has not
been found satisfactory again in 2010-11 as the Ministry could spend
Rs. 0.03 crore against BE of Rs. 10 crore. This is indicative of the fact
that neither the Planning Commission nor the Government realized
the importance of skill development. The admission made by the
Ministry of Planning that the shortfall in utilisation under the scheme
is owing to involvement of various other stakeholders, which has
delayed the decision making process regarding the proposals under
the scheme, only gives credence to the Committee's view that there is
a need for reviewing the Scheme by having a nodal agency for
channelizing funding, co-ordinating, and facilitating the implementing
agencies, both in public and private sectors involved in the scheme.
The Committee would like to emphasize that Government should
review this issue and not hesitate in entrusting the implementation of
the scheme to a single nodal agency.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission formulated a scheme “New Initiative in Skill
Development through PPP” to facilitate operationalising the mandate
of the National Skill Development Coordination Board which is
constituted under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission as a part of the Coordinated Action on Skill Development.
All expenditure incurred on the meetings of the NSDCB, its
Sub-Committees, regional consultations, its initiatives for grants-in-aid

30
to State Skill Development Missions for undertaking pilot projects in
uncovered Districts are being financed through this scheme. The
mandate of the scheme does not cover financing activities of all the
Ministries involved in the Skill Development work. It is purely a
scheme formulated by the Planning Commission to support NSDCB in
fulfilling its mandate.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee regret to note the fact, as deposed by the Member-
Secretary, Planning Commission before the Committee, that given the
size of younger population, the infrastructure available for skill
development such as ITI etc. is not adequate. As conceded by the
Member-Secretary, Planning Commission, a legislation to make
mandatory for the industry to run the training centres for improving
the skills should be brought in to redressing the mismatch between
demand and supply of skilled workers. The Committee also desire
that the vocationalisation of education should be done on priority
especially at school level, say from 8th to 12th standards, so that the
envisaged target of achieving 500 million skilled people by 2022 can
be achieved.
Reply of the Government
Government of India has been implementing Craftsmen Training
Scheme and Apprenticeship Training Scheme to train the people. Under
the Craftsmen Training Scheme, number of initiatives have, been taken
to involve the private sector with the objective of bringing about
synergy in the market demand and availability of supply such as
upgradation of 1396 ITIs in the PPP , creation of Centres of Excellence
through World Bank assistance and Skill Development Initiative—
Modular Employable Skill Programme implemented through number
of private vocational training providers. In addition, the Apprenticeship
Training Pogramme is covered by Apprenticeship Act, 1961 wherein
industry trains the apprentices in accordance with the provision of the
Act.
As regards vocationalisation of education from 8th to 12th standards,
it is submitted that as per Selected Education Statistics (2008-09) of
Ministry of Human Resource Development, the number of students in
Upper Primary level (Classes VI-VIII) were 5.55 crore, however, their
number at Secondary level (Classes IX-X) and Higher Secondary level
(Classes XI-XII) was 2.90 crore and 1.67 crore, respectively as compared

31
to the projected population of 4.84 crore and 4.87 crore for the age
group 14-15 and 16-17 years respectively. Thus there is a wide gap
between enrolment and projected population at Secondary and Higher
Secondary level. Therefore, it would be beneficial if these dropped out
children, as also a large number of children who may not have the
competency, but are compelled to pursue academic courses in the
absence of any other option, as well as those with an inclination
towards vocational skills, to be channelized into vocational education.
It would be much appropriate to have pre-vocational courses (optional)
at Classes IX & X and vocational education at Higher Secondary level
with appropriate certification by accrediting agencies. The Department
of School Education & Literacy, MHRD is implementing a scheme of
Vocational Education at 10+2 stage. The existing scheme had many
problems, including inflexible curriculum and duration, lack of need
based courses and trained teachers, poor vertical mobility and linkage
with industry etc. The scheme is being restructured and will now aim
at preparing educated employable and competitive human resources
for various sectors of economy and the global market, enhancing the
employability of youth through competency—based modular vocational
courses, providing multi entry and exit learning opportunities,
horizontal and vertical mobility. The Mid-Term appraisal of the
XI Five Year Plan has emphasized that in vocational education,
curriculum revision, appropriate certification by accrediting agencies,
facility for horizontal and vertical mobility and linkage with industry
for self employment/employment should be prioritised. A National
Vocational Education Qualification Framework (NVEQF) has been
prepared focusing on students from class IX onwards. The scheme of
vocationalisation of Secondary Education is under approval stage.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 18 of the Chapter I)
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
Role of the Planning Commission
The Planning Commission came into existence in 1950 with the
objective of raising the standard of living of the people by augmenting
production and optimizing available resources. There is no denying
the fact that the country has seen significant developments in many
fields since independence. At the same time, there should not be any
denial of the fact that given the experience of over six decades of

32
planning, the extent of progress made has been far from satisfactory.
Despite a good number of policy measures initiated and interventions
made at different levels, the development policies have not benefited
the majority of the people in the country; which could be widely seen
through prolonged prevalence of imbalance in development across
States and within States, unsatisfactory performance in human
development parameters, failure in achieving desired agricultural
growth rate, high drop out at primary level education, absence of
universalisation of higher education, mismatch between demand and
supply of skilled personnel, inability in earmarking 2-3% of GDP to
the health sector as envisaged etc., on the policy front also, planning
in the country has failed to deliver the desired results owing to
disjunction between planning and budgeting, lack of synchronization
between the plans/policies and implementation and proper monitoring
etc. The Committee regret to observe that the basic objectives of
planning are yet to be achieved. When the issue calls for an immediate
and serious introspection, the Committee are surprised to note that
the Ministry of Planning is satisfied with tailor made solutions like
implementation of UID scheme. The Committee can only observe that
the Ministry of Planning/Planning Commission do not seem to have
a futuristic vision in social planning in the post-reforms period. The
Committee are of the view that while planning is very much relevant
in India, the Planning Commission has to come grips with the emerging
social realities to reinvent itself to make itself more relevant and
effective for aligning the planning process with economic reforms and
its consequences, particularly for the poor. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should constitute an Expert Group
immediately for evaluating the performance of the Planning
Commission and redefining its role and objectives so as to relate the
planning process to the life of the common man and its role in the
implementation of programmes and schemes.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission was set up by a Resolution of the
Government of India in March 1950 in pursuance of declared objectives
of the Government to promote a rapid rise in the standard of living
of the people by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country,
increasing production and offering opportunities to all for employment
in the service of the community. The Planning Commission was charged
with the responsibility of marking assessment of all resources of the
country, augmenting deficient resources, formulating plans for the most
effective and balanced utilisation of resources and determining priorities.

33
The Planning Commission since its inception, has taken due care
in sincere discharge of its duties and has been successful in meeting
its obligations by way of formulating eleven five year plans, in addition
to other well documented achievements. Planning Commission during
the course of its working has been evolving its strategies by way of
continuous internal assessment of its working. It has always kept itself
abreast with the latest developments and aligned its policies in such
a manner so as to keep the interests of poor in mind. As regards the
suggestion of the Committee to set up an Expert Group for evaluating
performance of the Planning Commission, the matter has been brought
to the notice of the Competent Authority .
As one of the initiatives to re-invent itself, Planning Commission
has recently obtained the approval of Government for setting up of an
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) for evaluating major flagship
programmes. The IEO is to be funded by the Government of India
and will be charged with the task of evaluating the impact of the
programmes/schemes being implemented by various Departments/
Ministries of the Government of India throughout the country. The
IEO seeks to conduct the evaluation of flagship programmes in a
professional and unbiased manner so that the findings can be utilised
by Planners and policy-makers to improve the implementation efficiency
of these programmes and further ‘equity and inclusive growth’, which
is the main objective of these programmes.
Another important step taken by Planning Commission is setting
up a High Level Expert Committee, under the Chairmanship of Dr. C.
Rangarajan, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister, to suggest measures for the efficient management of public
sector expenditure. The Committee has recently submitted its draft
report.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]

34
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—NIL—

35
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
Targeted Subsidies to the Poor
The Committee note that targeted PDS is in place through which
subsidized foodgrain is distributed. However, the present system is
not without flaws. The Committee further note that the Government
propose to replace existing method of fertilizer subsidy payment
through industry to direct payment to the poor farmers below the
poverty line by March, 2012. They find that a Task Force has been set
up to work out the modalities for the same. The Committee emphasize
that the interest of the bargadaars or share-croppers should be
adequately taken care of in the new method of fertilizer subsidy.
In this connection, with regard to other items on which direct
cash transfer is proposed, the Committee are not convinced that this
would be a panacea for all ills of the present distribution system.
They fear that the proposed system may also not be free from leakages
and manipulations. Moreover, the Committee are informed that many
State Governments are implementing Universal PDS successfully, thus
there is no reason why it should not be tried out at the Central level.
Therefore, the Committee would recommend the Government to
consider universalisation of PDS in a phased manner.
Reply of the Government
The subject matter comes within the purview of the Department
of Food and Public Distribution. According to information obtained
from them, the concept of universal Public Distribution System was in
vogue prior to the year 1997. However, due to various limitations, it
was replaced by the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) since
June, 1997 with a view to target the benefits to the poor sections of
the society in a more effective manner.
Presently, formulation of the National Food Security Bill is being
deliberated by the Government. As per the draft bill discussed in
Empowered Group of Ministers Meeting held in July, 2011, the coverage
of population is proposed at 75% in rural areas and 50% in urban
areas.

36
A Task Force on direct subsidy in respect of kerosene, LPG &
fertilizers has been set up under the chairmanship of Shri Nandan
Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI to examine and implement a solution for
transfer of subsidy directly to the farmers. The mandate of the
Department of Fertilizers is to make available fertilizers to the farmers
at affordable prices. The Task Force is expected to give implementable
solution on how the direct transfer of subsidy to the beneficiary can
take place. An Interim Report of the Task Force has been submitted to
the Government on 5th July, 2011 and is available on the website of
Ministry of Finance. In addition, the Task Force mandate has also
been extended to include an implementable solution for targeted PDS
and the Interim Report is expected by the end of August, 2011.
In respect of fertilizers, the Task Force has recommended a three
stage approach to the issue of direct subsidy. Phase-I is to capture the
information availability regarding fertilizers at the farm gate level,
wherein the availability at the last point of sale will be captured. In
Phase-II, which will be implemented after the Phase-I stabilizes, the
subsidy is expected to be transferred to the last point sale and in
Phase-III, when the Phase-I & II stabilizes, the subsidy is expected to
be transferred directly to the intended beneficiary once the AADHAR
Nos. are given to the beneficiaries and AADHAR enabled payment
bridges are in place. The roll out of Phase-I will be in December, 2011
and the roll out of Phase-II in June, 2012. Phase-III will take place
after AADHAR Nos. are given to all the eligible beneficiaries.
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2011-Parl., dated 14.10.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 7 of the Chapter I)

37
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

38
ANNEXURE I
Work status under MGNREGA (FY: 2010-11)
Sl.No. States Total Works Total Works % Age of
Takenup Completed Works
(In Nos.) (In Nos.) Completed
12 345
1. Andhra Pradesh 1286311 864989 67.25
2. Arunachal Pradesh 2454 926 37.73
3. Assam 31136 10650 34.20
4. Bihar 202415 82349 40.68
5. Chhattisgarh 156226 89287 57.15
6. Gujarat 85094 45158 53.07
7. Haryana 12890 7573 58.75
8. Himachal Pradesh 62253 33975 54.58
9. Jammu and Kashmir 56116 36542 65.12
10. Jharkhand 227798 47419 20.82
11. Karnataka 435182 91089 20.93
12. Kerala 147084 104489 71.04
13. Madhya Pradesh 686703 291035 42.38
14. Maharashtra 49205 18707 38.02
15. Manipur 8812 7897 89.62
16. Meghalaya 14035 7755 55.25
17. Mizoram 3812 3253 85.34
18. Nagaland 10531 8937 84.86
19. Odisha 220906 59278 26.83
20. Punjab 14939 6793 45.47

39
21. Rajasthan 199119 52262 26.25
22. Sikkim 2314 1534 66.29
23. Tamil Nadu 69515 31391 45.16
24. Tripura 71922 65433 90.98
25. Uttar Pradesh 752067 448148 59.59
26. Uttarakhand 42206 29749 70.49
27. West Bengal 246013 142974 58.12
28. Andaman and Nicobar 399 263 65.91
Islands
29. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 31 7 22.58
30. Daman and Diu 0 0 0.00
31. Goa 760 559 73.55
32. Lakhshadweep 75 0 0.00
33. Puducherry 667 1 0.15
34. Chandigarh NR NR NR
Total 5098990 2590422 50.80
12 345

40
ANNEXURE II
Financial Performance Under MGNREGA (FY: 2010-11)
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. No. States Central Total Funds Total
Release Available Expenditure
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 7418.07 9107.10 5439.39
2. Arunachal Pradesh 35.28 55.55 50.57
3. Assam 609.29 1269.28 921.04
4. Bihar 2103.65 3197.56 2664.25
5. Chhattisgarh 1685.05 2233.09 1633.98
6. Gujarat 894.86 1281.59 788.22
7. Haryana 131.00 232.09 214.70
8. Himachal Pradesh 636.25 820.00 501.96
9. Jammu and Kashmir 313.60 412.57 377.77
10. Jharkhand 962.87 1638.11 1284.35
11. Karnataka 1573.05 2897.92 2537.17
12. Kerala 704.23 843.33 704.34
13. Madhya Pradesh 2565.77 5535.53 3637.25
14. Maharashtra 204.71 597.59 358.12
15. Manipur 342.99 416.43 440.71
16. Meghalaya 209.81 331.46 319.02
17. Mizoram 216.03 278.43 293.15
18. Nagaland 511.57 635.71 605.37
19. Orissa 1561.86 1791.88 1533.14
20. Punjab 128.79 230.52 165.84

41
21. Rajasthan 2788.82 6340.42 3289.07
22. Sikkim 44.49 83.48 85.26
23. Tamil Nadu 2024.90 2824.89 2323.32
24. Tripura 382.61 638.02 631.87
25. Uttar Pradesh 5266.59 7221.48 5631.20
26. Uttarakhand 289.81 404.07 380.20
27. West Bengal 2117.61 2779.94 2532.46
28. Andaman and Nicobar 7.69 11.99 9.04
Islands
29. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 0.48 1.27 1.23
30. Daman and Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00
31. Goa 5.08 16.10 9.93
32. Lakhshadweep 2.34 5.80 2.52
33. Puducherry 29.82 38.95 10.82
34. Chandigarh 0.00 0.00 0.00
Total 35768.97 54172.15 39377.26
12 345

42
ANNEXURE III
MGNREGA Performance in LWE affected districts
Sl.No. State HH provided employment (in Nos.) Cumulative Person days generated (in Lakhs) % of Women participation Total Expenditure
 (in Lakhs)
Districts 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2006-07 2007-0
8
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1
51 6 1 71 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 2161395 4803892 5699557 6158493 6200423 678.8 2010.3 2735.5 4044.3 3351.6 54.8 57.7 58.2 58.1 57.0 68020.3 208374.8 296390.4 4509
18.0 543938.6
1. Apndhra Pradesh Khammam 166357 281345 347987 310095 280215 53.1 136.8 189.0 202.3 131.6 60.5 58.1 56.7 58.2 57.2 5372.4 12941.6 19066.1 21819.0 20
567.1
4. Bihar 1688899 3859630 3822484 4127330 4738464 596.9 843.0 991.8 1136.9 1602.6 17.4 27.7 30.0 30.0 28.5 71276.2 105222.7 131648.0 181687.6 266425.
2
2. Bihar Auranagabad 57574 100230 159352 139048 119074 24.5 20.4 29.6 36.9 37.2 7.7 21.0 23.5 29.2 30.1 2862.7 2410.4 4053.3 5880.0 6952.53. Bihar Gaya 72015 142046 166494 159129 179400 26.8 47.6 24.7 22.3 53.7 35.0 35.0 35.0 35.0 35.0 3323.1 6298.5 3471.4 3786.9 9301.44. Bihar Jamui 84943 102777 58505 81570 67535 35.1 35.2 23.6 22.7 30.1 28.7 35.9 41.5 36.2 39.3 4538.1 4461.5 3267.7 3379.8 4847.55. Bihar Jehanabad 54640 76480 39565 68615 51051 25.3 21.7 22.1 17.5 22.2 47.0 25.2 42.4 33.1 34.4 2521.0 2932.1 2633.0 2568.9 2245.56. Bihar Rohtas 18319 97356 133214 99782 149210 15.9 13.9 18.4 20.2 42.3 7.1 32.5 33.3 14.9 10.8 1218.1 1973.8 2525.9 3119.1 6674.47. Bihar Arwal 46563 47581 24857 22891 10.5 11.9 7.9 11.5 15.3 28.6 31.1 34.6 1010.3 1366.6 1209.2 1660.25. Chhattisgarh 1256737 2284963 2270415 2025845 2485581 700.2 1316.1 1243.2 1041.6 1110.4 39.3 42.0 47.4 49.2 48.6 66882.2 140183.2 143447.5 132266
.7 163397.8
8. Chhattisgarh Bastar 95475 184265 175850 131618 104385 70.0 98.8 65.7 35.9 33.2 39.8 40.3 42.9 42.8 39.2 6741.0 10816.7 8067.3 4854.7 5790.99. Chhattisgarh Dantewada 65115 121959 71703 84012 65310 25.7 54.0 39.9 30.9 21.0 32.0 30.0 40.5 47.9 47.3 2961.7 6173.0 4221.0 3467.8 3044.610. Chhattisgarh Kanker 109098 102173 83485 83140 104485 76.1 88.2 47.6 38.5 44.5 61.2 58.0 57.0 50.1 46.4 6780.4 9213.1 5585.5 5281.2 6684.811.
Chhattisgarh Rajnandagon 120572 162915 184569 168503 205344 71.6 117.5 132.5 113.0 136.5 49.0 46.8 54.0 63.0 62.2 5601.9 11658.6 14585.1 12372.2
18700.0

43
12. Chhattisgarh Surguja 194511 265488 275623 211234 260513 103.5 148.6 154.6 112.1 120.3 33.0 33.0 35.7 35.3 34.2 10260.8 15694.8 18499.8 14809.5 18
458.4
13. Chhattisgarh Bijapur 12480 4.7 33.2 1275.914. Chhattisgarh Narayanpur 12603 3.0 49.7 494.410. Jharkhand 1394108 1679868 1576348 1702599 1987360 520.5 747.5 750.0 842.5 830.9 39.5 27.2 28.5 34.2 33.5 71155.1 106253.9 134171.7 137970.2 1284
35.4
15. Jharkhand Bokaro 22142 60969 57077 48918 64000 17.0 19.1 21.0 22.6 27.4 28.9 39.8 31.0 33.2 32.3 1564.1 2508.8 3624.7 3732.4 4190.816. Jharkhand Chatra 95400 59783 112537 73981 87998 35.4 36.8 54.3 48.6 38.5 33.5 31.5 30.0 34.7 37.6 4015.3 7621.7 8490.6 7644.1 6111.317. Jharkhand Garhwa 81978 61789 87743 70894 68111 43.6 38.0 45.7 31.9 28.8 35.8 31.0 33.5 34.5 35.2 4867.8 4800.4 7159.7 5336.0 4257.318. Jharkhand Gumla 86810 143986 94274 71260 79261 37.7 80.8 35.9 32.4 30.7 26.5 32.0 20.2 30.7 27.3 5070.4 11816.0 7472.9 5289.0 4761.519. Jharkhand Hazaribagh 63378 123827 102275 96722 70254 15.0 42.3 17.8 32.9 25.5 9.2 19.9 22.4 26.0 32.0 2792.1 5663.2 6035.9 6216.5 4199.120. Jharkhand Latehar 62375 79197 54130 52183 69667 23.4 38.9 36.8 30.6 33.3 25.6 25.0 33.0 44.7 43.4 3168.8 5064.9 5830.5 4949.0 6294.021. Jharkhand Lohardaga 42493 45873 30310 26335 40258 28.6 21.9 15.8 18.3 16.9 38.8 36.7 37.0 35.0 43.5 3617.7 3157.0 2879.9 2904.3 2796.822. Jharkhand Palamu 80264 117876 82436 83455 78659 36.7 46.7 43.8 34.4 31.5 30.6 30.0 34.5 35.0 34.5 4629.2 6197.3 6681.7 5558.8 4545.623. Jharkhand West Singhbhum 95373 39930 62950 100479 145115 37.6 19.5 40.8 56.7 44.3 28.0 30.0 55.0 52.0 55.0 5213.6 2811.8 10551.4 10108.7 6552.624. Jharkhand East Singhbhum 89500 61100 76159 96891 23.4 31.6 33.0 36.4 45.2 41.6 42.2 38.7 3595.6 7115.2 6534.8 5393.225. Jharkhand Ramgarh 42510 68888 56840 15.9 15.4 20.1 27.2 33.0 33.1 2830.1 2861.7 3584.813. Madhya Pradesh 2866349 4346916 5207665 4714591 4407643 1971.8 2753.0 2947.0 2624.0 2198.2 43.2 41.7 43.3 44.2 44.4 186268.6 289172.6 355496.2 3
72228.1 363724.9
26. Madhya Pradesh Balaghat 248484 207624 227015 228746 191358 130.7 131.3 135.5 135.9 95.3 40.7 51.4 59.8 57.2 55.0 13390.0 13136.0 17979.9 18250.4
19775.1
14. Maharashtra 353024 474695 906297 591547 451169 159.3 184.9 419.9 274.4 200.0 37.1 40.0 46.2 39.7 45.9 17461.2 18907.2 36154.3 32109.3 35812.012 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1
51 6 1 71 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3

44
27. Maharashtra Gadchiroli 38155 62777 61496 41292 29128 8.9 11.9 30.6 27.1 17.6 51.1 40.5 49.0 19.8 31.4 873.2 1966.4 2338.8 2594.9 2920.928. Maharashtra Gondia 23472 83296 96494 42462 59492 8.4 12.8 62.2 16.6 19.4 60.0 60.0 60.0 55.7 55.9 1261.8 990.2 2000.5 2464.4 2829.619. Orissa 1394169 1096711 1199006 1398300 2004815 799.3 405.2 432.6 554.1 976.6 35.6 36.4 37.6 36.2 39.4 73346.6 57956.9 67829.3 93898.4 153314.329. Orissa Deogarh 32673 19712 14968 15747 16840 21.4 10.6 4.8 5.5 7.8 30.5 30.0 37.6 38.5 40.8 1925.5 1249.5 1089.7 1162.2 1334.930. Orissa Gajapati 63011 47640 47051 59991 67950 27.3 17.7 18.3 28.1 32.8 39.0 44.5 45.1 45.8 46.8 2832.5 2020.8 2502.7 3503.4 4874.031. Orissa Malkangiri 38833 36758 32110 26819 58841 43.3 23.6 15.4 10.0 34.8 27.9 35.9 44.1 39.5 42.8 3044.3 3288.2 2087.5 2010.4 5017.732. Orissa Rayagada 70423 52161 58863 58537 75826 41.6 19.4 28.7 30.7 48.4 46.1 47.2 44.3 45.4 47.1 3727.3 2847.7 4486.1 4672.4 7481.233. Orissa Sambalpur 76646 29216 28172 29540 60560 38.4 16.6 8.1 11.1 37.6 29.2 30.0 28.0 27.3 38.3 3539.1 2157.5 2168.0 2325.2 5215.225. Uttar Pradesh 2573245 4096408 4336466 5483434 6431213 822.9 1363.1 2272.2 3559.2 3349.0 16.6 14.5 18.1 21.7 21.4 77967.5 189825.1 356887.7 5900
03.9 563120.1
34. Uttar Pradesh Sonbhadra 83072 98416 105262 186544 183258 52.8 58.5 104.0 148.4 88.7 53.0 52.6 37.2 40.3 41.2 5061.7 8461.8 17242.6 25044.7 16565.
4
27. West Bengal 3083757 3843335 3025854 3479915 4998239 440.1 968.8 786.6 1551.7 1553.1 18.3 17.0 26.5 33.4 33.7 39462.6 100434.6 94038.5 210898.2 2
53246.1
35. West Bengal Paschim 369777 313673 319753 342500 498029 58.0 76.1 86.7 178.1 171.7 14.1 17.7 25.5 30.0 30.4 5037.7 8474.2 10600.7 23397.7 26741.4
Medinipur
National Average/Total 20984179 33889122 45112792 52585999 54947068 9050.6 14359.2 21632.5 28359.5 25715.2 40.2 42.6 47.9 48.1 47.7 882335.6 158
5688.6 2725009.9 3790522.8 3937727.1
Naxal Districts Average/Total 2713378 3457600 3522454 3363055 3732832 1233.3 1538.7 1612.9 1608.3 1578.9 37.3 39.4 43.3 43.0 41.9 127813.3 18341
3.1 218511.6 229109.3 252139.8
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1
51 6 1 71 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3

45
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th December, 2011 from
1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Prem Das Rai
6. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai
9. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Piyush Goyal
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Financial Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

46
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Planning;
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme implementation; and
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at Sl. Nos. (ii) and
(iv) without any modification and those at Sl. Nos. (i), (iii) and (v)
with minor modifications. The Committee authorised the Chairman to
finalise the Reports in the light of the modifications suggested and
present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

47
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2011-2012) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations 13
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 12 92.31
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which Nil 0.00
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 01 7.69
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 6)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 00.00
of which final reply of the Government
is still awaited