 1 
82 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Seventy-first 
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs]  
 
 
 
EIGHTY SECOND REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


 2 
 
EIGHTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Seventy-first 
Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs]  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


 3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………...... (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
 
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
 
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29 November, 2013................ 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Seventy -first Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs ………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -  Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised by 
the Committee, present this Eighty Second Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventy -first Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs  
 2. The Seventy-first Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 22 April,  2013.  Replies indicating action taken on all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 17 July, 2013.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 29 
November, 2013. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Seventy-first  Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
29 November, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
08 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 

 6 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Seventy -
First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 April, 2013 
and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.   Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 11 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analys ed 
and categorized as follows: 
  
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2, 3, 7, 8 and 9                     
                                                                                              (Total: 6) 
            (Chapter II)   
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
Nil 
                                  (Total : Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  4, 5, 6, 10 and 11  
                                      (Total: 5) 
 (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 Nil 
                                 (Total : Nil) 
  (Chapter V)  
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 

 7 
A. Registrar of Companies (RoCs) 
 
      Recommendation (Para No. 4.) 
 
5. The Ministry had informed the Committee that its IT platform (versio n-2 of 
MCA21), which was rolled out from January, 2013 had the capacity to take the 
additional load but the issue of shortage of manpower in the field offices of Ministry had 
still not been addressed by the Ministry. The Committee observed that the shortag e of 
skilled manpower was seriously affecting the functioning of the Ministry in general and 
its field offices in particular.  
6. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
 
 “The Ministry is taking necessary s teps for filling up the vacant 
posts at the earliest. The present strength of posts in Group A and 
Group B is indicated below: 
 
Sr. No. Grade Sanctioned 
strength 
Present 
strength 
1 Group “A” ICLS 292 230 
2 Senior Technical Assistant (STA) Group 
„B‟ 
128 104 
3 Company Prosecutor (CP) Group „B‟ 30 17 
4 Junior Technical Assistant  (JTA) Group 
„B‟ 
231 112 
 
 The recruitment and promotion in Group „A‟ posts in the Ministry 
is done on regular basis. The Ministry has moved a proposal for 
amendment in the servic e rules of Group „A‟ posts (ICLS Posts) for 
incorporating a provision engaging similarly placed officers on short 
term deputation. The requisition for appointment in Group „B‟ and 
Group „C‟ posts have been sent to SSC and UPSC. The promotion to 
Group „B‟ and Group „C‟ posts are being done regularly. The Ministry 
is making all efforts for filling up vacant posts.” 
 
7. The Committee note that the Ministry is functioning with shortages of 
skilled manpower across different cadres.  Although the recruitment and 
promotion in Group ‘A’ posts (ICLS) is being done on a regular basis, the vacancy 
level is about 21% in this cadre.  The Committee are alarmed to note that bulk of 
the vacancies are at the cutting edge level like Junior Technical Assistant (JTA), 
thereby i mpairing the functioning of field offices.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that the Ministry should make sincere efforts to address the issue of 

 8 
shortage of skilled manpower so that the responsibilities cast on the Ministry and 
its field / attached of fices under the new company law can be discharged 
effectively. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
8. The Committee found that inspite of being in such a tight spot, the Ministry had 
been reluctant to hire/engage skilled workforce on contractual terms on the ple a that it 
would create conflict of interest and undermine professional ethics.  The Ministry 
instead, sought to fill up its regular vacancies and was pursuing UPSC and SSC in this 
regard.  The Committee would urge the Ministry to come out of its slumber an d take 
immediate action to address this serious shortage of skilled manpower. The Committee 
desired that while taking steps to fill its regular vacancies, the Ministry should explore 
new ways and means for supplementing its regular manpower. The Ministry m ight 
replicate proposals like the one approved for Serious Fraud Investigation Office, with 
regard to appointment of legal counsels on contract basis. The Committee were of the 
view that since there was no dearth of skilled/qualified manpower in this count ry, the 
Ministry should take the initiative to gainfully employ them.   
   
9.    In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated, among other things, the 
following:- 
 “It is submitted that the main function of the Ministry is regulation of 
Companies under the Companies Act, 1956. The officers appointed 
function in the offices of Registrar of Companies, Official Liquidator 
and Regional Directors as per provisions of the Companies Act 1956. 
There is no provision to confer such powers to private professi onals to 
be engaged on contract basis. In addition, issues such as conflict of 
interest can arise by engaging private professionals on contract basis.”   
 
 
10.   In case of engaging skilled manpower on contractual basis for the field 
offices of the Ministr y, it has been stated by the Ministry in their action taken 
reply that the officers appointed in the offices of Registrar of Companies (RoCs), 
Official Liquidators (OLs) and Regional Director (RDs) functions as per the 
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  and there is no provision to confer such 
powers to private professionals to be engaged on contract basis.   The 

 9 
Companies Bill, 2012 as passed by the Parliament gives statutory status to SFIO.  
Apart from regular induction, SFIO has also been working on p roposals like 
appointment of legal counsels on contract basis to address the issue of shortage 
of skilled manpower.  The process for engaging technically skilled manpower on 
contractual basis for the revamped Market Research & Analysis Unit of the SFIO 
is also stated to have commenced.  The Committee would therefore recommend 
the Ministry to follow a standard policy of engaging skilled / technical manpower 
on contractual basis as support staff to its regular workforce across all offices of 
the Ministry.   
 
        B.          Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 
11. The Committee noted that Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) had been 
proposed to be given statutory status under the Companies Bill, 2012.  However, the  
Committee found to their surprise that the Ministry had not shown the requisite 
seriousness towards the functioning of the SFIO, which had been in existence for 
almost ten years.  It was presently operating at a pathetic vacancy level of 40% at the 
operational level, 90% at the legal staff level and 79% at the support staff level.  The 
primary mode of appointment in SFIO was deputation basis, but the Ministry had made 
no efforts to make deputations terms attractive at SFIO.  Recruitment Rules had also 
not been finalized even then.  The Committee would, therefore, urge the Ministry to take 
immediate steps to address the shortage of manpower so that SFIO was well -equipped 
for the enhanced role it was expected to play after the passage of the Companies Bill, 
2012. 
12. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
 
 “SFIO is on a regular trying its best to fill the vacancies.  For this 
purpose, advertisements were released in 2012 as well as in February, 
2013.  Letters have also been sent to various Government organizations 
for filling up various posts on deputation basis in SFIO. The applications 
received though proper channels have been screened and some 
vacancies are likely to be filled up by the end of June, 2013.  I n addition, 
the process for engaging technically skilled manpower on contract basis 

 10 
for the revamped Market Research & Analysis Unit, has already 
commenced.  The Unit has been entrusted with responsibility of 
developing and implementing the proposed Fraud Prediction Model.” 
 
 
13.      The Committee note that the Market Research & Analysis Unit of SFIO has 
been entrusted with the responsibility of developing and implementing the 
proposed Fraud Prediction Model.   The Steering Committee of the Ministry has 
recommended purchase of IT tools and hiring on contract basis manpower with 
requisite IT skills and experience for operationalizing the proposed Fraud 
Prediction Model.  As IT enabled Early Warning System (EWS) under the Ministry 
is already functioning to sc rutinize financial statements and detect corporate 
frauds, the Committee desire that the Ministry / SFIO should seek to synergise  
the proposed Fraud Prediction Model systemically with the existing Early 
Warning System so as to yield optimum results.  The Committee would also 
suggest that a coordination mechanism should be set up in this regard so that all 
the investigating agencies working under different departments can share data 
on a common platform.  The Committee desire that additional budgetary and 
technological support may also be provided for this purpose.  In the meantime, 
the Committee would like the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to furnish a statement 
of cases detected through the existing Early Warning System and action initiated 
thereafter.    
 
C. National Corporate Governance Policy 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
  
14.   The Committee noted that the Adi Godrej Committee on the Corporate 
Governance had submitted its report in 2012, which was under examination of the 
Ministry. The Committee desire d that the Ministry should consider the report at the 
earliest, and accordingly formulate a National Corporate  Governance Policy including 

 11 
issues relating to corporate delinquency in line with the new company  statute. The 
Committee might be apprised of the action taken report in this regard within one month. 
 
15.     In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
“The Adi Godrej Committee was constituted by the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in 2012 to formulate a po licy document on Corporate 
Governance and its report is under examination and consideration of this 
Ministry. Accordingly, a National Corporate Governance Policy is to be 
formulated after examination.” 
 
 
16. The Committee note that the process of examinati on of the Report of Adi 
Godrej Committee on Corporate Governance has taken an unduly long time as it 
has been pending with the Ministry for more than a year.  It is imperative that a 
clear policy is formulated with regard to Corporate Governance issues, wh ich 
may also be suitably incorporated in the Company Rules.  The Committee would, 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should consider the above said report at the 
earliest, and accordingly formulate a National Corporate  Governance Policy 
including issues relating to corporate delinquency in line with the new company  
statute. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
17.    The Committee in its 55 th Report had desired that the Ministry may review the 
role, functions and scope of the two related profession of Charter ed Accountants and 
Cost Accountants and bring necessary amendments, if required, in their respective 
statues so that the ambiguities and gray areas were duly addressed. The Committee 
observed that the Ministry had not taken any specific measure so far to s treamline the 
functioning of the professional institutes. The Committee noted that the Ministry had not 
taken any steps to ensure that both development and regulation of the professions of 
Chartered Accountants/Cost Accountants/Company Secretaries were not  handled by 
the professional institutes themselves. The Committee urged the Ministry to bring 
necessary amendments in the respective statutes of the professional institutes so that 
these area of concern were addressed at the earliest. 
 

 12 
18.    In their acti on taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
 “The Ministry has taken adequate measures to streamline the 
functioning of the Professional Institutes. The statutes of the three 
Professional Institutes which were enacted many d ecades back, have 
been amended from time to time to meet the changing requirements of 
the professions as well as the expectations of the stakeholders 
concerned. In the winter session of Parliament, 2011, the Acts relating to 
the three Professional Institut es viz. the Chartered Accountants Act, 
1949, The Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and the Cost and Work 
Accountants Act, 1959 have been amended to allow the practitioners of 
the relevant Professional Institutes to form multi disciplinary LLPs. In 
addition, the name of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountant of India 
has also been changed to the Institute of Cost Accountants of India. 
These amendments have come into force with effect from February 1, 
2012. Subsequent to the change in the name of the Institut e of Cost 
Accountants of India, necessary changes in the relevant Rules have 
been carried out in consultation with Legislative Department, Ministry of 
Law & Justice and notified in the Official Gazette vide notification dated 
24th September 2012. Further, a large number of provisions significantly 
enhancing the efficiency, transparency and work culture of the 
professions in performance of their professional and academic roles 
have been incorporated in the Companies‟ Bill, 2012 which has been 
passed by the L ok Sabha and is presently awaiting the consideration of 
the Rajya Sabha. Some of these proposals are as follows:  
 
(i) The disciplinary mechanism will be strengthened by 
establishing a National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA) 
with a mandate to ensure moni toring and compliance of 
accounting and auditing standards and to oversee quality of 
service of professionals and covers areas relating to Audit, 
Accounting, Quality Review Mechanism, Disciplinary 
Mechanism, etc. 
(ii) The term „Key Managerial Personnel‟ recogni zed to fix 
responsibility in relation to a company will, also include 
Company Secretary, the Chief Financial Officer (who is 
generally a CA) and such other officer as may be prescribed. 
(iii) Clause 144 prohibits an auditor of a company to render certain 
other kinds of services. 
(iv) Clause 141 provides for ceiling on number of Audit 
assignments for an auditor. 
(v) The term „Officer who is in default‟ will also include 
Professionals working for the company. 
(vi) Provision for rotation of Auditors. 
(vii) Cost records m andated for companies engaged in production 
of such goods or rendering of such services. The concept of 
„„cost auditing standards‟‟ has been mandated. 
(viii) Internal Audit mandated for bigger companies. 
(ix) Enabling provisions for Vigil mechanism (Whistle Blowing).   
 

 13 
2. The three Professional Institutes i.e. Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India (ICAI), Institute of Cost Accountants of India and 
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) have been established 
under three separate Acts of Parl iament and are autonomous and self 
regulatory bodies engaged in developing and regulating the respective 
professions/professional education in India. Although the professional 
Institutes are self regulatory, the Ministry exercises adequate control in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant Acts to ensure that the 
autonomy of the Institutes does not result in promotion of vested 
interests in the following ways:- 
 
a) The Central Govt. administers the Acts governing the three 
Professional Institutes, and amendments thereon are also made 
depending upon specific requirements of the professions and its 
stakeholders from time to time. The Rules under these Acts are 
also framed by the Central Govt.  
b) The Regulations of the three Professional Institutes under the 
respective Acts are framed and amended with the approval of 
Central Govt.  The Central Government is also empowered to 
issue directions to the Institutes to amend or revoke any 
Regulations earlier made.  
c) Central Govt. nominees are also nominated on the Coun cils of 
the three Professional Institutes. In order to ensure that Govt. 
nominees discharge their duties impartially, members belonging 
to the profession represented by the Institute are not nominated 
as Govt. nominees to the Council of such Institutes.   
d) The Central Government may from time to time issue such 
directions to the Councils of the Institutes, as in the opinion of 
the Central Government are conducive to the fulfillment of the 
objects of this Act and in the discharge of its functions, the 
Council shall be bound to carry out any such directions. The 
Central Government is also empowered to dissolve the Council, 
after satisfying the prescribed conditions, if in its opinion, the 
Council of the respective Professional Institute has persistently 
made de fault in giving effect to the directions of the Central 
Govt. 
e)  Quality Review Boards of the Institutes, with both Govt. 
nominees and nominees of the Councils of the respective 
Institutes have been set up by the Central Government for 
making recommendations  to the Councils with regard to the 
quality of services provided by the members of the profession. 
The Chairpersons of the Boards are also nominated by the 
Central Govt. 
f) Accountability and parliamentary oversight in the functioning of 
the three Institutes is also ensured by providing that all rules 
regulations and notifications made and every notification issued 
under the respective Act shall be laid, in Parliament within 
specified time period.  
g) All the three Professional Institutes are covered by the 
provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005, and they have 

 14 
nominated their own CPIOs who are responsible for complying 
with the provisions of the RTI Act.” 
 
 
19. The Ministry have stated in their action taken reply that necessary 
amendments have been made from  time to time in the respective statutes 
governing the professions of the Chartered Accountants, Company Secretaries 
and Cost Accountants to meet the changing requirements of the profession as 
well as expectation of the stakeholders.  The reply also states that the Companies 
Act 2013 contains many provisions which significantly enhances the efficiency, 
transparency and work culture of these professions.  While taking note of the 
steps taken up by the Ministry in the recent past including the enactment of th e 
new Companies Bill, to streamline the working of the professional institutes, the 
Committee recommend that the spirit of this new legislative framework should be 
carried forward by the rules and regulations which are currently being framed by 
the Ministry.  The proposed rules under the Companies Act, 2013 should ensure 
that the institutions like National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA) to be 
constituted under the new Act has the necessary mandate and independence to 
oversee the quality of the service s of professions associated with it and enforce 
the compliance of the prescribed accounting and auditing standards.   
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
29 November, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
08 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  

 15 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th November, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
8.  Adv. A. Sampath 
9. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
 
12.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
13.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
  
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
 
2.  XX  XX   XX   XX 
XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
                                          The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 16 
Part II 
(1240 hrs. to 1320 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
  
3.  XX  XX   XX   XX 
XX  XX   XX   XX 
  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
Part III 
(1320 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
 
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption :-  
 
(i)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 79 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on „Counterfeit Currency Notes in 
Circulation‟; 
 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 6th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on „Inflation and Price Rise‟; and  
 
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Govern ment on   recommendations 
contained in 71 st Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
   
5.     The Committee adopted the above draft reports without any modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament. 
    
 
6. The Committee decided to hold their next sitting on 5 th December, 2013 subject to 
other exigencies.   
 
          The Committee then adjourned. 

 17 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) OF THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   11   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government  07  63.63 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2, 3,    
7, 8 and  9) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect            
of which replies of the Government have   04  36.37 
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 10 and 11) 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL  0.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
  