STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010 /Bhadra, 1932 (Saka)
24

TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 August, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 August, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010 /Bhadra, 1932 (Saka)

COF No. 24
Price : Rs. 30.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
I. Introductory.................................................................................... 1
II.Amendments to the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949............... 3
(A) Clause 2: Amendment of Section 2 .................................... 3
(B) Clause 3: Amendment of Section 25 of the Act:
Companies not to engage in accountancy ........................ 4
III. Recommendations.......................................................................... 6
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
7 July, 2010, 4 August, 2010 and 26 August, 2010.............. 8
II. The Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010.......... 16

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara*
(iii)
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Raashid Alvi
23. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24. Vacant**
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan
28. Vacant***
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar —Additional Director
3. Smt. B. Visala— Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T. Mathivanan— Senior Executive Assistant
**Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, MP retired on 4 July, 2010.
***Shri S. Anbalagan, MP retired on 29 June, 2010.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Fourth Report
on “The Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010”.
2. The Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010 introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010, was referred to the Committee on
4 May, 2010 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
in consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha under Rule 331E of the
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background note and written
information on various provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
4. Written views/memorandum was received from the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI).
5. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
ICAI on 7 July, 2010. The Committee also took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 4 August, 2010.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting
held on 26 August, 2010.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for appearing before the Committee
and furnishing the material and information which were desired in
connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) for furnishing written views/
memorandum and appearing before the Committee for placing their views.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August, 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(v)

REPORT
I. Introductory
The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is a statutory
body enacted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 for regulation
of the profession of Chartered Accountants in India.
(i) The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949
2. The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 governs the profession of
the chartered accountants. The said Act was amended in 2006 by the
Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2006, inter alia, to enable the
members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India to form multi-
disciplinary firms and offer multi-professional services in a competitive
and commercial manner.
(ii) Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010
3. The Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010, was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010 and referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4 May,
2010 for examination and report thereon. The Bill inter alia, proposes to
amend the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to:—
(i) apply certain provisions of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008 to the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 in order
to allow the members of the professional institute governed
by the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to form the limited
liability partnership and insert new definitions of “firm”,
“partner”, “partnership” and “sole proprietorship” for the
said purpose;
(ii)amend the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 on lines similar
with the provisions of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 so
as to allow the professionals of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India to form partnership with members of such
other recognized professions.
1

4. On the issue of Limited Liability Partnership firms, the Naresh
Chandra Committee on Corporate Audit and Governance which submitted
its report in 2002 had inter alia recommended as under:—
“Related issues regarding the maximum number of partners, number
of audits per partner etc. were discussed and reviewed by the
Committee. ………….the Committee accepted the suggestion of
introducing the concept of ‘limited liability’, as per the prevalent
international norms, in India for partnership firms of professionals.
This would encourage quality talent to be attracted to the profession,
and allow for faster growth and consolidation of firms, by reducing
fear of unlimited liability for all partners. The Committee therefore
recommends that necessary changes in the law be made to allow
for the incorporation/conversion of partnership firms to ‘limited
liability’ firms.”
5. The Limited Liability Partnership Act was enacted in the year
2008 to make provisions for the formation and regulation of limited
liability partnerships and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. The limited liability partnership is an organized form of business
which operates on the basis of an agreement and gives the benefits of
limited liability of a company and the flexibility of a partnership. It will
be a separate legal entity, liable to the full extent of its assets, with the
liability of the partners being limited to their agreed contribution in the
limited liability partnership which may be of tangible or intangible nature
or both tangible and intangible in nature. Any two or more persons
associating for carrying on a lawful business with a view to profit may
set up an LLP.
6. The Committee, apart from taking evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Corporate affairs in connection with the examination
of the Bill, also heard the views of the representatives of the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) on the provisions of the Bill.
The Institute also furnished their written views/suggestions thereon for
consideration of the Committee.
7. The Background note furnished to the Committee on the
Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010, states inter alia:—
“Consultations with the CA institute have been held which have
revealed that if definition of the firm is added to the CA Act it
will enable the members of the CA institutes to form LLPs and take
benefits of the provisions of the LLP Act. This will enlarge the
spectrum of the services provided by the Members of the CA
Institute. It will also ensure the competitiveness of the members
of the professions. Apart from the inclusion of the definition of the
2

firm, some allied definitions like partner, partnership and sole
proprietorship would also be required in the Act and as such have
been included in the proposed Bill.”
II. Amendments to the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949
(A) Clause 2: Amendment of Section 2
8. Section 2 (1) and (2) define and interpret various terms in the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, Clause 2 of the Bill which, inter-alia
seeks to include the definitions of ‘firm, ‘partner’, ‘partnership’ and
‘sole proprietorship’ in section 2 of the Act reads as under:—
“In the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act) in section 2,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ca) “firm” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4 of
the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, and includes,—
(i) the limited liability partnership as defined in clause (n) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act,
2008;
(ii) the sole proprietorship, registered with the Institute;’;
(b) after clause (ea), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(eb) “partner” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4
of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or in clause (q) of sub-section
(1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, as
the case may be;
(ec) “partnership” means—
(A) a partnership as defined in section 4 of the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932; or
(B) a limited liability partnership which has no company as its
partner’;
(c) after clause (ha), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
3

‘(haa) sole proprietorship means an individual who engages himself
in the practice of accountancy or offers to perform services referred
to in clauses (ii) to (iv) of sub-section (2)’;
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) after the words “chartered accountants in practice”, the words
“or in partnership with members of such other recognised
professions as may be prescribed” shall be inserted;
(b) in the Explanation, for the words “a firm of such chartered
accountants”, the words “a firm of such chartered accountants or
firm consisting of one or more chartered accountant and members
of any other professional body having prescribed qualifications”
shall be substituted.
(B) Clause 3: Amendment of Section 25 of the Act : Companies not
to engage in accountancy
9. Section 25(1) of the Act reads as under:—
“No company, whether incorporated in India or elsewhere, shall
practise as chartered accountants.”
Clause 3 of the Bill reads as under:—
“In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the “company” shall include any limited liability partnership which
has company as its partner for the purposes of this section.’. ”
10. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), in their
written memorandum and in the course of personal hearing of the
representatives before the Committee, expressed agreement with the
amendment proposals of the Bill enabling Chartered Accountants to form
Limited Liability Partnership.
11. However, while deposing before the Committee a representative
of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, with specific reference
to the amendments proposed to sub-section (2) of section (2), suggested
an alternate formulation. In this regard, the representative stated:—
“ ….There is another Clause in the first Schedule of the Act, which
clearly mentions, ‘prescribed by the Central Government or Council,
the qualifications’. Here the amendment is with regard to the
4

professional bodies whereas the existing Act says it should have
qualifications. It should not restrict to only professional bodies but
experts can be partners of LLP. For example in the case of forensic
audit we need a forensic expert to be partner of the audit firm.
In case of Management Finance we can have an MBA analyst within
our firm. For this, there is an enabling existing provision available
that he should have a prescribed qualification as per the Council
or Government, instead of the word ‘profession’ specifically
specified in relation to the Chartered Accountants in practice. That
is the only amendment we are proposing. It will give more
weightage to these professional firms. Wherever, we want the
qualifications prescribed by the Government or the Council.
This is in harmony with the existing law and we have already
circulated it.”
12. The alternate formulation of the amendment proposal suggested
by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) reads as under:—
“(ii) in sub-section (2) of Section 2 - Clauses (a) and (b) be
substituted with the following:—
(a) For the words “chartered accountants in practice” the words
“a chartered accountant in practice or such other person who is
a member of any other professional body having such qualifications
as may be prescribed or whose qualifications are recognized by the
Central Government or the Council in terms of Item (4) of
Part-I of First Schedule”, shall be substituted.
(b) In the explanation for the words “a firm of such chartered
accountants” the words “a firm of such chartered accountants or
a firm consisting of one or more chartered accountants and such
other person who is a member of any other professional body having
such qualifications as may be prescribed or whose qualifications are
recognized by the Central Government or the Council in terms of
Item (4) of Part-I of First Schedule” shall be substituted.”
13. In terms of item (4) of Part 1 of the Chartered Accountants Act,
1949, a Chartered Accountant shall be deemed to be guilty of professional
misconduct, if he:—
“(4) enters into partnership, in or outside India, with any person
other than a chartered accountant in practice or such other person
5

who is a member of any other professional body having such
qualifications as may be prescribed, including a resident who but
for his residence abroad would be entitled to be registered as a
member under clause (v) of sub-section (1) of Section 4 or whose
qualifications are recognized by the Central Government or the
Council for the purpose of permitting such partnership.”
14. Asked to give comments on the above suggestion of ICAI, the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs, reply states:—
“The proposed amendment to sub-section (2) of Section 2 in the
CA (Amendment) Bill, 2010 is on the lines of that of existing
provisions of CS Act, 1980 so as to allow professionals of the Institute
to form partnership with members of such other recognized
professions. Similar provisions have been proposed in CWA
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. This is only to harmonise the three statutes.
This issue had already been discussed with Legislative Department
where representatives of ICAI were also present.”
III. Recommendations
15. Way back in 2002, the Naresh Chandra Committee on
Corporate Audit and Governance had recommended making
appropriate legislative changes for enabling the professional group of
chartered accountants to form limited liability partnership firms. The
Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks inter-alia to add
the definitions of ‘firm’, ‘partner’, ‘partnership’ and ‘sole proprietorship’
in the Act so as to enable chartered accountants to take the benefits
of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
16. There is a divergence in the submissions of the ICAI and the
stance of the Ministry in regard to the formulation of the amendment
proposed to sub-section (2) of section (2) under clause 3, which relates
to partnerships of chartered accountants with members of other
professions. Though the amendment proposals of the Bill are stated
to have been framed in consultation with the legislative department
as well as ICAI, the issue of aligning the provision proposed with the
existing stipulations of the Chartered Accountants Act has been placed
6

before the Committee by the ICAI. The Committee while recommending
the Bill for consideration feel it to be essential on the part of the
Ministry to review the proposed amendment to sub-section (2) of section
(2) under clause 3, so as to avoid any ambiguity.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August, 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
7

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th July, 2010 from 1100 hrs.
to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7. Shri Bhatruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri N. Dharam Singh
12. Shri Manicka Tagore
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Raashid Alvi
15. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
8

17. Shri Mahendra Mohan
18. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar —Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan —Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
PART I
(1100 to 1230 hrs.)
*** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
PART II
(1415 to 1430 hrs.)
*** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
PART III
(1430 to 1500 hrs.)
*** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
PART IV
(1500 to 1530 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI)
1. CA. Amarjit Chopra, President, ICAI
2. CA. G. Ramaswamy, Vice-President, ICAI
3. CA. Atul C. Bheda, Council Member, ICAI
4. Shri N.P Singh Joint Secretary, ICAI
The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) in connection with
9

examination of the Chartered Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The
major issues discussed with the representatives included, definition of
‘Management Accounting’, role and functions of cost accountants, the
role of ICAI to propagate management accounting, the reasons why ICAI
is opposed to the proposal of the change of name of the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India to Institute of Cost and Management
Accountants of India etc. The Chairman directed the representatives to
furnish written replies to the queries raised by Members at an early date.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
10

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4th August, 2010 from
1600 hrs. to 1900 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri N. Dharam Singh
10. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
11. Dr. M. Thambidurai
12. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
16. Shri Mahendra Mohan
17. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
11

18. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
19. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar —Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan —Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
PART I
(1600 to 1640 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1. Shri R. Bandyopadhyay, Secretary
2. Shri P.D. Sudhakar, Special Secretary
3. Smt. Renuka Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the Chartered Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010, the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the Cost
and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010.
3. The major issues discussed with the representatives
included, necessity of the proposed amendment Bills, change
proposed in the name of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants
of India to the Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of India,
and consequent change of name of members of the Institute to ‘Cost and
Management Accountants’, distinction in the roles of a Cost and Works
Accountant and a Cost and Management Accountant, nomenclature of
‘Cost and Works Accountants’ in other countries etc. The Chairman
directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the queries raised
by Members within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
12

PART II
(1645 to 1900 hrs.)
4. *** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
13

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th August, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
10. Shri N. Dharam Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
12. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar —Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan —Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
14

2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on the Companies Bill, 2009;
(ii)Draft Report on the Coinage Bill, 2009;
(iii) Draft Report on the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill,
2010;
(iv) Draft Report on the Chartered Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010; and
(v) Draft Report on the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i) with the
modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure* and (ii) and (iv) above
with minor modifications. The Committee adopted the remaining draft
reports without any change.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of the modifications suggested and present all the reports
to Parliament in the current session.
The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours.
*Does not pertain to this Report.
15

APPENDIX II
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill No. XXVIII of 2010
THE CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Chartered Accountants
Act, 1949.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chartered
Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in
section 2,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) after clause (c), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ca) “firm” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932, and includes,—
(i) the limited liability
partnership as defined in clause (n)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Limited Liability Partnership Act,
2008;
Short title
and comm-
encement.
38 of 1949. Amendment
of section 2.
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
16

(ii) the sole proprietorship,
registered with the Institute;’;
(b) after clause (ea), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(eb) “partner” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 or in clause (q) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008, as the case may be;
(ec) “partnership” means—
(A) a partnership as defined in
section 4 of the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932; or
(B) a limited liability partnership
which has no company as its partner;’;
(c) after clause (ha), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(haa) “sole proprietorship” means an
individual who engages himself in the
practice of accountancy or offers to perform
services referred to in clauses (ii) to (iv) of
sub-section (2);’;
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) after the words “chartered
accountants in practice”, the words “or in
partnership with members of such other
recognised professions as may be prescribed”
shall be inserted;
(b) in the Explanation, for the words “a
firm of such chartered accountants”, the
words “a firm of such chartered accountants
or firm consisting of one or more chartered
accountant and members of any other
professional body having prescribed
qualifications” shall be substituted.
9 of 1932.
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
17

Amendment
of section
25.
3.In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation:— For the removal of doubts,
it is hereby declared that the “company” shall
include any limited liability partnership
which has company as its partner for the
purposes of this section.’.
18

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Chartered  Accountants Act, 1949 has been enacted to make
provision for the regulation of the profession of the chartered accountants.
The said Act was amended in 2006 by the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Act, 2006, inter alia, to enable the members of the Institute
of Chartered Accountants of India to form multi-disciplinary firms and
offer multi-professional services in a competitive and commercial manner.
2. Subsequently, the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 has
been enacted to make provisions for the formation and regulation of
limited liability partnerships and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. The limited liability partnership will be a separate
legal entity, liable to the full extent of its assets, with the liability of the
partners being limited to their agreed contribution in the limited liability
partnership which may be of tangible or intangible nature or both tangible
and intangible in nature.
3. It is proposed to extend the benefits of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of chartered accountants under the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 and to amend the provisions of that Act.
4. The Chartered Accountants  (Amendment) Bill, 2010, inter alia,
proposes to amend the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to,—
(i) apply certain provisions of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008 to the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 in order
to allow the members of the professional institute governed
by the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to form the limited
liability partnership and insert new definitions of “firm”,“Partner”,
“partnership” and “sole proprietorship” for the said purpose;
(ii) amend the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 on lines similar
with the provisions of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 so
as to allow the professionals of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India to form partnership with members of
such other recognized professions.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; SALMAN KHURSHID.
The 15 th April, 2010.
19

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 and clause 3 of the Bill seeks to extend the benefits of
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of chartered
accountants under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. The provisions
of the Bill will not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.
20

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 2 of
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 to empower the Council of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India to make regulations for
recognition of other professions with whom members of the Institute can
enter into partnership.
2. The matters in respect of which the said regulations may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill itself.
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
21

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C HARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
ACT, 1949 (38 OF 1949)
** ** ** **
2. (1) in this Act, unless there is anything
repugnant in the subject or context,—
** ** ** **
(2) A member of the Institute shall be
deemed “to be in practice”, when
individually or in partnership with chartered
accountants in practice, he, in consideration
of remuneration received or to be received:—
(i) engages himself in the practice of
accountancy; or
(ii) offers to perform or performs
services involving the audition or
verification of financial transactions,
books, accounts or records, or the
preparation, verification or certification
of financial accounting and related
statements or hold himself out to the
public as an accountant; or
(iii) renders professional services or
assistance in or about matters of principle
or detail relating to accounting
procedure or the recording, presentation
or certification of financial facts or data;
or
(iv) renders such other services as,
in the opinion of the council, are of may
be rendered by a chartered accountant
in practice; and the words “to be in
Interpretation.
22

practice” with their grammatical
variations and cognate expressions shall
be construed accordingly.
Explanation— An associate or a fellow of the
Institute who is a salaried employee of a chartered
accountant in practice or a firm, of such chartered
accountants shall, notwithstanding such
employment, be deemed to be in practice for the
limited purpose of the training of articled
assistants.
** ** ** **
23

RAJYA SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949
_______
(Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of Corporate Affairs)
24