FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on
Finance on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 22.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)


COF No. 48
Price : Rs. 35.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 22
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 24
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 25
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
19 December, 2011 .................................................................... 26
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs....................................................................... 28
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi Chanabasappa
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda

(iv)
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Forty-eighth Report
on action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
the Thirty-seventh Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
2. The Thirty-seventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to
the Hon’ble Speaker on 11th July , 2011 and presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 August, 2011. Replies indicating action taken
on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished
by the Government on 11 October, 2011.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 19 December, 2011.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report of the
Committee is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) deals with action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in their Thirty Seventh Report
on the Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
2 August, 2011.
2. The Report contained 8 recommendations. Action taken notes
have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the report. These have been categorised
as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8
Total: 7
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. 3
Total: 1
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Total: Nil
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Total : Nil
(Chapter V)
3. The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments
contained in Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them
expeditiously, in any case not later than three months of the
presentation of this Report.

2
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Revenue by Renewal charges
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
5. The Committee noted with satisfaction that there had been a
steady increase in the income generated by the Ministry in as much
as an income of Rs. 1038.18 in 2006-07 had risen to Rs. 1493.44 crore
in 2010-11. The Committee had hoped that the Ministry would sustain
this trend while also exploring avenues to augment revenue by way
of annual renewal charges, which would also help in keeping track of
‘vanishing’ companies.
6. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have submitted as follows:—
“(a) This Ministry has enhanced the fee for making an
application for availability of name from Rs. 500/- to
Rs. 1000/- w.e.f. from 24th July , 2011.
(b) The Ministry has introduced the Company Law Settlement
Scheme, 2011 condoning the delay in filing documents with
the Registrar, granting immunity from prosecution and
charging normal filing fee and additional fee of 25% of
actual additional fee payable for filing belated documents
under the Companies Act, 1956 and the rules made
thereunder. It is presumed that the documents will be filed
with MCA pursuant to this Scheme, which might not have
been filed by the companies.”
7. The Committee note with satisfaction that in pursuance to the
recommendation of the Committee to explore avenues to augment
revenue collection, the Ministry have revised the fee payable for
making an application for availability of names from Rs. 500 to
Rs. 1000 w.e.f. 24th July, 2011. In addition, with a view to induce
defaulting companies to opt for filing documents even after missing
the annual/regular stipulated dateline, a policy of providing immunity
from prosecution and charging such companies only 25% of the actual
additional fees (late fees) payable has been introduced. However,
the Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry has
evaded reply to their specific recommendation for levy of annual
charges which could have provided them a perennial source of
revenue, and helped them in tracking the vanishing companies. The

3
Committee are of the considered view that in order to sustain the
trend in revenue collection, the Ministry should put in place a
suitable mechanism or scheme. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
that the Ministry must explore avenues to augment revenue by way
of levying annual charges which will also help in keeping track of
‘vanishing’ companies.
B. Registrar of Companies (RoCs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
8. As per the mandate provided under Section 234 and 234A of
the Companies Act, the Registrar of Companies (RoCs) were required
to scrutinize the Balance Sheets of Companies filed before them.
In this regard, the Standing Committee on Finance in their 5th Report
(2009-10) had recommended that “proper coordination between the
RoCs and the SEBI in regard to technical scrutiny of Balance Sheets”
should be maintained. Similarly, proper coordination would be required
with other regulatory bodies such as the RBI. From the reply furnished
by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Committee gathered that a
Committee was being proposed to be set up under the Chairmanship
of Additional Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs with the
representatives of SEBI to share information gathered out of technical
scrutiny/inspection/investigation done on the companies. While
informing about the work done by the RoCs, the Ministry had
submitted that there were 60,773 cases pending for disposal with the
RoCs as on 31 December, 2010. Since the RoCs were acutely under
staffed, the Committee were at a loss to understand as to how the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs would be able to cater to the 6.84 lakh
active companies and do justice to their expanding mandate. The
Committee therefore, recommended that the Ministry should augment
the cadre strength of the services manning the field posts and also, if
required, engage qualified personnel on deputation or short-term
contracts.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs, inter alia submitted their reply
as stated under:—
“All efforts are being made to fill all vacancies in all grades in the
offices of RoCs, OLs and Regional Director Offices in accordance
with rules and procedures relating to recruitment/promotion.”
9. The Committee, during examination of the Demands for Grants,
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs had made their

4
recommendations (5th Report, 15th LS) on the issue of shortage of in
the Ministry as stated under:—
“The manpower requirement of the Ministry and its field Offices
does not correspond with the huge increase in the number of
companies registered in India.…..Considering the expanding volume
of work, the Committee urged the Ministry to immediately fill up
all the vacant posts and then, if required, also enhance the
sanctioned strength of requisite posts, while also roping in
professionally qualified persons at the lateral level on short term
contract, wherever necessary.”
10. In their action taken reply furnished by the Ministry to the
Committee on 26.03.2010 it was stated as under:—
“The Ministry has taken up the following steps to address the
shortage of manpower requirement of the Ministry and its field
offices:
(i) All out efforts are being made to fill up the existing
vacancies and the matter is vigorously being taken up with
the Union Public Commission and the Staff Selection
Commission;
(ii) The number of vacancies reported for Civil Service
Examination, 2009 for the Indian Corporate Law Service has
been increased from 10 to 20;
(iii) 20 vacancies in the Indian Corporate Law Service have been
reported for Civil Service Examination, 2010;
(iv) To increase the manpower strength and also in roping
professionally qualified persons, the Ministry has proposed
launching of Special Drive to fill up 30 vacancies in the
Indian Corporate Law Service from the professionals viz.
Chartered Accountants, Cost and Works Accountants,
Company Secretaries and Law Graduates etc.
(v) The Department of Personnel and Training in 2001 had
introduced a scheme known as ‘Optimization of Direct
Recruitment to Civilian posts’ which allowed filling up of
only 1/3 vacancies in Direct Recruitment or 1% of the
authorized strength, whichever is less. As a result of this
scheme, the Ministry had to abolish 245 posts in 2005.
Moreover, 284 posts qualify for abolition under the scheme
till 31.03.2009. The matter has been taken up with the
Department of Personnel and Training and the Department

5
of Expenditure to allow the Ministry to continue these posts
so that the shortage of manpower requirement of the
Ministry is addressed;
(vi) The Ministry had undertaken Cadre Review of Indian
Corporate Law Service (Group ‘A’) which resulted in
increase of 60 new posts raising its strength from 231 to
291; and
(vii) The proposal of Cadre Review of Group ‘B’ & Group ‘C’
posts i.e. feeder services of Indian Corporate Law Service
viz., Senior Technical Assistant, Junior Technical Assistant,
Company Prosecutor, Investigating Officer and Statistical
Assistant are being initiated.”
11. The Committee take note of the measures taken by the
Ministry that include increasing the number of vacancies for the
Indian Corporate Law Service from 10 to 20, roping in professionally
qualified persons, cadre review of Indian Corporate Law Service
resulting in increase in number of posts from 231 to 291 and the
proposal to carry out cadre review of group B and C posts. The
Committee, however, feel that these measures are not sufficient as
they will not result in increasing the manpower immediately. The
Ministry’s silence over specific recommendation about hiring
professionals on deputation basis surprises the Committee. The
Committee reiterate their recommendation that efforts be made for
filling the vacancies including selecting professionals on contract/
deputation basis so as to overcome the staff crunch immediately.
C. Competition Commission of India (CCI)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
12. The Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established
with the objectives of preventing activities/commercial practices having
adverse effect on market competition; to promote and sustain
competition in markets; to protect the interest of consumers; and to
ensure freedom of trade. As regards its performance till date since it
became operational on 1 March, 2009, the Committee find that out of
32 cases taken up, 21 cases are pending and out of 50 cases received
from erstwhile MRTPC, 30 cases still remain pending. In this context,
the Committee also gathered that out of 197 posts envisaged to be
filled up in 2010-11, only 96 posts had been filled up so far. The
Committee were unable to comprehend as to how the CCI had been
functioning with minimal personnel, when the Chairman and Members

6
of the Commission were appointed way back in 2009. The Committee
were of the view that if the Ministry had shown the same keenness
and promptness to appoint the staff/personnel just as they had
demonstrated in respect of the Chairman and Members, the
Commission and its attached office viz., the Directorate General could
have been better equipped to deliver results much better than witnessed
so far. The Committee, therefore, urged the Ministry to fill the vacant
posts without further delay and even engage consultants and domain
experts so that the purpose behind the setting up of the Commission
was not defeated. Besides, in view of the wide range of responsibilities
assigned to the Commission, the Committee desired that the Ministry
should draw people from varied backgrounds and experience  viz., Law,
Finance, Administration, Legislation, etc. while appointing members
for the Commission; so as to enable the Commission to arrive at
balanced and equitable views/conclusions.
13. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have submitted as follows:
“The Government has noted the concern expressed by the
Committee with regard to vacancies in the Competition Commission
of India. Right from the beginning the concerted efforts are being
made by the Commission and the Ministry to fill up all the posts.
So far, 95 posts have been filled up on deputation and direct
recruitment basis. Further, eight officers have been selected for
appointment on deputation basis who are likely to join the office
of DG, CCI shortly.
To fill up the remaining vacant posts, the vacancies are being
advertised and applications invited. It may, however, be appreciated
that given the responsibilities attached to these posts care needs to
be taken to ensure induction of persons of adequate experience
and quality which at times entails some extra efforts. It must also
be candidly admitted that responses to advertisement and special
efforts to invite candidatures is often not very encouraging—this
coupled with the need to maintain quality is causing back-log of
unfilled posts for which the Ministry and the Commission assure
to make all out efforts to improve the situation.
It may be added that while appointing Members for the
Commission, the Ministry is already drawing people from varied
backgrounds as per Section 8(2) of the Competition Act, so as to
enable the Commission to arrive at balanced and equitable views/
conclusions.”

7
14. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that only
8 officers have been selected for the office of the Director General
(DG) of the CCI though the number of vacant posts were 102.
According to the Ministry, the need to maintain quality and the
demand for persons with adequate experience and qualification to
fill up the vacant posts has been the factor responsible for back-log
vacancies in the Commission. While declining to accept the reason
adduced by the Ministry for the posts remaining vacant in CCI till
date, the Committee are of the opinion that with a large number of
posts remaining vacant in the Commission, the functioning of the
Commission would certainly be crippled. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate and desire the Ministry to make sustained all out efforts to
fill the vacant posts without further delay so as to ensure smooth
and efficient functioning of the Commission.
15. The Committee are given to understand that appointment of
Members of the Commission is being done as per section 8(2) of the
Competition Act, 2002. In this regard the Committee desire that, in
future the Ministry may also consider person with experience and
background in “legislation” apart from the areas of experience already
specified in the aforesaid provision in order to enlarge the scope of
eligibility meant for the Members of the Commission.
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
16. The Committee further desired that the Ministry should apprise
the Committee of the work done and decisions taken by the CCI to
address the issues currently in their hand viz. sugar prices, hike in air
fares, hike in onion prices, hike in cement prices and cartelization of
gas cylinder prices etc. The Committee would also like the Competition
Commission to remain alive and alert to issues of price-cartelization,
price-rigging and other such market-distorting practices widely
prevalent even in the PSUs today in order to prevent such measures
and to protect the interest of the consumers.
17. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
have submitted as follows:—
“The Competition Commission of India, engages external agencies/
research institutions from time to time for conducting market
studies on various industries/sectors, which (based on information
available in the public domain), do not appear to be functioning
well. The Commission also carries out the performance and conduct
analysis of certain selected sectors internally to identify anti-
competitive trends. The objective of such studies is to identify

8
signs of market distortion or features tending to prevent, restrict
or distort competition in domestic markets where the findings of
such analyses are indicative of violations of the Competition Act,
the Commission initiate appropriate action.
Sections 3 & 4 of the Competition Act, 2002 relating to ‘Anti-
competitive Agreements’ and ‘Abuse of Dominant Position’ were
notified by the Government of India on 20th May, 2009.
Subsequently, the Commission started considering information
received for violation of above stated Sections of the Competition
Act. In addition to this, some cases were also transferred from
Office of DGIR and MRTP Commission under Section 66(6) of the
Competition Act. The Commission also took cognizance of the facts
and material published in various media reports and initiated
suo moto proceedings in some of the important cases keeping in
mind the overall economic growth of the country. Gist of some of
the important cases considered/being considered by the
Commission is given hereunder:
Hike in Cement Prices
Competition Commission of India received certain information
against Cement Manufacturers — one filed by Builders’ Association,
while the other was transferred from DGIR of the erstwhile MRTP
Commission. The complaints alleged unfair trade practices,
controlling prices, limiting production and restricting supplies and
collusive price fixing etc. The Commission got the matters
investigated through the Director General (Investigation). The
investigation reports were considered and been sent to the parties
concerned to file their reply/objections in terms of the provisions
under the Competition Act. Further action is awaited.
Hike in Sugar Prices
After taking cognizance of news reports regarding the alleged
formation of cartels by the Indian Sugar Mills Association and the
National Cooperative Sugar Mills Federation (NCSF) to increase
the ex-factory price 4-6% to the Commission considered the matter
suo moto. After such consideration the Commission was of
prima facie opinion that there is violation of Section 3(3)(b) of the
Competition Act, 2002. The matter was referred to Director General
(Investigation) for further investigation under section 26(1) of the
Competition Act, 2002. The Director General submitted his
investigation report and the matter is under consideration of the
Commission.

9
Hike in Air Fare
Last year there were reports in the media alleging that some
domestic carriers were charging exorbitant fares from passengers
by taking advantage of increased demand. It was, further, alleged
that while the passenger demand had soared, the capacity of the
airlines had not kept pace. Similarly, a number of Aircraft were
kept grounded to encourage a mistake between demand and
availability.
The Commission after preliminary consideration took suo moto
notice and held that prima facie such concerted action amounts a
tacit collusion between the Airlines. The action of Airlines is anti-
competitive and seems to be violative of section 3(3)(b) of the
Competition Act, 2002. The matter was referred to Director General
(Investigation) under Section 26(1) of the Act during December,
2010. Director General submitted his Report on 30th May, 2011
and the matter is still under consideration of the Commission.
Hike in Onion Prices
 In December, 2010, Onion prices rose to Rs. 60-70 per kg. It was
observed that this steep rise was due to ‘hoarding and speculation’.
Media also reported ‘the speculative build up of stocks by traders
could have also led to the unexpected price rise’. The primary
reports/information gathered through various sources revealed that
there appears to be existence of forces and factors other than
demand and supply factors like cartels which are operating in the
market and having appreciable adverse effect on the competition
within the markets in India, which shows the violation of the
section 3 of the Competition Act.
After considering various reports/data, the Commission has come
to the conclusion that there exists a prima facie case which was fit
for taking suo moto action under Section 19 of the Act. As such,
the Commission directed Director General, CCI to conduct
investigation. Director General submitted his report on 11th April,
2011 and the matter is under consideration of the Commission.
Bid Rigging by LPG Gas Cylinder Manufacturers
During October, 2010, Director General, CCI submitted his Report
in a case titled M/s Pankaj Gas Cylinder Ltd. Vs. Indian Oil
Corporation Ltd. The Report of Director General revealed that:
(i) Indian Oil Corporation (PSU) started the process of
procurement of 14.2 Kg. cylinder through tender system
during the year 2001 only;

10
(ii) The bids submitted by bidders were found to be similar/
identical pattern; and
(iii) Director General noted that the cylinder manufacturers have
colluded together, acted like a cartel, fixed the bid rates
which in turn raised the cost of procurement of gas cylinders
by the Indian Oil Corporation.
The Report of Director General prima facie proved that the
manufacturers of LPG cylinders manipulated the bids and procured
orders for supply of 14.2 kg. LPG cylinders by quoting identical
rates in violation of provisions of section 3(3) (d) of the Act.
Accordingly, the Commission, by exercising its powers suo moto
under Section 19 of the Act referred the matter to Director General
for investigation into the matter of ‘bid rigging’ for award of
tenders for procuring 14.2 kg. LPG cylinders by the public sector
gas marketing companies viz., Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOC),
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) and the Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL). The Director General submitted
his Report on 16th May, 2011 which is still under consideration of
the Commission.
Reference received from Central Government
CCI received a reference (information) under Section 19 (1)(b) of
Competition Act, 2002 from Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 6th
May, 2011 stating that the Standing Committee on Finance pointed
out the following facts relating to airfare:
(a) Due to strike of Air India, different Airlines are charging
exorbitant prices for tickets; and
(b) In a normal course also one cannot take tickets online, even
though seats are available and tickets have to be bought at
higher prices near to the date of departure.
Ministry of Corporate Affairs requested the Commission to consider
passing suitable interim orders to provide relief to the public, as
per the provisions of the Act.
Based on the input received from Ministry of Corporate Affairs
and also the feedback provided by Director General, Civil Aviation
referred the matter to the Director General, CCI for investigation
under Section 26(1) of the Act. For passing orders under section
33 of the Act, the Commission decided to direct the concerned

11
domestic airlines viz., Jet Airways, IndiGO, JetLite, Kingfisher,
Spicejet, Air India (Domestic) and Go Air to file their views/
submissions and oral hearing. The matter is under investigation
with Director General, CCI.”
18. The Committee observe from the reply submitted by the
Ministry that CCI has acted mostly after incidence of malpractices/
market-distortions are reported by print/electronic media. The
Committee find that the Commission hardly acquire information
about “mis-happenings” in the market on their own and had the
Commission been alert, it could have initiated investigations well
before the media reported about the anti-competitive and unethical
marketing activities. The Committee are further constrained to note
that even after the DG submitted investigation reports, most of the
cases pertaining to hike in the prices of sugar, airfare, onion etc.
have been kept pending with the Commission for several months
for their consideration. The Committee deeply concerned about the
state of affairs of the CCI and the plight of consumers in the country,
reiterate that the Commission should be proactive to issues of price-
cartelization, price-rigging and other such market-distorting practices
like abuse of dominant position including PSUs and Government
departments/agencies providing public services to protect the interest
of the consumers.
19. The Committee are further constrained to point out that on
the issue of onion prices, farmers are often under the false impression
that export of the item/commodity (onion) is banned. In this regard
the Committee desire that Competition Commission of India (CCI)
may ensure that Export Reserve Price (ERP) is announced before or
during harvesting of the crop, and that adequate awareness campaign
should be made for the farmers by making advertisement in the
local print as well as electronic media so that farmers are not misled
by cartels.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (No. 1)
Budgetary allocation
The Committee note that the year-wise total expenditure (non-
plan) from 2006-07 to 2010-11 were Rs. 122.57 crore, Rs. 113.66 crore,
Rs. 205.46 crore, Rs. 227.00 crore and Rs. 215.61 crore respectively
against budget allocation/estimates of Rs. 145 crore, 185.10 crore,
Rs. 223.00 crore, Rs. 239.05 and Rs. 249.01 crore respectively. This clearly
indicates that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have persistently
reported a shortfall in utilization of budgeted funds under the Non-
Plan head for the last five years. Such a recurring negative trend in
utilization of funds has obviously reduced the budgeting exercise to a
ritual. The reasons advanced by the Ministry are rather routine and
thus not very convincing, particularly considering the recurring nature
of the problem. The Committee therefore observe and suggest the
Ministry to put their systems in order so that the entire budgeting
exercise is taken more seriously and executed with due care and
caution.
Reply of the Government
The budget grant of this Ministry provides for the expenditure on
the Secretariat of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and its field and
attached/subordinates offices all over India under the non-plan head
on Modernization, Computerisation and Networking of Corporate
Affairs (MCA21 e-Governance Project) & its field offices, Investor
Education & Protection Fund (IEPF), infrastructure activities. It also
caters Grants-in-aid-General to Competition Commission of India (CCI).
The Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates are projected on the basis of
the anticipated expenditure proposed by the each budgetary unit of
the Ministry. Shortfall in utilization of the budgeted funds is preliminary
due to fact that the various posts in different grades could not be
filled up in the Competition Commission of India and attached/
subordinate offices. Also the savings under the various object heads
were on account of the strictly enforcing the austerity measures and
following the prescribed ceilings on expenditure.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G.20018/22/2011-BGT,
dated 11.10.2011]

13
Recommendation (No. 2)
The Committee note with satisfaction that there has been a steady
increase in the income generated by the Ministry in as much as an
income of Rs. 1038.18 in 2006-07 has risen to Rs. 1493.44 crore in
2010-11. The Committee hope that the Ministry would sustain this
trend while also exploring avenues to augment revenue by way of
annual renewal charges, which will also help in keeping track of
‘vanishing’ companies.
Reply of the Government
(a) This Ministry has enhanced the fee for making an
application for availability of name from Rs. 500/- to
Rs. 1000/- w.e.f. from 24th July , 2011.
(b) The Ministry has introduced the Company Law Settlement
Scheme, 2011 condoning the delay in filing documents with
the Registrar, granting immunity from prosecution and
charging normal filing fee and additional fee of 25% of
actual additional fee payable for filing belated documents
under the Companies Act, 1956 and the rules made
thereunder. It is presumed that the documents will be filed
with MCA pursuant to this Scheme, which might not have
been filed by the companies.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G.20018/22/2011-BGT,
dated 11.10.2011]
Recommendation (No. 4)
Registrar of Companies (ROCs)
As per the mandate provided under Section 234 and 234A of the
Companies Act, the Registrar of Companies (ROCs) are required to
scrutinize the Balance Sheets of Companies filed before them. In this
regard, the Standing Committee on Finance in their 5th Report
(2009-10) had recommended that ‘proper coordination between the
ROCs and the SEBI in regard to technical scrutiny of Balance Sheets’
should be maintained. Similarly, proper coordination would be required
with other regulatory bodies such as the RBI. From the reply furnished
by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the Committee gather that a
Committee is being proposed to be set up under the Chairmanship of
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs with the
representatives of SEBI to share information gathered out of technical
scrutiny/inspection/investigation done on the companies. While

14
informing about the work done by the ROCs, the Ministry have
submitted that there are 60,773 cases pending for disposal with the
ROCs as on 31 December, 2010. Since the ROCs are acutely under
staffed, the Committee are at a loss to understand as to how the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs will be able to cater to the 6.84 lakh
active companies and do justice to their expanding mandate. The
Committee would therefore recommend that the Ministry should
augment the cadre strength of the services manning the field posts
and also, if required, engage qualified personnel on deputation or
short-term contracts.
Reply of the Government
All efforts are being made to fill all vacancies in all grades in the
offices of ROCs, OLs and Regional Director Offices in accordance with
rules and procedures relating to recruitment/promotion.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G-20018/22/2011-BGT,
dated 11.10.2011]
Recommendation (No. 5)
Early Warning System (EWS)
The Committee are happy to note that the number of risk
parameters under the Early Warning System (EWS) instituted in 2009
to prevent and detect corporate frauds has been enhanced. The
Committee hope that this system of generating ‘early warning alerts’
is nurtured earnestly and followed up rigorously with strict
enforcement. It should also provide an electronic platform for related
agencies like SEBI, RBI, SFIO, Directorate of Enforcement, Income Tax
Department etc. to share valuable information about corporate entities
and governance practices for necessary follow-up within their respective
domain. The Committee would like to emphasise further that the EWS
should also be gainfully utilized to inform and caution investors about
defaulting companies.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs regularly sending information/
extracts of the Scrutiny/inspection/investigation report to the other
regulatory bodies such as SEBI, RBI, Income Tax Department and PF
Authorities etc. The Ministry has also revisited and revised the criteria
for identifying companies under Early Warning System and has
prepared a list of companies of which salient features are given below:—
(i) The companies (listed & unlisted) are first scanned through
five parameters as ‘first filter’;

15
(ii) The set of the companies identified/selected through the
‘first filter’ are examined against a set of another five
parameters for listed and unlisted companies separately as
‘second filter’; and
(iii) Lists of listed and unlisted companies are also generated in
various categories such as (a) disqualification of directors,
(b) companies which failed to repay the matured deposits
and interest thereon, (c) companies having ‘charges’ ( i.e.
incumbencies) but have not filed balance sheets and annual
reports.
Such companies are being examined from the point of view of
‘public interest’. For the purpose of this examination, public interest is
taken to mean companies (i) having accepted deposits have not repaid
matured amount and interest; (ii) having collected money through IPO;
and (iii) having taken secured loan but have not filed their due annual
returns with the ROCs.
About 150 companies is being shortlisted for detailed scrutiny under
Section 234 of the Companies Act, 1956.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G-20018/22/2011-BGT,
dated 11.10.2011]
Recommendation (No. 6)
Investors Education and Protection Fund (IEPF)
The Committee note that the Ministry has established the Investors
Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) to promote investor awareness
and ensure investor protection. They appreciate the various programmes
undertaken by Ministry in this regard by involving professional bodies
such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), the
Institute of Companies Secretaries of India (ICSI) and the Institute of
Cost and Works Accounts of India (ICWAI). The Committee believe
that this is a large task requiring adequate resources for its
accomplishment. The Committee had therefore recommended in their
earlier reports for better utilization of funds by way of conducting
awareness programmes for investors across the country. The Committee
had also recommended for augmenting the corpus of Rs. 5 crore, which
is being allocated for IEPF every year, in view of the magnitude of
the problems faced by vast number of investors located in different
parts of the country. The Committee are surprised that the Ministry
are barely able to spend this amount, let alone increase the allocation.

16
The Committee are therefore constrained to observe that the Ministry
are not treating investor awareness and protection with requisite gravity.
As this is an emerging area of concern with an ever-increasing number
of grievances and widening scope for redressal involving multitudes
of people and organizations, the Committee desire that the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs should not only consider enhancing the corpus of
IEPF but also devise effective methods of communicating with investors
through workshops, seminars, grievance-redressal meetings, net-based
interface etc. In this context, the Committee would also expect the
Ministry to keep a check on companies in coordination with SEBI for
ensuring proper disclosures and transparency while approaching the
investors.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2011-12, the Ministry has decided to entrust
investor awareness programmes primarily to the three professional
institutes — ICSI, ICAI & ICWAI. It is aimed to have around 30 such
programmes in ‘Metros and big cities’ and 1200 programmes in the
State Capitals and District Headquarters by the PIs themselves. The
approved scale of financial allocation for such programmes varies from
Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 30,000 per programme. At towns and District
Headquarters level the Programmes are being organised through
Resource Persons (RPs) to be appointed by the professional institutes
at a unit outlay @ Rs. 5000 each.
It is also proposed to take up media campaigns for the programmes
regularly.
The Committee on IEPF has also decided to conduct an Impact
Assessment Study, jointly with SEBI to ascertain the impact of the
relevant initiatives. The cost for conducting this study will be shared
with SEBI.
Steps have been taken to increase the number of investors education
programme, to improve the quality of such programmes by engaging
the Professional Institutes, to review the efficacy of such programme
by conducting Impact Assessment Study. Besides, the Ministry has
restructured its complaint module on MCA-21 System with a view to
make investor grievance redressal more effective and responsive.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G-20018/22/2011,
dated 11.10.2011]

17
Recommendation (No. 7)
Competition Commission of India (CCI)
The Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established with
the objectives of preventing activities/commercial practices having
adverse effect on market competition; to promote and sustain
competition in markets; to protect the invest of consumers; and to
ensure freedom of trade. As regards its performance till date since it
became operational on 1 March, 2009, the Committee find that out of
32 cases taken up, 21 cases are pending and out of 50 cases received
from erstwhile MRTPC, 30 cases still remain pending. In this context,
the Committee also gather that out of 197 posts envisage to be filled
up in 2010-11, only 96 posts have been filled up so far. The Committee
are unable to comprehend as to how the CCI has been functioning
with minimal personnel, when the Chairman and Members of the
Commission were appointed way back in 2009. The Committee are of
the view that if the Ministry had shown the same keenness and
promptness to appoint the staff/personnel just as they had
demonstrated in respect of the Chairman and Members, the
Commission and its attached office  viz., the Directorate General could
have been better equipped to deliver results much better than witnessed
so far. The Committee would therefore, urge the Ministry to fill the
vacant posts without further delay and even engage consultants and
domain experts so that the purpose behind the setting up of the
Commission is not defeated. Besides, in view of the wide range of
responsibilities assigned to the Commission, the Committee desire that
the Ministry should draw people from varied backgrounds and
experience viz., Law, Finance, Administration, Legislation, etc. while
appointing members for the Commission; so as to enable the
Commission to arrive at balanced and equitable views/conclusions.
Reply of the Government
The Government has noted the concern expressed by the Committee
with regard to vacancies in the Competition Commission of India.
Right from the beginning the concerted efforts are being made by the
Commission and the Ministry to fill up all the posts. So far, 95 posts
have been filled up on deputation and direct recruitment basis. Further,
eight officers have been selected for appointment on deputation basis
who are likely to join the office of DG, CCI shortly.
To fill up the remaining vacant posts, the vacancies are being
advertised and applications invited. It may, however, be appreciated
that given the responsibilities attached to these posts care needs to be

18
taken to ensure induction of persons of adequate experience and quality
which at times entails some extra efforts. It must also be candidly
admitted that responses to advertisement and special efforts to invite
candidatures is often not very encouraging-this coupled with the need
to maintain quality is causing back-log of unfilled posts for which the
Ministry and the Commission assure to make all out efforts to improve
the situation.
It may be added that while appointing Members for the
Commission, the Ministry is already drawing people from varied
backgrounds as per Section 8(2) of the Competition Act, so as to unable
the Commission to arrive at balanced and equitable views/conclusions.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G-20018/22/2011-BGT,
Dated 11.10.2011]
Recommendation (No. 8)
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should apprise the
Committee of the work done and decisions taken by the CCI to address
the issues currently in their hand viz. sugar prices, hike in air fares,
hike in onion prices, hike in cement prices and cartelization of gas
cylinder prices etc. The Committee would also like the Competition
Commission to remain alive and alert to issues of price-cartelization,
price-rigging and other such market-distorting practices widely
prevalent even in the PSUs today in order to prevent such measures
and to protect the interest of the consumers.
Reply of the Government
The Competition Commission of India, engages external agencies/
research institutions from time to time for conducting market studies
on various industries/sectors, which (based on information available
in the public domain), do not appear to be functioning well. The
Commission also carries out the performance and conduct analyses of
certain selected sectors internally to identify anti-competitive trends.
The objective of such studies is to identify signs of market distortion
or features tending to prevent, restrict or distort competition in domestic
markets where the findings of such analyses are indicative of violations
of the Competition Act the Commission initiate appropriate action.
Sections 3 & 4 of the Competition Act, 2002 relating to ‘Anti-
competitive Agreements’ and ‘Abuse of Dominant Position’ were
notified by the Government of India on 20th May, 2009. Subsequently,
the Commission started considering information received for violation

19
of above stated Sections of the Competition Act. In addition to this,
some cases were also transferred from Office of DGIR and MRTP
Commission under Section 66(6) of the Competition Act. The
Commission also took cognizance of the facts and material published
in various media reports and initiated suo moto proceedings in some
of the important cases keeping in mind the overall economic growth
of the country. Gist of some of the important cases considered/being
considered by the Commission is given hereunder:
Hike in Cement Prices
Competition Commission of India received certain information
against Cement Manufacturers — one filed by Builders’ Association,
while the other was transferred from DGIR of the erstwhile MRTP
Commission. The complaints alleged unfair trade practices, controlling
prices, limiting production and restricting supplies and collusive price
fixing etc. The Commission got the matters investigated through the
Director General (Investigation). The investigation reports were
considered and been sent to the parties concerned to file their reply/
objections in terms of the provisions under the Competition Act. Further
action is awaited.
Hike in Sugar Prices
After taking cognizance of news reports regarding the alleged
formation of cartels by the Indian Sugar Mills Association and the
National Cooperative Sugar Mills Federation (NCSF) to increase the
ex-factory price 4-6% to the Commission considered the matter
suo moto . After such consideration the Commission was of prima facie
opinion that there is violation of Section 3(3)(b) of the Competition
Act, 2002. The matter was referred to Director General (Investigation)
for further investigation under Section 26(1) of the Competition Act,
2002. The Director General submitted his investigation report and the
matter is under consideration of the Commission.
Hike in Air Fare
Last year there were reports in the media alleging that some
domestic carriers were charging exorbitant fares from passengers by
taking advantage of increased demand. It was, further, alleged that
while the passenger demand had soared, the capacity of the airlines
had not kept pace. Similarly, a number of Aircraft were kept grounded
to encourage a mistake between demand and availability.
The Commission after preliminary consideration took suo moto
notice and held that prima facie such concerted action amounts a tacit
collusion between the Airlines. The action of Airlines is anti-competitive

20
and seems to be violative of section 3(3)(b) of the Competition Act, 2002.
The matter was referred to Director General (Investigation) under
Section 26(1) of the Act during December, 2010. Director General
submitted his Report on 30th May, 2011 and the matter is still under
consideration of the Commission.
Hike in Onion Prices
In December, 2010, Onion prices rose to Rs. 60-70 per kg. It was
observed that this steep rise was due to ‘hoarding and speculation’.
Media also reported ‘the speculative build up of stocks by traders
could have also led to the unexpected price rise.’ The primary reports/
information gathered through various sources revealed that there
appears to be existence of forces and factors other than demand and
supply factors like cartels which are operating in the market and having
appreciable adverse effect on the competition within the markets in
India, which shows the violation of the section 3 of the Competition
Act.
After considering various reports/data, the Commission has come
to the conclusion that there exists a prima facie case which was fit for
taking suo moto action under Section 19 of the Act. As such, the
Commission directed Director General, CCI to conduct investigation.
Director General submitted his report on 11th April, 2011 and the
matter is under consideration of the Commission.
Bid Rigging by LPG Gas Cylinder Manufacturers
During October, 2010, Director General, CCI submitted his Report
in a case titled M/s. Pankaj Gas Cylinder Ltd. Vs. Indian Oil
Corporation Ltd. The Report of Director General revealed that:—
(i) Indian Oil Corporation (PSU) started the process of
procurement of 14.2 kg. cylinder through tender system
during the year 2001 only;
(ii) The bids submitted by bidders were found to be similar/
identical pattern; and
(iii) Director General noted that the cylinder manufacturers have
colluded together, acted like a cartel, fixed the bid rates
which in turn raised the cost of procurement of gas cylinders
by the Indian Oil Corporation.
The Report of Director General prima facie proved that the
manufacturers of LPG cylinders manipulated the bids and procured
orders for supply of 14.2 kg. LPG cylinders by quoting identical rates
in violation of provisions of section 3(3)(d) of the Act.

21
Accordingly, the Commission, by exercising its powers suo moto
under Section 19 of the Act referred the matter to Director General for
investigation into the matter of ‘bid rigging’ for award of tenders for
procuring 14.2 kg. LPG cylinders by the public sector gas marketing
companies viz., Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOC), Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) and the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation
Ltd. (HPCL). The Director General submitted his Report on 16th May,
2011 which is still under consideration of the Commission.
Reference received from Central Government
CCI received a reference (information) under Section 19 (1)(b) of
Competition Act, 2002 from Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 6th May,
2011 stating that the Standing Committee on Finance pointed out the
following facts relating to air fare:—
(a) Due to strike of Air India, different Airlines are charging
exorbitant prices for tickets; and
(b) In a normal course also one cannot take tickets online, even
though seats are available and tickets have to be bought at
higher prices near to the date of departure.
Ministry of Corporate Affairs requested the Commission to consider
passing suitable interim orders to provide relief to the public, as per
the provisions of the Act.
Based on the input received from Ministry of Corporate Affairs
and also the feedback provided by Director General, Civil Aviation
referred the matter to the Director General, CCI for investigation under
Section 26(1) of the Act. For passing orders under section 33 of the
Act, the Commission decided to direct the concerned domestic airlines
viz., Jet Airways, IndiGO, JetLite, Kingfisher, Spicejet, Air India (Domestic)
and Go Air to file their views/submissions and oral hearing. The matter
is under investigation with Director General, CCI.
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G-20018/22/2011,
dated 11.10.2011]

22
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (No. 3)
Major works, Lands & Building, Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs
(IICA)
The Committee note that there have been wide variations between
the Budget Estimates (BE) (Rs. 30 crore) and Actual Expenditure (AE)
(Rs. 60 crore) in 2008-09 and BE Rs. 34 crore and AE Rs. 75.34 crore
in 2010-11 under detailed Head—Major Works, Lands and Buildings
(IICA). In both the years, the AEs overshot the BEs by twice the
amounts allocated. The Committee understand that the IICA building
and campus at Manesar was scheduled to be completed by May, 2011
with an initial Plan Outlay of Rs. 211 crore. However, such gross
mismatch between the Budget Estimates and Actual Expenditure under
this head of account, where the expenditure incurred has been mainly
for payment of cost of land and construction of building of the Indian
Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) indicates cost overrun, not
anticipated and budgeted for by the Ministry. The Committee would
therefore like the Ministry to apprise them of the extent of cost overrun
that has occurred in this project, while ensuring completion of the
construction of IICA building and campus at the earliest without further
exceeding the estimated outlay. The Committee would expect the
Ministry to exercise greater prudence and financial discipline while
planning and executing such important projects involving large costs.
Reply of the Government
A Plan Scheme with allocation of Rs. 211 crore was approved for
establishment of the IICA. Activities of the establishment were spread
over respective financial years within the Eleventh Plan period,
2007-2012. The Project was to be completed by May, 2011 within the
approved allocation. Requirement of funds for each financial year was
estimated as per the projections given by the executing agency, the
NBCC in consultation with the IIT, Kharagpur (KGP). With these

23
observations, comments on observations of the Committee are offered
as follows:—
2008-09
As against the allocation of Rs. 30.00 crore on the Capital side,
requirement of funds grew up as follows:—
(i) Purchase of land with upward revision of cost consummated
and demand for Rs. 45.00 crore was received from the
HSIIDC.
(ii) Construction activities on the piece of land allotted took off
entailing expenditure of Rs. 15.00 crore.
The accrued expenditure had to be met and could not be put back
as the Institute had to be raised. Hence the requirement of additional
funds from within the approved allocation of Rs. 211.00 crore. It may
be appreciated that since the object of the scheme is establishment of
an entity, the activities could not be halted to ensure restricting
expenditure within the budgetary allocations of each financial year.
2010-2011
Against this Ministry’s demand of Rs. 87.36 crore only an amount
of Rs. 40.00 crore was allocated. Going by the target fixed for
completion, the outgo of the funds was estimated to be Rs. 81.36
crore. The allocation initially made was insufficient and it was
apprehended that this will result in break of continuity of construction,
which in turn will result in cost overrun. Hence, the demand for
additionality over initial allocations. It may be mentioned that the
entire allocation has been exhausted.
It is further submitted that the Project needs to be looked into in
its entirety and not on segmented basis of financial year. Viewed thus,
there are no cost overruns as the Project is the entire amount of
Rs. 211.00 crore allocated for it upto 2011-12 will stand exhausted but
this will be exactly within the ceiling initially approved.
Time over run.
The civil part of the construction of the campus has completed
and from the new campus of the institute has commenced functioning.
 [Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. G-20018/22/2011-BGT,
dated 11.10.2011]

24
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
—NIL—

25
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
   N EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

26
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th December, 2011 from
1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Prem Das Rai
6. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai
9. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Piyush Goyal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up following draft Reports for consideration
and adoption:—
(i) * * * *
(ii) * * * *
(iii) * * * *
(iv) * * * *

27
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at Sl. Nos. (ii) and
(iv) without any modification and those at Sl. Nos. (i), (iii) and (v)
with minor modifications. The Committee authorised the Chairman to
finalise the Reports in the light of the modifications suggested and
present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

28
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SEVENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2011-2012) OF THE MINISTRY OF
CORPORATE AFFAIRS
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations 8
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 7 87.50
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4,
5, 6, 7 and 8)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 1 12.50
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect Nil 0.00
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 0.00
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited