FORTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2011
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 13.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)


COF No. 43
Price : Rs. 80.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
1. Background ................................................................................... 1
(i) The basic features of the Bill ........................................ 1
(ii) Comparative Statement of provisions of the
Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 vis-a-vis
the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011 ............... 2
(iii) Additional amendments in the Banking Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 which were not part of the
Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 ............ 5
(iv) Rationale for bringing the amendments ..................... 6
2. (A) Banking Mergers to remain outside the purview
of Competition Commission of India ......................... 7
(B) Voting Rights ..................................................................... 9
(C) Depositor Education and Awareness Fund................ 12
(D) Definition of Associated Enterprises ............................ 14
(E) Supersession of Board of Directors of Banking
Company—Appointment of Administrator ................ 16
A
PPENDICES
I. Note of Dissent submitted by Shri Moinul Hassan, MP ... 18
II. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
14 July, 2011, 29 July, 2011 and 8 December, 2011 ........... 19
III. The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011 ........................ 20
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi Chanabasappa
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda

(iv)
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Forty-third Report on
the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
2. The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011, introduced in
Lok Sabha on 22 March, 2011 was referred to the Committee on
29 March, 2011 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Reserve Bank
of India, State Bank of India, Indian Banks Association, Bank of Baroda,
Syndicate Bank, Canara Bank, Vijaya Bank, Indian Bank, Corporation
Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce, Bank of India, ICICI Bank, IDBI
Bank, Indus Ind Bank, Bank Employees’ Federation of India (BEFI),
All India Bank Employees’ Association (AIBEA), All India Bank Officers’
Association (AIBOA), and All India Bank Officers’ Confederation
(AIBOC).
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 14 July, 2011 took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Financial Services) and Indian Banks’ Association (IBA).
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 8 December, 2011
considered and adopted this Report.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) and the
representatives of Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information
which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Reserve
Bank of India, State Bank of India, Bank of Baroda, Syndicate Bank,
Canara Bank, Vijaya Bank, Indian Bank, Corporation Bank, Oriental Bank
of Commerce, Bank of India, ICICI Bank, IDBI Bank, Indus Ind Bank,

Bank Employees’ Federation of India (BEFI), All India Bank Employees’
Association (AIBEA), All India Bank Officers’ Association (AIBOA),
and All India Bank Officers‘ Confederation (AIBOC) for placing before
them their considered views on the Bill in the form of memoranda.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
   N EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
09 December, 2011 Chairman,
18 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Background
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 being the law relating to banking
has been in force for more than six decades. It, inter alia, empowers
the Reserve Bank to regulate and supervise the banking sector. The
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has asked the Government to move certain
legislative amendments to not only develop the banking sector in India,
but also strengthen its regulatory powers. The legislative amendments
in the Bill relating to strengthening of RBI‘s regulatory and supervisory
powers are thus proposed by way of amendments to the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949. Further, other consequential amendments are also
proposed in Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970 and 1980 to grant greater flexibility to
nationalised banks in raising capital to meet the requirements of
expanding banking business.
2. The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 (72 of 2005)
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 13th May, 2005 to strengthen
RBI‘s supervisory and regulatory powers over the banking sector. The
Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for examination
and report thereon in the year 2005 and based on the recommendations
of the Standing Committee, the Government decided to move official
amendments to the Bill in the Lok Sabha, but the Bill could not be
taken up for consideration and passing in the 14th Lok Sabha and
after the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, the Bill lapsed.
3. The present Bill inter alia incorporates certain provisions of the
Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005.
(i) The basic features of the Bill
4. The salient features of the Bill are as follows:
•T o exempt bank mergers from scrutiny of the Competition
Commission of India;
•T o enable banking companies to issue preference shares
subject to regulatory guidelines by the RBI;
•T o remove the restrictions on voting rights for private banks
and raise the ceiling to 10% for public sector banks on par
with State Bank of India;

2
•T o create a Depositor Education and Awareness Fund by
utilising the inoperative deposit accounts;
•T o provide prior approval of RBI for acquisition of 5% or
more of shares or voting rights in a banking company by
any person and empowering RBI to impose such conditions
as it deems fit in this regard;
•T o empower RBI to collect information and inspect associate
enterprises of banking companies;
•T o empowering RBI to supersede the Board of Directors of
banking company and appointment of administrator till
alternate arrangements are made;
•T o provide for primary cooperative societies to carry on the
business of banking only after obtaining a license from RBI;
•T o provide for special audit of cooperative banks at instance
of RBI by extending applicability of section 30 to them; and
•T o enable the nationalised banks to raise capital through
“bonus” and “rights” issue and also enable them to increase
or decrease the authorised capital with approval from the
Government and RBI without being limited by the ceiling
of Rs. 3000 crore under the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980.
(ii) Comparative Statement of provisions of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 vis-a-vis the Banking Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2011
5. The provisions of the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011
incorporate almost all the recommendations/amendments suggested
by the Standing Committee on Finance in its 26th Report on the
Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 with suitable modifications
required in the present day circumstances and other consequential
amendments in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The tabular statement
given below shows in detail the recommendations of the Standing
Committee on Finance in its 26th Report on the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 and how these have been incorporated in the
Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011. The table also gives in detail
additional amendments which were not part of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005.

3
Comparative Statement indicating provisions as originally proposed
in the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the
Recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Finance and
incorporation of the Recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Finance in the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
Clause 3
Section 12
(i) For clause (ii), the following
clause shall be substituted,
namely:-
“(ii) that notwithstanding
anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956, the
capital of such banking
company consists of—
(a) ordinary or equity shares,
and
(b) Preference shares issued
in accordance with the
guidelines framed by the
Reserve Bank specifying
the class of, and the
terms and conditions
subject to which, the
preference shares may be
issued;
Provided that no holder
of the preference share
issued by the company
shall be entitled to
exercise the voting right
specified in clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section
87 of the Companies Act,
1956”;
The standing Committee on
Finance observed that the
Government may consider
bringing in such changes in the
proposed provisions to also
clearly indicate the fact that the
extent to which a banking
company may issue preference
shares of a particular
description  would be specified
by the Reserve Bank.
Clause 4 of the Bill incorporates
the recommendations of the
Standing Committee on
Finance as follows:
4. In section 12 of the principal
Act, in subsection (1),—
(i) for clause (ii), the following
clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(ii) that, notwithstanding
anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956, the
capital of such banking
company consists of—
(a) equity shares only, or
(b) equity shares and preference
shares:
Provided that the issue of
preference share shall be in
accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank
specifying the class of
preference shares, the extent of
issue of each class of such
preference shares, (whether
perpetual or irredeemable or
Provision in the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill,
2005
Recommendations of the
Standing Committee on
Finance
Incorporation of the
recommendation of the
Standing Committee on
Finance in the Banking Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
12 3

4
12 3
The Committee, recommended
that clause 12 B (6) be
amended suitably to specify in
clear terms that the decision of
either accepting or rejecting an
application for acquisition of
shares under sub-section (1) of
Section 12B will necessarily be
taken and conveyed by the
Reserve Bank within the
stipulated period of 90 days.
The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that
instead of pursuing the present
(iii) The proviso shall be
omitted.
(iv) Sub-section (2) shall be
omitted.”
Clause 4
Section: Sub-section (6) of 12B
(6) Every application made
under sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to have been granted,
unless before the expiry of a
period of ninety days from the
date on which the application
was received by the Reserve
Bank, it communicates to the
applicant that the approval
applied for has not been
granted:
Provided that in computing the
period of ninety days, the
period taken by the applicant
for furnishing the information
called for by the Reserve Bank
shall be executed.
Clause 5
Section: 20
“(6) The Reserve Bank may,
subject to such conditions as
may be specified, grant to any
redeemable), and the terms
and conditions subject to
which each class of preference
shares may be issued: Provided
further that no holder of the
preference share, issued by the
company, shall be “entitled to
exercise the voting right
specified in clause (b) of
subsection (2) of section 87 of
the Companies Act, 1956”;
(ii) the proviso shall be
omitted;
(iii) sub-section (2) shall be
omitted.
Sub-clause (6) of Clause 12B of
the Bill is as follows:
(6) The decision of the Reserve
Bank on the application made
under sub-section (1) shall be
taken within a period of ninety
days from the date of receipt
of the application by the
Reserve Bank:
Provided that in computing the
period of ninety days, the
period taken by the applicant
for furnishing the information
called for by the Reserve Bank
shall be excluded.
There is no such proposal in
the present Bill to allow
exemption from the provisions

5
12 3
banking company exemption
from the provisions of this
section in regard to any
restriction on entering into any
commitment for granting any
loan or advance to any
company referred to in sub-
clause (iii) of clause (b) of
subsection (1). ”
Clause 8
Section: 36 ACA
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on
supersession of Board of
Directors of the Banking
company under sub-section (1),
appoint an Administrator for
such period as it may
determine.
(5) The Reserve Bank may
constitute a committee of three
or more persons who have
experience in law, finance,
banking, administration or
accountancy to assist the
Administrator in the discharge
of his duties.
proposal to ease the
restrictions, the Government
should reintroduce the
proposals made in the earlier
Bill of 2003, to specifically
debar banks from granting any
loan or advance to relatives of
Directors on their Boards and
prohibit “connected lending”.
Though the Ministry has
informed that selection of
Administrator would be from
persons having experience in
law, finance, banking,
administration or accountancy,
the Committee feels that the
qualifications required to be
met should be confined to
experience in the fields of law,
finance, banking and
accountancy only and no
bureaucrat should be chosen
for the assignment. The
Committee, accordingly ,
recommends that appropriate
changes be made in the
provisions to indicate the
qualifications of the
administrator.
of the section 20 which
prohibits “connected lending.”
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 11 of
the Bill provides for
appointment of an
Administrator for a banking
company whose Board of
Directors has been superseded
in certain cases by Reserve
Bank.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on
supersession of the Board of
Directors of the banking
company under subsection (1)
appoint in consultation with
the Central Government for
such period as it may
determine, an Administrator
(not being an officer of the
Central Government or a State
Government) who has
experience in law, finance,
banking, economics or
accountancy.
(iii) Additional amendments in the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2011 which were not part of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005
New Section Provision
     1 2
2A To exempt matters relating to
amalgamation, reconstruction, transfer,
reconstitution of acquisition of Banking
companies from the applicability of the
provisions of the Companies Act, 2002.

6
Amendment of Section 13 To amend Section 13 to relax the ceiling
on commission, brokerage, discount and
remuneration for issue of shares such
that this ceiling is fixed with reference
to the price at which the shares are
issued instead of the paid up value.
26A To create a Depositor Education and
Awareness Fund to takeover inoperative
deposit accounts of banks which have
not been operated for more than
10 years and to provide for mode of
operation of the Fund to be regulated
by Reserve Bank.
Amendments of Sections To increase the amount of penalty for
46 and 47A violations of the Act.
Amendment of section 3 of To grant additional flexibility to
the Banking Companies nationalised banks to raise capital.
(Acquisition and Transfer
of Undertakings) Act,
1970/1980.
(iv) Rationale for bringing the amendments
7. • Certain amendments have been proposed to the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 to not only develop the banking sector
in India, but also strengthen its regulatory powers.
• Some of the regulatory powers, such as, power of prior
approval to shareholding of 5% or more to only “fit and
proper” shareholders of private banks, power of supersession
of board of private sector banks and consolidated
supervision over “associates” and “subsidiaries” of banking
companies, may be required for grant of new banking
licenses to private sector banks (including Industrial Houses
and Subsidiary of holding companies) by RBI.
• The voting rights of shareholders of private sector banks
would be equal to that of shareholding rights. This, coupled
with the power to issue preference shares, would enable
the private sector banks to access capital for further
development of banking business.
• The exemption of bank mergers etc. from the scrutiny of
the Competition Commission of India (CCI) would allow
   1 2

7
RBI to approve bank mergers in public/depositors’ interest,
in the interest of the banking system in India and to secure
the proper management of the banking company in a timely
manner without waiting for approval of the CCI.
• The additional flexibility proposed to be granted to
nationalised banks would allow them to raise regulatory
capital to meet the growing business requirements.
8. The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was introduced in
Lok Sabha on 22 March, 2011 and referred to Standing Committee on
Finance for examination and report on 24 March, 2011. The Committee
invited views/suggestions of various banks, RBI and employees
associations on the various/provisions of the Bill. They also took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Financial Services) on the amendment proposals of the Bill. After
their deliberations, the Committee have approved the Bill with certain
modifications and comments as brought out in succeeding paras.
(A) Banking Mergers to remain outside the purview of Competition
Commission of India
9. Clause 2 of the Bill proposes insertion of a new Section after
Section 2 of the principal Act i.e. the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
which reads as below:
“After section 2 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (hereinafter
in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act), the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“2A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section
2, nothing contained in the Competition Act, 2002 shall apply to
any banking company, the State Bank of India, any subsidiary
bank, any corresponding new bank or any regional rural bank or
co-operative bank or multi-state co-operative bank in respect of
the matters relating to amalgamation, merger, reconstruction,
transfer, reconstitution or acquisition under—
(i) this Act;
(ii) the State Bank of India Act, 1955;
(iii) the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959;
(iv) the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970;
(v) the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976;
(vi) the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980;

8
(vii) the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002; and
(viii) any State law relating to co-operative societies.”
10. Justifying the above proposal, the representatives of the
Department of Financial Services submitted inter-alia as under:
“Banking is some kind of an entity and the trust of people on the
banking system is paramount. There are times when decisions have
to be taken very quickly. Competition Commission‘s procedures
gives sometime for scrutiny and for decision to be taken. Our
financial sector in some sense is getting strengthened and it would
take sometime to find them as quick to be US or EU kind of a
system. So after great deliberations the Government took the view
that we will keep the mergers and acquisitions of banks with the
RBI. Obviously, when time demands, we will revisit. For the time
being, the Government‘s careful consideration is that it remains
with the RBI so that we are in a position to ensure the safety,
security, trust and confidence of people in the banking system are
maintained. Today, until the financial system becomes very strong
we need to ensure that the depositors, the customers and
stakeholders in the system retain their faith in the financial system
of the Government. So, the best way is 16 to keep it within the
confines of the Reserve Bank of India. Otherwise, all issues would
be published, everything would come into public domain, people
would think this is unsafe, and the confidence in the system would
be shaken and it would become a run on the bank, not only on
one but on other banks also. So, a kind of stability should be
provided.”
11. Further on this issue, they elaborated as follows:
“There is a procedure under the existing Competition Act for a
certain period of time when application is given should be in the
public domain, some investigation has to be made, after
investigation, the same has to be proposed to the Commission
Members; they have to scrutinize—it can take a good amount of
time.”
“Hon’ble Members are aware, I know, that certain mergers have
been done with an overnight kind of a focus and it has stood the
test of time because the confidence of the people in the financial
system got restored as a result of such actions were taken. So, that
is the reason. Let me look at the NPAs, the financial stability,
those kinds of things-unless we come to that mature level, it will
take some more time to get into that.”
12. The Committee, while supporting the Government’s proposal
to keep bank mergers etc., outside the purview of Competition
Commission of India for the time being, would recommend that

9
this exemption should be considered as a special case and an
expedient measure to be revisited in due course in the light of
experience gained by both the regulators in question, namely the
RBI and the Competition Commission of India. This however does
not in any manner convey the Committee’s views on mergers or
acquisition policy in banking sector as such, which is an issue
meriting a separate discourse.
(B) Voting Rights
13. Clause 4 of the Bill proposes amendment of Section 12 of the
principal Act i.e. the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which includes
omission of the sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Act which reads as
below:-
“No person holding shares in a banking company shall, in respect
of any shares held by him, exercise voting rights on poll in excess
of ten per cent of the total voting rights of all the shareholders of
the banking company”.
Clause 5 of the Bill also proposes insertion of a new Section
after Section 12A of the principal Act which inter-alia reads as
below:
“12B. (1) No person (hereinafter referred to as “the applicant”)
shall, except with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank,
on an application being made, acquire or agree to acquire,
directly or indirectly, by himself or acting in concert with any
other person, shares of a banking company or voting rights
therein, which acquisition taken together with shares and voting
rights, if any, held by him or his relative or associate enterprise
or person acting in concert with him, makes the applicant to
hold five per cent or more of the paid-up share capital of such
banking company or entitles him to exercise five per cent or
more of the voting rights in such banking company.”
(4) The approval for acquisition of shares may be subject to
such conditions as the Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose,
including a condition that any further acquisition of shares shall
require prior approval of the Reserve Bank and that the
applicant continues to be a fit and proper person to hold the
shares or voting rights.
(5) Before issuing or allotting any share to any person or
registering the transfer of shares in the name of any person,
the banking company shall ensure that the requirements of sub-
section (i) are complied with by that person and where the
acquisition is with the approval of the Reserve Bank, the
banking company shall further ensure that the conditions
imposed under sub-section (4), if any, of such approval are
fulfilled.

10
(8) The Reserve Bank may, if it is satisfied that any person or
persons acting in concert with him holding shares or voting
rights in excess of five per cent of the total voting rights of all
the shareholders of the banking company, are not fit and proper
to hold such shares or voting rights, pass an order directing
that such person or persons acting in concert with him shall
not, in the aggregate, exercise voting rights on poll in excess of
five per cent. of the total voting rights of all the shareholders
of the banking company.
14. In their 26th Report on the earlier Bill of 2005, the Committee
vide para 27 had made their observation on the issue of proportionate
voting rights as reproduced hereunder:
“The Committee note that placing a limitation on the exercise of
voting rights of share holders of private sector banks, which stands
at 10% at present, was necessitated owing to the likely problems
of credit concentration and credit diversion that had beset the
banking system prior to nationalization. The proposal of the present
Bill to do away with the restrictions and permit proportionate
voting rights to the promoters/shareholders is in consonance with
the principles of Company Law. While addressing the issue of
impact of the proposal to do away with the restrictions on voting
rights as contained in the earlier Bill that lapsed viz., the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2003, the Committee had, in the
related report (Forty-Seventh Report; Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
inter alia observed that the move would pave way for a process of
consolidation in Indian private banks and also lead to setting up
of subsidiaries of foreign banks. The Committee reiterate the
opinion expressed in the earlier report that allowing proportionate
voting rights to shareholders would provide greater opportunities
for investors. The Committee, however, note that the main concerns
relating to the proposals to do away with the restrictions presently
applicable on exercise of voting rights centered on the possibility
of concentration of power or shareholding in the hands of a single
entity or a conglomerate. The legal and regulatory measures
available, or proposed, to address such concerns, as informed by
the Ministry include, the move to incorporate Section 12B in the
principal Act as per which acquisition of 5% or more of
shareholding in a banking company would require the prior
approval of Reserve Bank; the ceiling limits applicable on foreign
holding in banks; and mandatory requirement of acknowledgement
of the Reserve Bank for effecting any transfer of shareholding in
excess of 5%. The Committee trust and hope that the Reserve
Bank would ensure that the legal and regulatory mechanism is
adequate and complied with strictly so that no scope is left for
possible misuse of the provisions relating to permitting
proportionate voting rights to shareholders.”

11
15. Explaining the logic of lifting the ceiling on voting rights in
respect of private sector banks, the representatives of the Ministry
submitted as under:
“The removal off restrictions on voting rights on the shares of
private sector banks would facilitate them in raising regulatory
capital from the capital market as the shareholders would like to
have appropriate control on the management of the banking
company. The public sector banks have shareholding restrictions
while private sector banks have no such restrictions. So, both
categories of banks are not on the same footing. For example,
while foreign investment upto 74% of the shareholding is permitted
in the case of private sector banks, the foreign investment ceiling
for public sector banks is 20% of the shareholding. Further, the
Government shareholding in public sector bank by definition cannot
go below 51%, whereas in private sector banks, there is no such
restriction. In view of the different shareholding restrictions for
private sector banks vis-a-vis public sector banks, it is not
appropriate to remove the restriction on voting rights for public
sector banks. On the other hand, since private sector banks would
be constantly in need of raising regulatory capital from the Capital
Market on their own, their shares should appear to be attractive
for prospective investors lest they should avoid investment in such
banks.”
16. They further clarified the position on this issue as below:-
“There are four sets of legislations that basically cover all banking
activity in the country. As far as public sector banks are concerned,
there are two legislations; the Acquisition Act of 1970 and the
Acquisition Act of 1980. In both these acts, there is a restriction of
voting rights to only one per cent, irrespective of the number of
shares held by an individual. It is sought by this Bill to increase
that one per cent to ten per cent. So, we are enhancing the limit
and bringing it at par with the State Bank of India where it is ten
per cent. So, it increases from current one per cent to ten per cent.
All public sector banks and State Banks will now have the ten per
cent clause. As far as the Banking Regulation Act, 1940 is concerned,
which primarily deals with the licensing and other issues of private
banks, there is a current limit of ten per cent of the voting rights.
The limit is sought to be removed. Now, in case of private sector
banks, it will be equivalent to the number of shares.”
17. On the issue of non-voting rights, the representatives of Ministry
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) expressed their view as
under:—
“It is an issue which needs serious examination. One of the legal
feedbacks that we have got is that introduction of the concept of
non-voting rights would require a change in the basic structure of

12
the Banking Regulation Act and the Acquisition and Nationalisation
Acts because the nature of government holding or public sector
holding has been defined in terms of shareholding and not voting
rights per se.”
18. With regard to the proposal for making the voting rights in
private sector banks proportionate to shareholding, while removing
the existing ceiling of 10 percent, the Committee feel that the
Ministry may consider increasing the limit only to 26% from the
existing 10% inorder to keep a balance between conflicting factors
underpinning the decisio, namely concentration of economic power/
control and promotion of corporate democracy. The Committee would
also reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Reserve Bank of
India must ensure that the regulatory mechanism is adequate and is
strictly complied with so that no scope is left for possible misuse of
this provision. As Reserve Bank of India has been entrusted with
the mandate to grant approval for acquisitions, transfer, mergers etc.
in the banking sector, the Committee would expect that the Reserve
Bank of India would conduct due diligence of ‘fit and proper’
persons/entities (as per sub-clause 8 of Clause 5) and take sufficient
safeguards while stipulating conditions as to credentials, source of
funds, track record, financial inclusion etc. before granting approvals
under this clause.
19. The Committee would also like the Government to consider
the merits of issuing non-voting shares as an avenue to expand the
capital base of banks without allowing concentration of management
control in a few hands and which would also enable them to grow
faster.
(C) Depositor Education and Awareness Fund
20. Clause 9 of the Bill proposes insertion of a new Section after
Section 26 of the principal Act which reads as below:—
“After section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
26A. (1) The Reserve Bank shall establish a Fund to be called the
‘Depositor Education and Awareness Fund’ (hereafter in this section
referred to as the “Fund”).
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund the amount to the credit
of any account in India with a banking company which has not
been operated upon for a period of ten years or any deposit or
any amount remaining unclaimed for more than ten years, within
a period of three months from the expiry of the said period of ten
years:

13
Providing that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
prevent a depositor or any other claimant to claim his deposit
or unclaimed amount or operate his account or deposit account
from or with the banking company after the expiry of said
period of ten years and such banking company shall be liable
to repay such deposit or amount at such rate of interest as
may be specified by the Reserve Bank in this behalf.
(3) Where the banking company has paid outstanding amount
referred to in sub-section (2) or allowed operation of such account
or deposit, such banking company may apply for refund of such
amount in such manner as may be specified by the authority or
committee referred to in sub-section (5).
(4) The Fund shall be utilised for promotion of depositors' interests
and for such other purposes as may be specified by the Reserve
Bank from time to time.
(5) The Reserve Bank shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify an authority or committee, with such members as the
Reserve Bank may appoint, to administer the Fund, and to maintain
separate accounts and other relevant records in relation to the
Fund in such forms as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(6) It shall be competent for the authority or committee appointed
under sub-section (5) to spend moneys out of the Fund for carrying
out the objects for which the Fund has been established”.
21. On the operation of Depositor Education and Awareness Fund
and settlement of accounts beyond 10 years, the representatives of the
Ministry stated as under:—
“This is the liability of a bank. That liability cannot be quashed.
Even after 10 years a rightful person were to make a claim money
has to be paid by the bank”.
On this issue, the representatives of the RBI clarified that:—
“We have issued detailed instructions to banks that wherever they
find inoperative type of accounts they should write to customer in
the last available address and try to follow it up. Also in the new
accounts we are always telling that nomination facility is a must
so that the legal heirs can easily excess the funds”.
22. The Committee desire that the proposed Depositor Education
and Awareness Fund should be created without compromising the
rights and claims of depositors or their legal heirs, who should be
able to secure their claims without difficulty. Depositors’ legal heirs
should be informed before transfer of funds to Depositor Education
Protection Fund. Further, it should be amply clarified that even after

14
transfer to the fund, the bank would be liable to repay with interest
claims of depositors within a period of one month of claim. RBI
should also be mandated to refund the claimed amount under the
fund immediately on demand from the concerned bank. In this
context, the Government may also consider incorporating a similar
provision for determining the fate of unclaimed articles under safe
custody of the banking company or lying in the lockers, which have
not been operated for more than certain period of time.
23. With regard to the issue that the Depositors Education and
Awareness Fund shall be utilized for promotion of depositors interest
and for “such other purposes” as may be specified by RBI from time
to time as mentioned in sub-clause 4 of Clause 26 (a), the
representatives of IBA explained the rationale as:—
“The other purpose will take colour from the provisions of the
Act. They will not be able to go beyond the purposes for which
it is meant. For education of the depositor and awareness of the
depositors, it can be used because the substantive provisions would
restrict the other purpose for which it can be used.”
24. The Committee are of the view that the words “Other
purpose” used in the Clause is too wide and broad and may
needlessly lead to ambiguities on the deployment of funds. The
Committee would therefore recommend that these words should be
replaced with the words “incidental or ancillary to the promotion of
depositor interest”. Amendments may thus be made accordingly.
(D) Definition of Associated Enterprises
25. Clause 10 of the Bill proposes insertion of a new Section
after Section 29 of the principal Act which reads as below:—
“After section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be inserted, namely:—
29A. (1) The Reserve Bank may, at any time, direct a banking
company to annex to its financial statements or furnish to it
separately, within such time and at such intervals as may be
specified by the Reserve Bank, such statements and information
relating to the business or affairs of any associate enterprise of the
banking company as the Reserve Bank may consider necessary or
expedient to obtain for the purpose of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
Companies Act, 1956, the Reserve Bank may, at any time, cause an
inspection to be made of any associate enterprise of a banking
company and its books of account by one or more of its officers
or employees or other persons.

15
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) and (3) of section 35 shall
apply mutatis mutandis to the inspection under this section.
Explanation. —“associate enterprise” in relation to a banking
company includes an enterprise which—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary company of the
banking company; or
(ii) is a joint venture of the banking company; or
(iii) is a subsidiary company or a joint venture of the holding
company of the banking company; or
(iv) controls the composition of the Board of Directors or other
body governing the banking company; or
(v) exercises, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, significant
influence on the banking company in taking financial or
policy decisions; or
(vi) is able to obtain economic benefits from the activities of the
banking company.”
26. As regards proposed definition of an “associated enterprises”
of a banking company, the representatives of Department of Financial
Services deposed as under:—
“One holding company can have many associated companies; they
may also have a banking company. The point we are trying to say
is that we want to avoid the risk of the holding companies seeping
through the associated company into the banking company. When
we have to have new banks, the regulatory machinery of RBI has
to be beefed up. There is no way it can be done otherwise. RBI
will find ways of doing it. It is not necessary that they add on to
staff. There are very many ways in which this can be done but
ultimate responsibility is only with the RBI. RBI can take a view
as to how they would like to regulate the bank. So it is left to
their own knowledge and experience.”
27. Considering the wide scope and amplitude proposed in the
definition of “associated enterprises” of a banking company, the
Committee would expect that RBI’s regulatory machinery would be
adequately beefed up in view of their expanding role and augmented
functions as proposed in the Bill. However, the Committee believe
that an elaborate and expansive explanation as proposed in the Clause
is superfluous, as the main clause by itself ensures adequate risk
management of “associated enterprises” by RBI. The Government
may therefore consider omitting the Explanation to Clause 10 of the
Bill. Further, any reference to the Companies Act in the Bill as in
the above Clause, should be considered in harmony with the
amended Companies Bill being introduced in Parliament after
incorporating the recommendations of this Committee.

16
(E) Supersession of Board of Directors of Banking Company—
Appointment of Administrator
(Clause 11 of the Bill)
28. Clause 8 of the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005
had proposed for insertion of a new Section after 36AC of the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 as follows:—
“(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession of Board of Directors
of the Banking company under sub-section (1), appoint an
Administrator for such period as it may determine.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute a committee of three or more
persons who have experience in law, finance, banking,
administration or accountancy to assist the Administrator in the
discharge of his duties.”
29. The Standing Committee on Finance in 26 th Report (14th Lok
Sabha) on the Bill had made their recommendation as reproduced
below:—
“Though the Ministry has informed that selection of Administrator
would be from persons having experience in law, finance, banking,
administration or accountancy , the Committee feels that the
qualifications required to be met should be confined to experience
in the fields of law, finance, banking and accountancy only and no
bureaucrat should be chosen for the assignment. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that appropriate changes be made in the
provisions to indicate the qualifications of the administrator”.
30. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) have
submitted that the recommendation of the Committee was accepted
and consequently the following provisions have been proposed in the
current Bill in sub-clause (2) of Clause 11 of the Bill which reads as
below:—
“(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession of the Board of
Directors of the banking company under sub-section (1) appoint in
consultation with the Central Government for such period as it
may determine, an Administrator (not being an officer of the
Central Government or a State Government) who has experience
in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy.”
31. The Committee find that the Ministry have not wholly
accepted their recommendation made in their Report on the Banking
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 on the qualifications to be

17
prescribed for the Administrator to be appointed by the RBI in
consultation with Central Government on supersession of the Board
of Directors of the banking company. The Committee would thus
reiterate that no serving or retired officer of the Central Government
or a State Government should be considered for appointment as
Administrator. Suitable amendments may therefore be carried out in
sub-clause (2) of Clause 11 of the Bill accordingly.
32. While broadly endorsing the proposals contained in the Bill
as measures to facilitate growth with regulation in banking sector,
the Committee would like to emphasise that the recent failures of
some major private banks internationally and the lessons learnt from
them should not be lost sight of, while formulating the new policy
on banking licences as per the mandate proposed in the Bill. The
Committee would like the stability of the banking system to be
preserved, while nurturing growth and development of the banking
sector as a whole. Key issues and concerns such as banking
penetration, coverage and financial inclusion should remain
paramount and the entire banking industry including banks in the
private sector should be clearly mandated to achieve the desired
objectives in this regard.
33. As amendments are being proposed by Government
frequently in banking law covering different aspects at different
points of time, the Committee would recommend that the
Government, instead of bringing piecemeal amendments, should
consider formulating an integrated modern banking law for the
country, which will be comprehensive and will consolidate all related
provisions and aspects of banking presently dispersed in different
statutes. Such an integrated and holistic law will also be in line
with the proposed legislation in other areas like the Direct Taxes
Code and the Companies Bill. Employee-friendly measures like
introduction of Employee Stock Options (ESOPs), deterrent
safeguards against ‘willful default’ by a borrower in repayment of
loans and such other fresh and forward-looking proposals reflecting
emerging realities, may be considered for inclusion in the integrated
banking law.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
09 December, 2011 Chairman,
18 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

18
NOTE OF DISSENT
Shri Moinul Hassan, MP
Respected Sir,
I suggest that note of dissent may please be recorded in the
Standing Committee draft report on the Banking Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2011 at least against the following sections of the Bill:
Section 2 of the Bill that seeks to exempt banks from Competition
Commission of India as this will pave the way for unrestricted merger
of banks and resultant closure of bank branches but need of the hour
is opening of more branches to cover 74000 habitats with more than
2000 population having no branch of any bank.
Section 3 of the Bill that seeks to include securities issued by
private corporate within the definition of ‘approved securities’. Banks’
investment in securities represent hard earned savings of common
people and that should not be allowed to be utilized by private
corporate as this will expose people’s money to unwarranted risks.
Section 4 of the Bill is intended to allow proportionate voting
right to FDI in case of private banks. This amendment, if passed, will
allow any foreign investor to take over any Indian private bank.
Similarly section 5 of the Bill has to be objected as this section is
linked with the proposal under section 4.
Sections 16(f) and 17(f) of the Bill seek to increase the limit of
voting right of private share holders in public sector banks from
existing 1% to 10%. This is a very dangerous proposal against
maintaining public sector character of public sector banks as the
Government will not stop here and it will move for proportionate
voting right for private share holders in public sector banks in future.
In fact, Indian Banks Associations (IBA) has already recommended to
the Government for that.
With regards,
Sd/-
(MOINUL HASSAN)

19
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14th July, 2011 from 1100 hrs.
to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
7. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
9. Shri Raashid Alvi
10. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
11. Shri Piyush Goyal
12. Shri Moinul Hassan
13. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
16. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

20
Part I
(1100 hrs. to 1145 hrs.)
2. *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
Part II
(1200 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)
WITNESSES
3. *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part III
(1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
4. Shri P .R. Ravimohan, CGM
5. Shri A. Unnikrishnan, Jt. Legal Advisor
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
6. Shri M.R. Umerji, Chief Legal Advisor, IBA
4. The Committee heard the representatives of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) in connection with examination of
‘the Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011’. The major issues discussed
during the briefing included, exemption of banking company from the
scrutiny of Competition Commission of India (CCI), removal of the
existing restriction of voting rights of all shareholders of the banking
companies, rationale for establishment of Depositor Education and
Awareness Fund (DEAF), regulation of acquisition of shares or voting
rights etc. The Chairman directed the representatives of Ministry of
Finance (Department of Financial Services) to furnish replies to the
points raised by the Members during the discussion at an early date.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

21
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th July, 2011 from 1100 hrs. to
1715 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Manicka Tagore
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
12. Shri Moinul Hassan
13. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
16. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

22
Part I
(1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs.)
2. The Committee took up the draft report on the ‘the Banking
Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011’ for consideration and adoption. As some
Members desired more time to consider and formulate their views on
the draft report, the Committee decided to postpone the adoption of
the draft report.
Part II
(1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs.)
WITNESSES
3. *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part III
(1400 hrs. to 1715 hrs.)
WITNESSES
4. *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
W
ITNESSES
5. *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

23
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 08th December, 2011 from
1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi Chanabasappa
3. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Prem Das Rai
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
11. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
12. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
13. Shri Yashvir Singh
14. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
15. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
17. Shri Raashid Alvi
18. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
19. Shri Moinul Hassan
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
21. Shri Mahendra Mohan
22. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
23. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
24. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi

24
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) The Insurance Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2008;
(ii) The National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010; and
(iii) The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee adopted the above draft reports with some minor
modifications/changes as suggested by Members. The Committee
authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the
modifications suggested and present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

25
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABAHA
Bill No. 18 of 201 1
THE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 and to
make consequential amendments in certain other enactments.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
CHAPTER II
A
MENDMENTS TO THE B ANKING R EGULATION
ACT, 1949
2. After section 2 of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949 (hereinafter in this Chapter referred
to as the principal Act), the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Insertion of
new section
2A.10 of 1949.

26
‘‘ 2A. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in section 2, nothing
contained in the Competition Act, 2002 shall
apply to any banking company, the State Bank
of India, any subsidiary bank, any
corresponding new bank or any regional rural
bank or co-operative bank or multi-State
co-operative bank in respect of the matters
relating to amalgamation, merger,
reconstruction, transfer, reconstitution or
acquisition under—
(i) this Act;
(ii) the State Bank of India Act, 1955;
(iii) the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks) Act, 1959;
(iv) the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970;
(v) the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976;
(vi) the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980;
(vii ) the Multi-State Co-operative
Societies Act, 2002; and
(viii ) any State law relating to co-
operative societies.”.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act, for clause
(a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘(a) ‘‘approved securities’’ means the
securities issued by the Central Government or
any State Government or such other securities
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from
time to time;’.
4. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1),—
(i) for clause (ii), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(ii) that, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Companies Act, 1956, the
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 5.
Competition
Act not to
apply in
certain cases. 12 of 2003.
39 of 2002.
23 of 1955.
38 of 1959.
5 of 1970.
21 of 1976.
40 of 1980.
1 of 1956.

27
capital of such banking company consists
of—
(a) equity shares only, or
(b) equity shares and preference
shares:
Provided that the issue of
preference share shall be in accordance
with the guidelines framed by the
Reserve Bank specifying the class of
preference shares, the extent of issue of
each class of such preference shares
(whether perpetual or irredeemable or
redeemable), and the terms and
conditions subject to which each class
of preference shares may be issued:
Provided further that no holder of
the preference share, issued by the
company, shall be entitled to exercise
the voting right specified in clause (b)
of sub-section (2) of section 87 of the
Companies Act, 1956;’’;
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted;
(iii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
5. After section 12A of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘12B. (1) No person (hereinafter referred
to as “the applicant”) shall, except with the
previous approval of the Reserve Bank, on
an application being made, acquire or agree
to acquire, directly or indirectly, by himself
or acting in concert with any other person,
shares of a banking company or voting
rights therein, which acquisition taken
together with shares and voting rights, if
any, held by him or his relative or associate
enterprise or person acting in concert with
him, makes the applicant to hold five per
cent. or more of the paid-up share capital
of such banking company or entitles him
Insertion of
new section
12B.
Regulation
of
acquisition
of shares or
voting
rights.
1 of 1956.

28
to exercise five per cent. or more of the
voting rights in such banking company.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub-
section,—
(a) “relative” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 6 of the Companies
Act, 1956;
(b) “associate enterprise” means a
company, whether incorporated or not,
which,—
(i) is a holding company or a
subsidiary company of the applicant; or
(ii ) is a joint venture of the
applicant; or
(iii) controls the composition of the
Board of Directors or other body
governing the applicant; or
(iv) exercises, in the opinion of the
Reserve Bank, significant influence on
the applicant in taking financial or
policy decisions; or
(v) is able to obtain economic
benefits from the activities of the
applicant;
(c) persons shall be deemed to be
“acting in concert” who, for a common
objective or purpose of acquisition of shares
or voting rights in excess of the percentage
mentioned in this sub-section, pursuant to
an agreement or understanding (formal or
informal), directly or indirectly cooperate by
acquiring or agreeing to acquire shares or
voting rights in the banking company.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this
Act, joint venture means a legal entity in
the nature of a partnership engaged in the
joint undertaking of a particular transaction
for mutual profit or an association of
persons or companies jointly undertaking
some commercial enterprise wherein all
contribute assets and share risks.
1 of 1956.

29
(2) An approval under sub-section ( 1) may
be granted by the Reserve Bank if it is satisfied
that—
(a) in the public interest; or
(b) in the interest of banking policy; or
(c) to prevent the affairs of any banking
company being conducted in a manner
detrimental or prejudicial to the interests
of the banking company; or
(d) in view of the emerging trends in
banking and international best practices; or
(e) in the interest of the banking and
financial system in India, the applicant is a
fit and proper person to acquire shares or
voting rights:
Provided that the Reserve Bank may call for
such information from the applicant as it may
deem necessary for considering the application
referred to in sub-section ( 1):
Provided further that the Reserve Bank may
specify different criteria for acquisition of shares
or voting rights in different percentages.
(3) Where the acquisition is by way of
transfer of shares of a banking company and
the Reserve Bank is satisfied that such transfer
should not be permitted, it may, by order, direct
that no such share shall be transferred to the
proposed transferee and may further direct the
banking company not to give effect to the
transfer of shares and in case the transfer has
been registered, the transferee shall not be
entitled to exercise voting rights on poll in any
of the meetings of the banking company.
(4) The approval for acquisition of shares
may be subject to such conditions as the
Reserve Bank may deem fit to impose,
including a condition that any further
acquisition of shares shall require prior
approval of the Reserve Bank and that the
applicant continues to be a fit and proper
person to hold the shares or voting rights.

30
(5) Before issuing or allotting any share to
any person or registering the transfer of shares
in the name of any person, the banking
company shall ensure that the requirements of
sub-section ( 1) are complied with by that
person and where the acquisition is with the
approval of the Reserve Bank, the banking
company shall further ensure that the
conditions imposed under sub-section ( 4), if
any, of such approval are fulfilled.
(6) The decision of the Reserve Bank on the
application made under sub-section ( 1) shall be
taken within a period of ninety days from the
date of receipt of the application by the Reserve
Bank:
Provided that in computing the period of
ninety days, the period taken by the applicant
for furnishing the information called for by the
Reserve Bank shall be excluded.
(7) The Reserve Bank may specify the
minimum percentage of shares to be acquired
in a banking company if it considers that the
purpose for which the shares are proposed to
be acquired by the applicant warrants such
minimum shareholding.
(8) The Reserve Bank may, if it is satisfied
that any person or persons acting in concert
with him holding shares or voting rights in
excess of five per cent. of the total voting rights
of all the shareholders of the banking company,
are not fit and proper to hold such shares or
voting rights, pass an order directing that such
person or persons acting in concert with him
shall not, in the aggregate, exercise voting rights
on poll in excess of five per cent. of the total
voting rights of all the shareholders of the
banking company:
Provided that the Reserve Bank shall not
pass any such order without giving an
opportunity of being heard to such person or
persons acting in concert with him.’.

31
6. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(i) for the words “paid-up value of the
said shares” occurring at the end, the words
“price at which the said shares are issued”
shall be substituted;
(ii) the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it
is hereby declared that expression “price at
which the said shares are issued” shall include
amount or value of premium on such shares.’.
7. In section 18 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) for the words “shall maintain in
India”, the words “shall maintain in India
on a daily basis” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “at least three per
cent”, the words “such per cent.” shall be
substituted;
(c) after the words “second preceding
fortnight”, the words “as the Reserve Bank
may specify, by notification in the Official
Gazette, from time to time, having regard
to the needs of securing the monetary
stability in the country” shall be inserted;
(d) in the Explanation, in clause ( a), in
sub-clause (ii), the words “or from the
Development Bank” shall be omitted;
(ii) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
(1A) If the balance held by such banking
company at the close of business on any
day is below the minimum specified under
sub-section ( 1), such banking company
shall, without prejudice to the provisions
of any other law for the time being in force,
be liable to pay to the Reserve Bank, in
respect of that day, penal interest at a rate
of three per cent. above the bank rate on
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 18.

32
the amount by which such balance falls
short of the specified minimum, and if the
sortfall continues further, the penal interest
so charged shall be increased to a rate of
five per cent. above the bank rate in respect
of each subsequent day during which the
default continues.
(1B ) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this section, if the Reserve
Bank is satisifed, on an application in
writing by the defaulting banking company,
that such defaulting banking company had
sufficient cause for its failure to company
with the provisions of sub-section ( 1), it
may not demand the payment of the penal
interest.
(1C) The Reserve Bank may, for such
period and subject to such conditions as
may be specified, grant to any banking
company such exemptions from the
provisions of this section as it thinks fit
with reference to all or any of its offices or
with reference to the whole or any part of
its assets and liabilities.”.
8. In section 24 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 4), in clause ( a), the words,
brackets and letter “clause ( a) of” shall be
omitted;
(b) in sub-section ( 5), in clause ( b), the words,
brackets and letter “clause ( a) of” shall be
omitted;
(c) in sub-section ( 8), the words, brackets and
letter “clause ( a) of” shall be omitted;
9. After section 26 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘26A. ( 1) The Reserve Bank shall
establish a Fund to be called the “Depositor
Education and Awareness Fund” (hereafter
in this section referred to as the “Fund”).
Amendment
of section 24.
Insertion of
new section
26A.
Establishment
of Depositor
Education and
A wareness
Fund.

33
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund
the amount to the credit of any account in
India with a banking company which has
not been operated upon for a period of ten
years or any deposit or any amount
remaining unclaimed for more than ten
years, within a period of three months from
the expiry of the said period of ten years:
Providing that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall prevent a depositor or any
other claimant to claim his deposit or
unclaimed amount or operate his account
or deposit account from or with the
banking company after the expiry of said
period of ten years and such banking
comapny shall be laible to repay such
deposit or amount at such rate of interest
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank
in this behalf.
(3) Where the banking company has
paid outstanding amount referred to in
sub-section (2) or allowed operation of such
account or deposit, such banking company
may apply for refund of such amount in
such manner as may be specified by the
authority or Committee referred to in
sub-section ( 5).
(4) The Fund shall be utilised for
promotion of depositors’ interests and for
such other purposes as may be specified
by the Reserve Bank from time to time.
(5) The Reserve Bank shall, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify
an authority or Committee, with such
members as the Reserve Bank may appoint,
to administer the Fund, and to maintain
separate accounts and other relevant records
in relation to the Fund in such forms as
may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(6) It shall be competent for the
authority or Committee appointed under
sub-section ( 5) to spend moneys out of the
Fund for carrying out the objects for which
the Fund has been established.’.

34
10. After section 29 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
‘29A. (1) The Reserve Bank may, at any time,
direct a banking company to annex to its
financial statements or furnish to it separately,
within such time and at such intervals as may
be specified by the Reserve Bank, such
statements and information relating to the
business or affairs of any associate enterprise
of the banking company as the Reserve Bank
may consider necessary or expedient to obtain
for the purpose of this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in the Companies Act, 1956, the
Reserve Bank may, at any time, cause an
inspection to be made of any associate
enterprise of a banking company and its books
of account by one or more of its officers or
employees or other persons.
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 2) and ( 3)
of section 35 shall apply mutatis mutandis to
the inspection under this section.
Explanation. —“associate enterprise” in
relation to a banking company includes an
enterprise which—
(i) is a holding company or a subsidiary
company of the banking company; or
(ii) is a jont venture of the banking
company; or
(iii) is a subsidiary company or a joint
venture of the holding company of the
banking company; or
(iv) controls the composition of the
Board of directors or other body governing
the banking company; or
(v) exercises, in the opinion of the
Reserve Bank, significant influence on the
banking company in taking financial or
policy decisions; or
(vi) is able to obtain economic benefits
from the activities of the banking
company.’.
Insertion of
new section
29A.
Power in
respect of
associate
enterprises.
1 of 1956.

35
11. After Part IIA of the principal Act, the
following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
“PART IIAB
SUPERSESSION OF B OARD OF D IRECTORS OF
BANKING C OMPANY
36ACA. ( 1) Where the Reserve Bank is
satisfied, in consultation with the Central
Government, that in the public interest or for
preventing the affairs of any banking company
being conducted in a manner detrimental to
the interest of the depositors or any banking
company or for securing the proper
management of any banking company, it is
necessary so to do, the Reserve Bank may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order,
supersede the Board of Directors of such
banking company for a period not exceeding
six months as may be specified in the order:
Provided that the period of supersession of
the Board of Directors may be extended from
time to time, so, however, that the total period
shall not exceed twelve months.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession
of the Board of Directors of the banking
company under sub-section ( 1) appoint in
consultation with the Central Government for
such period as it may determine, an
Administrator (not being an officer of the
Central Government or a State Government)
who has experience in law, finance, banking,
economics or accountancy.
(3) The Reserve Bank may issue such
directions to the Administrator as it may deem
appropriate and the Administrator shall be
bound to follow such directions.
(4) Upon making the order of supersession
of the Board of Directors of a banking company,
notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956,—
(a) the chairman, managing director and
other directors shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
Insertion of
new Part
IIAB.
Supersession
of Board of
Directors in
certain cases.
1 of 1956.

36
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
the Companies Act, 1956 or this Act, or
any other law for the time being in force,
be exercised and discharged by or on behalf
of the Board of Directors of such banking
company, or by a resolution passed in
general meeting of such banking company,
shall, until the Board of Directors of such
banking company is reconstituted, be
exercised and discharged by the
Administrator appointed by the Reserve
Bank under sub-section ( 2):
Provided that the power exercised by
the Administrator shall be valid
notwithstanding that such power is
exercisable by a resolution passed in the
general meeting of such banking company.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute, in
consultation with the Central Government, a
Committee of three or more persons who have
experience in law, finance, banking, economics
or accountancy to assist the Administrator in
the discharge of his duties.
(6) The Committee shall meet at such times
and places and observe such rules of procedure
as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.
(7) The salary and allowances to the
Administrator and the members of the
Committee constituted under sub-section ( 5) by
the Reserve Bank shall be such as may be
specified by the Reserve Bank and be payable
by the concerned banking company.
(8) On and before the expiration of two
months before the expiry of the period of
supersession of the Board of Directors as
specified in the order issued under sub-section
(1), the Administrator of the banking company,
shall call the general meeting of the company
to elect new directors and reconstitute its Board
of Directors.
1 of 1956.

37
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law or in any contract, the
memorandum or articles of association, no
person shall be entitled to claim any
compensation for the loss or termination of his
office.
(10) The Administrator appointed under
sub-section ( 2) shall vacate office immediately
after the Board of Directors of such banking
company has been reconstituted.”.
12. In section 46 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “and
shall also be liable to fine”, the words “or
with fine, which may extend to one crore
rupees or with both” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words “two thousand
rupees”, the words “twenty lakh
rupees” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “one hundred
rupees”, the words “fifty thousand
rupees” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4),—
(i) for the words “fifty thousand
rupees”, the words “one crore rupees”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “two thousand
and five hundred rupees”, the words
“one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
13. In section 47A of the principal Act, in
sub-section ( 1),—
(a) in the opening portion, for the
words, brackets and figures “sub-section ( 3)
or sub-section ( 4)” the words, brackets and
figures “sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3)
or sub-section ( 4)” shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-clauses ( a) and ( b), the
following sub-clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(a) where the contravention or
default is of the nature referred to in
sub-section ( 2) of section 46, a penalty
Amendment
of section 46.
Amendment
of section
47A.

38
not exceeding twenty lakh rupees in
respect of each offence if the
contravention or default persists, a
further penalty not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees for everyday, after the
first day, during which the
contravention or deafult continues;
(b) where the contravention is of the
nature referred to in sub-section ( 3) of
section 46, a penalty not exceeding
twice the amount of the deposits in
respect of which such contravention
was made;
(c) where the contravention or
default is of the nature referred to in
sub-section ( 4) of section 46, a penalty
not exceeding one crore rupees or twice
the amount involved in such
contravention or deafult where such
amount is quantifiable, whichever is
more, and where such contravention or
deafult is a continuing one, a further
penalty which may extend to one lakh
rupees for everyday, after the first day,
during which the contravention or
deafult continues.”.
14. In section 51 of the principal Act, in
sub-section ( 1),—
(a) after the words “provisions of
sections”, the figure and letter “2A,” shall
be inserted;
(b) before the words, brackets, figures
and letters “sub-sections ( 1B), ( 1C) and ( 2)
of sections 30”, the figures and letter,
“29A,” shall be inserted.
15. In section 56 of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause ( i) relating to substitution
of section 18,—
(A) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the words “State
Co-operative Bank”, the words “a
co-operative bank” shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 51.
Amendment
of section 56.

39
(ii) for the brackets and words
‘(hereinafter referred to as a “scheduled
State co-operative bank”)’, the brackets
and words ‘(hereinafter referred to as a
“scheduled co-operative bank”)' shall be
substituted;
(iii) for the words “at least three
per cent.”, the words “such per cent.”
shall be substituted; and
(iv) after the words “second
preceding fortnight”, the words “as the
Reserve Bank may specify, by
notification in the Official Gazette, from
time to time having regard to the needs
for securing the monetary stability in
the country” shall be inserted;
(B) in the Explanation,—
(i) in clause ( a),—
(1) in sub-clause ( ii), the words “the
Development Bank” shall be omitted;
(2) in sub-clauses ( iii) and ( iv), for
the words “State co-operative bank”,
the words “Co-operative Bank” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in clause ( c), for the letter and words
“a corresponding new bank”, the letters and
words “a corresponding new bank of IDBI
Bank Ltd.” shall be substituted;
(C) after sub-section ( 1), the following
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If the balance held by co-operative
bank referred to in sub-clause ( cci) of clause
(c) of section 56 of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, at the close of business on any
day is below the minimum specified under
sub-section ( 1), such co-operative bank
shall, without prejudice to the provisions
of any other law for the time being in force,
be liable to pay to the Reserve Bank, in
respect of that day, penal interest at a rate
10 of 1949.

40
of three per cent. above the bank rate on
the amount by which such balance falls
short of the specified minimum, and if the
shortfall continues further, the penal interest
so charged shall be increased to a rate of
five per cent. above the bank rate in respect
of each subsequent day during which the
default continues.
(1B ) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this section, if the Reserve
Bank is satisfied, on an application in
writing by the defaulting co-operative bank,
that such defaulting co-operative bank had
sufficient cause for its failure to comply
with the provisions of sub-section ( 1), it
may not demand the payment of the penal
interest.
(1C) The Reserve Bank may, for such
period and subject to such conditions as
may be specified, grant to any co-operative
bank such exemptions from the provisions
of this section as it thinks fit with reference
to all or any of its officers or with reference
to the whole or any part of its assets and
liabilities.”;
(b) in clause ( o) relating to the modification
of section 22,—
(A) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) clause ( a) shall be omitted;
(ii) after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that nothing in
this sub-section shall apply to a primary
credit society carrying on banking
business on or before the
commencement of the Banking Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2011, for a period
of one year or for such further period
not exceeding three years, as the
Reserve Bank may, after recording the
reasons in writing for so doing,
extend.”;

41
(B) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the words “every primary credit
society which becomes a primary
co-operative bank after such commencement
shall before the expiry of three months from
the date on which it so becomes a primary
co-operative bank”, the words, brackets and
figures “every primary credit society which
had become a primary co-operative bank
on or before the commencement of the
Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011, shall
before the expiry of three months from the
date on which it had become a primary
co-operative bank” shall be substituted;
(ii) the words “other than a primary
credit society” shall be omitted;
(iii) in the proviso,—
(a) in clause ( ii), for the words
“thereafter, or”, the word “thereafter,”
shall be substituted;
(b) clause ( iii) shall be omitted;
(c) in clause ( q) relating to modification of
section 24,—
(a) sub-clause ( i) shall be omitted;
(b) for sub-clause ( ii), the following
sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(ii ) for sub-section ( 2A), the
following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(2A) A scheduled co-operative
bank, in addition to the average daily
balance which it is, or may be, required
to maintain under section 42 of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and
every other co-operative bank, in
addition to the cash reserve which it is
required to maintain under section 18,
shall maintain in India, assets, the value
of which shall not be less than such
2 of 1934.

42
percentage not exceeding forty per cent.
of the total of its demand and time
liabilities in India as on last Friday of
the second preceding fortnight as the
Reserve Bank may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify from time to
time and such assets shall be
maintained in such form and manner,
as may be specified in such
notification.” ’;
(d) after clause ( ri), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(ria) in section 26A, for the words
“banking companies”, the words
“co-operative bank” shall be substituted;’,
(e) in clause ( s), in the opening portion, for
the words and figures, “sections 29 and 30”,
the word and figures “section 29” shall be
substituted;
(f) after clause ( s), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘(sa) for section 30, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“30. ( 1) Without prejudice to anything
contained in any other law for the time
being inforce, where the Reserve Bank is
satisfied that it is necessary in the public
interest or in the interest of the co-operative
bank or its depositors so to do, it may at
any time by general or special order direct
that an additional audit of the co-operative
bank accounts, for any such transactions or
class of transactions or for such period or
periods as may be specified in the order,
shall be conducted and may by the same
or a different order appoint a person duly
qualified under any law for the time being
inforce to be an auditor of companies to
conduct such audit, and the auditor shall
comply with such directions and make a
report of such audit to the Reserve Bank
and forward a copy thereof to the
co-operative bank.
Audit.

43
(2) The expenses of, or incidental to, the
additional audit specified in the order made
by the Reserve Bank shall be borne by the
co-operative bank.
(3) The auditor referred to in sub-section
(1) shall have such powers, exercise such
functions vested in and discharge the duties
and be subject to the liabilities and penalties
imposed on auditors of companies by
section 227 of the Companies Act, 1956 and
also that of the auditors, if any, appointed
by the law establishing, constituting or
forming the co-operative bank to the extent
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956
are not inconsistent with the provisions of
such law.
(4) In addition to the matters referred
to in the order under sub-section ( 1) the
auditor shall state in his report—
(a) whether or not the information
and explanation required by him have
been found to be satisfactory;
(b) whether or not the transactions
of the co-operative bank which came
to his notice have been within the
powers of the co-operative bank;
(c) whether or not the returns
received from branch offices of the
co-operative bank have been found
adequate for the purpose of his audit;
(d) whether the profit and loss
accounts, shows a true balance or profit
or loss for the period covered by such
account;
(e) any other matter which he
considers should be brought to the
notice of the Reserve Bank and the
shareholders of the co-operative
bank.’’.’.
1 of 1956.

44
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENT TO THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1970
16. In section 3 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1970—
(a) for sub-section ( 2A), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2A) Subject to the provisions of
this Act, the authorised capital of every
corresponding new bank shall be three
thousand crores of rupees divided into
three hundred crores of fully paid-up
shares of ten rupees each:
Provided that the corresponding
new bank may reduce the nominal or
face value of the shares, and divide the
authorised capital into such
denomination as it may decide with the
prior approval of the Reserve Bank:
Provided further that the Central
Government may in consultation with
the Reserve Bank and by notification
in the Official Gazette increase or
reduce the authorised capital as it
deems fit so however that the shares
in all cases shall be fully paid-up
shares.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2B), in clause ( c), after
the words “public issue”, the words “or
rights issue or by issue of bonus shares”
shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section ( 2BB), after the words
‘‘public issue’’, the words ‘‘or rights issue
or by issue of bonus shares’’ shall be
inserted;
(d) in sub-section ( 2BBA), in clause ( a),
after the words “public issue”, the words
“or rights issue or by issue of bonus
shares” shall be inserted;
Amendment
of section 3.
5 of 1970.

45
(e) in sub-section ( 2C), after the words
“public issue”, the words “or rights issue
or by issue of bonus shares” shall be
inserted;
(f) in sub-section ( 2E),—
(i) for the words “one per cent.”,
the words “ten per cent.” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in the second proviso, for the
words “no preference shareholder shall
be entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of one per cent.”, the
words “no preference shareholder, other
than the Central Government, shall be
entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of ten per cent.” shall be
substituted.
CHAPTER IV
A
MENDMENT TO THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1980
17. In section 3 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,
1980,—
(a) for sub-section ( 2A), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2A) Subject to the provisions of this
Act, the authorised capital of every
corresponding new bank shall be three
thousand crores of rupees divided into
three hundred crores of fully paid-up shares
of ten rupees each:
Provided that the corresponding new bank
may reduce the nominal or face value of the
shares, and divide the authorised capital into
such denomination as it may decide with the
prior approval of the Reserve Bank:
Amendment
of section 3.
40 of 1980.

46
Provided further that the Central
Government may, in consultation with the
Reserve Bank, and by notification in the Official
Gazette increase or reduce the authorised
capital as it deems fit so however that the
shares in all cases shall be fully paid-up
shares.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2B), in clause ( c), after
the words “public issue”, the words “or
rights issue or by issue of bonus shares”
shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section ( 2BB), after the words
“public issue”, the words “or rights issue
or by issue of bonus shares” shall be
inserted;
(d) in sub-section ( 2BBA), in clause ( a),
after the words “public issue”, the words
“or right issue or by issue of bonus shares”
shall be inserted;
(e) in sub-section ( 2C), after the words
“public issue”, the words “or rights issue
or by issue of bonus shares” shall be
inserted;
(f) in sub-section ( 2E),—
(i) for the words “one per cent.”,
the words “ten per cent.” shall be
substituted.
(ii) in the second proviso, for the
words “no preference shareholder shall
be entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of one per cent.”, the
words “no preference shareholder, other
than the Central Government, shall be
entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of ten per cent.” shall be
substituted.
CHAPTER V
M
ISCELLANEOUS
18. The enactments specified in the Schedule
are hereby amended to the extent and in the
manner mentioned in the third column thereof.
Amendment
of certain
enactments.

47
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 18)
Sl.No. Short Title Amendment
1. The State Financial In section 7, in sub-section (3),
Corporation Act, 1951 the words and figures “and 5
(63 of 1951). the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949” shall be omitted. 10 of 1949.
2. The State Bank of India In section 12, the words and
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955). figures “and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949” shall 10 10 of 1949.
be omitted.
3. The State Bank of India In section 20, the words and
(Subsidiary Banks) figures “and the Banking
Act, 1959 (38 of 1959). Regulation Act, 1949” shall 10 of 1949.
be omitted.
4. The Warehousing In section 5, the words and 15
Corporations Act, 1962 figures “and the Banking
(58 of 1962). Regulation Act, 1949” shall 10 of 1949.
be omitted.
5. The Regional Rural In section 7, the words and 20
Banks Act, 1976 figures “and shall also be
(21 of 1976). deemed to be approved
securities for the purposes
of the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949” shall be omitted. 10 of 1949.
6. The Industrial Finance In section 10, the words and 25
Corporation (Transfer of figures “and the Banking
Undertaking and Repeal) Regulation Act, 1949” shall 10 of 1949.
Act, 1993 (23 of 1993). be omitted.
7. The Industrial In section 11, the words and 30
Reconstruction Bank figures “and the Banking
(Transfer of Undertakings Regulation Act, 1949” 10 of 1949.
and Repeal) Act, 1997 shall be omitted.
 (7 of 1997).
8. The Unit Trust of India In section 17, the words and
(Transfer of Undertaking figures “and the Banking 35
and Repeal) Act, 2002 Regulation Act, 1949” 10 of 1949.
(58 of 2002). shall be omitted.

48
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 being the law relating to banking
has been in force for more than six decades. It, inter alia,  empowers
the Reserve Bank to regulate and supervise the banking sector. The
banking companies are now operating in a liberalised environment. In
this scenario, it has become necessary that the banking companies in
India are enabled to raise capital in accordance with the international
best practices. Therefore, it is proposed to—
(a) enable the nationalised banks to increase or decrease the
authorised capital with approval from the Central Government and
the Reserve Bank without being limited by the ceiling of a
maximum of three thousand crores of rupees;
(b) provide the nationalised banks to issue two additional
instruments (“bonus shares” and “rights issue”) for accessing the
capital market to raise capital required for expansion of banking
business;
(c) raise the ceiling on voting rights of shareholders of
nationalised banks from one per cent. to ten per cent.;
(d) make provisions to ensure that control of banking companies
is in the hands of fit and proper persons, it should be mandatory
for the persons to obtain prior approval from the Reserve Bank
who propose to acquire five per cent. or more of the share capital
of a banking company;
(e) confer power upon the Reserve Bank to impose such
conditions as it deems necessary while granting such approval for
acquisitions of five per cent. or more share capital of a banking
company (including specifying acquisition of a minimum percentage
of shares in a banking company) if it considers necessary; and
(f) remove the existing restriction on voting rights limited to
ten per cent. of the total voting rights of all the shareholders of
the banking company.
2. Taking advantage of the liberalised environment, banking
companies are engaging in multifarious activities through the medium
of associate enterprises. It has, therefore, become necessary for the
Reserve Bank, as the regulator of the banking companies, to be aware
of the financial impact of the business of such enterprises on the

49
financial position of the banking companies. It is, therefore, proposed
to confer power upon the Reserve Bank to call for information and
returns from the associate enterprises of banking companies also and
to inspect the same, if necessary.
3. Under the existing provision contained in section 36AA of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Reserve Bank has, inter alia, power
to remove any director or other officers of a banking company, but
such power is not adequate if the entire Board of directors of a banking
company is functioning in a manner detrimental to the interest of the
depositors or the banking company itself. It is, therefore, proposed to
confer power upon the Reserve Bank to supersede the Board of
Directors of a banking company for a total period not exceeding twelve
months and appoint an administrator to manage the banking company
during the said period.
4. The Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies to
co-operative societies subject to modifications which, inter alia, allow a
primary co-operative society to carry on business of banking till it has
been granted a licence or a notice is notified that the licence cannot
be granted to it. For a sound and healthy banking system and to
protect the interest of depositors, it has become necessary to ensure
that only the co-operative societies licensed by the Reserve Bank should
carry on the business of banking by fulfilling all the requirements
specified by the Reserve Bank and it has become essential to provide
the time limit of one year to be extended to three years within which
a primary credit society should carry on the business of banking or
stop the business of banking.
5. Under the existing provisions of the Competition Act, 2002, the
Competition Commission of India has power to regulate combination,
which causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on
competition within the relevant market in India. It is proposed to
insert a new section 2A in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 so as to
exempt mergers of the banking companies from the applicability of
the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002. The exemption of mergers
of banking companies from the scrutiny of the Competition Commission
of India would allow the Reserve Bank to approve mergers of banking
companies in public or depositors’ interest, in the interest of the
banking system in India and to secure the proper management of the
banking company in a timely manner without waiting for the approval
of the Competition Commission of India.
6. The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was introduced
in the Lok Sabha on the 13th May, 2005 to strengthen the Reserve
Bank’s supervisory and regulatory powers over the banking sector.

50
The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for
examination and report thereon. Based on the recommendations of the
Standing Committee, it was decided to move official amendments to
the Bill in the Lok Sabha, but the Bill could not be taken up for
consideration and lapsed due to dissolution of the Lok Sabha. The
present Bill incorporates certain provisions of the Banking Regulation
(Amendment) Bill, 2005.
7. In addition to the changes proposed in paragraphs 1 to 5, it is
also proposed to,—
(a) enable the banking companies to issue preference shares
subject to regulatory guidelines of the Reserve Bank;
(b) align the restriction on commission, etc., on sale of shares
to issue price rather than to the paid-up value of shares;
(c) establish a “Depositor Education and Awareness Fund” to
take over in operative deposit accounts which have not been
claimed or operated for a period of ten years or more;
(d) substantially increase the penalties and fine for some
violations of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(e) confer power upon the Reserve Bank to levy penal interest
in case of non-maintenance of required cash reserve ratio;
(f) confer power upon the Reserve Bank to order a special
audit of co-operative banks in public interest for a more effective
supervision of co-operative banks.
8. The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011 seeks to amend the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 to make the
regulatory powers of Reserve Bank more effective and to increase the
access of the nationalised banks to capital market to raise capital
required for expansion of banking business and also to make certain
other consequential amendments in certain other enactments.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE
The 9th March, 2011.

51
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to confer power upon the Reserve
Bank to specify approved securities.
Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to empower the Reserve Bank to
issue guidelines so as to specify the class of preference shares, the
extent of issue of each class of such preference shares, and the terms
and conditions subject to which, the preference shares may be issued.
Clause 5 of the Bill confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify
different criteria for acquisition of shares or voting rights in different
percentages. This clause further empowers the Reserve Bank to specify
the minimum percentage of shares to be acquired in a banking
company by an applicant.
Clause 7 of the Bill confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify
the cash reserve ratio for select banks. This clause further confers power
upon the Reserve Bank to specify the conditions subject to which the
select banks would be exempt from provisions of maintenance of
specified level of cash reserve ratio.
Clause 9 of the Bill confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify
the rate of interest on unclaimed deposit. This clause further confers
power upon the Reserve Bank to specify the purposes for which the
Depositor Education and Awareness Fund would be utilised. This clause
also confers power upon the Reserve Bank to notify an Authority or
Committee to administer the Depositor Education and Awareness Fund.
Clause 11 of the Bill confers power upon the Reserve Bank to
specify the rules of procedure for the Committee to help the
Administrator appointed for the superseded banks. This clause further
confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify the periodicity of the
meetings and rules of procedure, salary and allowances payable to the
members of the Committee or Administrator.
Clause 15 of the Bill confers powers upon the Reserve Bank to
specify the cash reserve ratio for select cooperative banks. This clause
further confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify the conditions
subject to which the select cooperative banks would be exempt from
provisions of maintenance of specified level of cash reserve ratio. This
clause also confers power upon the Reserve Bank to specify such
percentage of value of assets, in such form and manner, which shall
be maintained in India by select cooperative banks.
The matters in respect of which the notification or guidelines are
issued or specified are all matters of procedure and administrative
details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.
The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

52
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE B ANKING R EGULATION A CT, 1949
(10 OF 1949)
* * * * *
5. In this Act, unless there is anything
repugnant in the subject or context,—
(a) “approved securities” means—
(i) securities in which a trustee may
invest money under clause ( a), clause ( b),
clause (bb), clause ( c) or clause ( d) of section
20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;
(ii) such of the securities authorised by
the Central Government under clause ( f) of
section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
as may be prescribed;
* * * * *
12. (1) No banking company shall carry on
business in India, unless it satisfies the
following conditions, namely:—
* * * * *
(ii) that the capital of the company
consists of ordinary shares only or of
ordinary shares or equity shares and such
preferential shares as may have been issued
prior to the 1st day of July, 1944:
Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall apply to any banking
company incorporated before the 15th day
of January, 1937.
(2) No person holding shares in a
banking company shall, in respect of any
shares held by him, exercise voting rights
on poll in excess of ten per cent. of the
total voting rights of all the shareholders
of the banking company.
* * * * *
Interpretation.
Regulation
of paid-up
capital,
subscribed
capital and
authorised
capital and
voting
rights of
shareholders.
2 of 1882.
2 of 1882.

53
13. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in sections 76 and 79 of the
Companies Act, 1956, no banking company
shall pay out directly or indirectly by way of
commission, brokerage, discount or
remuneration in any form in respect of any
shares issued by it, any amount exceeding in
the aggregate two and one-half per cent. of the
paid-up value of the said shares.
* * * * *
18. ( 1) Every banking company, not being a
scheduled bank, shall maintain in India by way
of cash reserve with itself or by way of balance
in a current account with the Reserve Bank, or
by way of net balance in current accounts or
in one or more of the aforesaid ways, a sum
equivalent to at least three per cent. of the total
of its demand and time liabilities in India as
on the last Friday of the second preceding
fortnight and shall submit to the Reserve Bank
before the twentieth day of every month a
return showing the amount so held on alternate
Friday during a month with particulars of its
demand and time liabilities in India on such
Fridays or if any such Friday is a public
holiday under the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 at the close of business on the
preceding working day.
Explanation.—In this section, and in section
24,—
(a) “liabilities in India” shall not include—
* * * * *
(ii) any advance taken from the Reserve
Bank or from the Development Bank or from
the Exim Bank or from the Reconstruction Bank
or from the National Bank or from the Small
Industries Bank by the banking company;
* * * * *
Restriction
on
commission,
brokerage,
discount,
etc., on sale
of shares.
Cash reserve.
1 of 1956.
26 of 1881.

54
24. (1) * * * * *
(4) ( a) If on any alternate Friday or, if such
Friday is a public holiday, on the preceding
working day, the amount maintained by a
banking company at the close of business on
that day falls below the minimum prescribed
by or under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2A), such
banking company shall be liable to pay to the
Reserve Bank in respect of that day’s default,
penal interest for that day at the rate of three
per cent. per annum above the bank rate on
the amount by which the amount actually
maintained falls short of the prescribed
minimum on that day; and
* * * * *
(5)( a) * * * * *
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section ( 4), on the failure of a banking
company to maintain as on any day, the
amount so required to be maintained by or
under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2A) the Reserve
Bank may, in respect of such default, require
the banking company to pay penal interest for
that day as provided in clause ( a) of sub-section
(4) and if the default continues on the next
succeeding working day, the penal interest may
be increased as provided in clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 4) for the concerned days.
* * * * *
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section, if the Reserve Bank is satisfied, on
an application in writing by the defaulting
banking company, that the banking company
had sufficient cause for its failure to comply
with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub-section
(2A), the Reserve Bank may not demand the
payment of the penal interest.
Explanation.—In this section, the expression
“public holiday” means a day which is a public
holiday under the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881.
* * * * *
Maintenance
of a
percentage
of assets.
26 of 1881.

55
PART IV
MISCELLANEOUS
46. ( 1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet
or other document for or in any information
required or furnished by or under or for the
purpose of any provision of this Act, wilfully
makes a statement which is false in any
material particular, knowing it to be false, or
wilfully omits to make a material statement,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall
also be liable to fine.
(2) If any person fails to produce any book,
account or other document or to furnish an
statement or information which under sub-
section (2) of section 35 it is his duty to produce
or furnish, or to answer any question relating
to the business of a banking company which
he is asked by an officer making any inspection
or scrutiny under that section, he shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to
two thousand rupees in respect of each offence,
and if he persists in such refusal, to a further
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees
for every day during which the offence
continues.
* * * * *
(4) If any other provision of this Act is
contravened or if any default is made in—
(i) complying with any requirement of
this Act or of any order rule or direction
made or condition imposed thereunder, or
(ii) carrying out of terms of, or the
obligations under, a scheme sanctioned
under sub-section ( 7) of section 45,
by any person, such person shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees or twice the amount involved in such
contravention or default where such amount is
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where a
Penalties.

56
contravention or default is a continuing one,
with a further fine which may extend to two
thousand and five hundred rupees for every
day, during which the contravention or default
continues.
* * * * *
47A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 46, if a contravention or default of
the nature referred to in sub-section ( 3) or sub-
section ( 4) of section 46, as the case may be, is
made by a banking company, then, the Reserve
Bank may impose on such banking company—
(a) where the contravention is of the
nature referred to in sub-section ( 3) of
section 46, a penalty not exceeding twice
the amount of the deposits in respect of
which such contravention was made;
(b) where the contravention or default
is of the nature referred to in sub-section
(4) of section 46, a penalty not exceeding
five lakh rupees or twice the amount
involved in such contravention or default
where such amount is quantifiable,
whichever is more, and where such
contravention or default is a continuing
one, a further penalty which may extend
to twenty-five thousand rupees for every
day, after the first, during which the
contravention or default continues.
* * * * *
51. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions
of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, or any
other enactment, the provisions of sections 10,
13 to 15, 17, 19 to 21-A, 23 to 28, 29 [excluding
sub-section ( 3)], sub-sections (1B), (1C) and (2)
of sections 30, 31, 34, 35, 35A, 36 [excluding
clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1)], 45Y to 45-ZF, 46
to 48, 50, 52 and 53 shall also apply, so far as
may be, to and in relation to the State Bank of
India for any corresponding new bank or a
Regional Rural Bank or any subsidiary bank as
they apply to and in relation to banking
companies.
Power of
Reserve
Bank to
impose
penalty.
Application
of certain
provisions
to the State
Bank of
India and
other
notified
banks.

57
Provided that—
(a) nothing contained in clause ( c) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 10 shall apply to
the chairman of the State Bank of India or
to a managing director of any subsidiary
bank in so far as the said clause precludes
him from being a director of, or holding
an office in, any institution approved by
the Reserve Bank;
(b) nothing contained in sub-section ( iii)
of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 20
shall apply to any bank referred to in sub-
section ( 1), insofar as the said sub-clause
(iii) of clause ( b) precludes that bank from
entering into any commitment for granting
any loan or advance to or on behalf of a
company (not being a Government
company) in which not less than forty per
cent. of the paid-up capital is held (whether
singly or taken together) by the Central
Government or the Reserve Bank or a
corporation owned by that bank; and
(c) nothing contained in section 46 or
in section 47A shall apply to,—
(i) an officer or the Central
Government or the Reserve Bank,
nominated or appointed as director of
the State Bank of India or any
corresponding new bank or a Regional
Rural Bank or any subsidiary bank or
a banking company; or
(ii) an officer of the State Bank of
India or a corresponding new bank or
a Regional Rural Bank or a subsidiary
bank nominated or appointed as
director of any of the said banks (not
being the bank of which he is an
officer) or of a banking company.
PART V
A
PPLICATIONS OF THE A CT TO CO-OPERATIVE B ANKS
56. The provisions of this Act, as in force
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation
to, co-operative societies as they apply to, or
in relation to banking companies subject to the
following modifications, namely:—
* * * *
Act to
apply to
co-operative
societies
subject to
modifications.

58
(f) for section 18, the following section shall
be substitued, namely:—
‘18. ( 1) Every co-operative bank, not
being a State Co-operative Bank for the
time being included in the Second Schedule
to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
(hereinafter referred to as a “scheduled
State Co-operative Bank”), shall maintain
in India by way of cash reserve with itself
or by way of balance in a current account
with the Reserve Bank or the State
co-operative bank of the State concerned
or by way of net balance in current
accounts, or, in the case of a primary
co-operative bank, with the central
co-operative bank of the district concerned,
or in one or more of the aforesaid ways, a
sum equivalent to at least three per cent.
of the total of its demand and time
liabilities in India, as on the last Friday of
the second preceding fortnight and shall
submit to the Reserve Bank before the
fifteenth day of every month a return
showing the amount so held on alternate
Fridays during a month with particulars of
its demand and time liabilities in India on
such Friday or if any such Friday is a
public holiday under the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 at the close of
business on the preceding working day.
Explanation .—In this section and in
section 24—
(a) “liabilities in India” shall not
include—
* * * *
(ii) any advance taken from a State
Government, the Reserve Bank, the
Development Bank, the Exim Bank, the
Reconstruction Bank, the National
Housing Bank, the National Bank, the
Small Industries Bank or from the
Cash reserve.
2 of 1934.
26 of 1881.

59
National Co-operative Development
Corporation established under section
3 of the National Co-operative
Development Corporation Act, 1962, by
the co-operative bank;
(iii) in the case of a State or Central
co-operative bank, also any deposit of
money with it representing the reserves
fund or any part thereof maintained
with it by any other co-operative
society within its area of operation, and
in the case of a Central co-operative
bank, also an advance taken by it from
the State co-operative bank of the State
concerned;
(iv) in the case of a primary
co-operative bank, also any advance
taken by it from the State co-operative
bank of the State concerned or the
Central co-operative bank of the district
concerned;
* * * *
(c) “net balance in current accounts” shall,
in relation to a co-operative bank, mean the
excess, if any, of the aggregate of the credit
balances in current account maintained by that
co-operative bank with the State Bank of India
or a subsidiary bank or a corresponding new
bank, over the aggregate of the credit balances
in current accounts held by the said banks with
such co-operative bank;
* * * *
(o) in section 22,—
(i) for sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) the
following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) Save as hereinafter provided, no
co-operative society shall carry on banking
business in India unless—
(a) it is a primary credit society , or
26 of 1962.

60
(b) it is a co-operative bank and
holds a licence issued in that behalf by
the Reserve Bank, subject to such
conditions, if any, as the Reserve Bank
may deem fit to impose:
Provided that nothing in this
sub-section shall apply to co-operative
society, not being a primary credit
society or a co-operative bank carrying
on banking business at the
commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies)
Act, 1965 for a period of one year from
such commencement.
(2) Every co-operative society carrying on
business as a co-operative bank at the
commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965
shall before the expiry of three months from
the commencement, every co-operative bank
which comes into existence as a result of the
division of any other co-operative society
carrying on business as a co-operative bank, or
the amalgamation of two or more co-operative
societies carrying on banking business shall,
before the expiry of three months from its so
coming into existence, every primary credit
society which becomes a primary co-operative
bank after such commencement shall before the
expiry of three months from the date on which
it so becomes a primary co-operative bank and
every co-operative society other than a primary
credit society shall before commencing banking
business in India, apply in writing to the
Reserve Bank for a licence under this section:
Provided that nothing in clause ( b) of
sub- section ( 1) shall be deemed to prohibit—
* * * *
(ii) a co-operative bank which has come
into existence as a result of the division of
any other co-operative society carrying on
business as a co-operative bank, or the
23 of 1965.
23 of 1965.

61
amalgamation of two or more co-operative
societies carrying on banking business at
the commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies)
Act, 1965 or at any time thereafter, or
(iii) a primary credit society which becomes
a primary Co-operative bank after such
commencement,
from carrying on banking business until it is
granted a licence in pursuance of this section
or is, by a notice in writing, notified by the
Reserve Bank that the licence cannot be granted
to it. ;
* * * *
(q) in section 24,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), the words “after
the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act,” shall be
omitted;
(ii) for sub-section ( 2) and ( 2A), the
following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely—
“(2) In computing the amount for the
purposes of sub-section ( 1),—
(a) any balances maintained in India
by a co-operative bank in current
account with the Reserve Bank or by
way of net balance in current accounts,
and in the case of a scheduled State
co-operative bank, also the balance
required under section 42 of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 to be
so, maintained;
(b) any balances maintained by a
Central co-operative bank with the State
co-operative bank of the State
concerned; and
(c) any balance maintained by a
primary co-operative bank with Central
co-operative bank of the district
concerned or with the State co-operative
bank of the State concerned,
shall be deemed to be cash maintained in India.
23 of 1965.
2 of 1934.

62
(2A) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section ( 1) or in sub-section ( 2), after
the expiry of two years from the
commencement of the Banking Laws
(Application to Co-operative Societies) Act, 1965
or of such further period not exceeding one
year as the Reserve Bank, having regard to the
interests of the co-operative bank concerned,
may think fit in any particular case to allow—
(i) a scheduled State co-operative bank,
in addition to the average daily balance
which it is or may be, required to maintain
under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934, and
(ii) every other co-operative bank, in
addition to the cash reserve which is
required to maintain under section 18,
shall maintain in India, in cash or in gold
valued at a price not exceeding the current
market price or in unencumbered approved
securities valued at a price determined in
accordance with such one or more of, or
combination of, the following methods of
valuation namely, valuation with reference to
cost price, market price, book value or face
value, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank
from time to time, an amount which shall not,
at the close of business on any day, be less
than twenty-five per cent or such other
percentage not exceeding four per cent as the
Reserve Bank may, from time to time, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, of
the total of its demand and time liabilities in
India, as on the last Friday of the second
preceding fortnight.
(b) In computing the amount for the purpose
of clause ( a), the following shall be deemed to
be cash maintained in India, namely:—
(i) any balance maintained by scheduled
State co-operative bank with the Reserve
Bank in excess of the balance required to
be maintained by it under section 42 of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
23 of 1965.
2 of 1934.
2 of 1934.

63
(ii) any cash or balances maintained in
India by a co-operative bank, other than a
scheduled State co-operative bank, with
itself or with the State co-operative bank
of the State concerned, or in current account
with the Reserve Bank or by way of net
balance in current accounts and, in the case
of a primary co-operative bank, also any
balances maintained with the Central
co-opeartive bank of the district concerned,
in excess of the aggregate of the cash or
balances required to be maintained under
section 18;
* * * * *
(s) for sections 29 and 30, the following
section shall be substituted, namely:—
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1970
(5 OF 1970)
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS
AND SHARE CAPITALS OF THE CORRESPONDING
NEW BANKS
3. * * * * *
(2A) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the authorised capital of every corresponding
new bank shall be one thousand five hundred
crores of rupees divided into one hundred fifty
crores fully paid-up shares of ten rupees each:
Provided that the Central Government may,
after consultation with the Reserve Bank and
by notification in the Official Gazette, increase
or reduce the authorised capital as it thinks fit,
Establishment
of
corresponding
new banks
and
business
thereof.

64
so, however, that after such increase or
reduction, the authorised capital shall not
exceed three thousand crores or be less than
one thousand five hundred crores, of rupees.
(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 2) the paid-up capital of every
corresponding new bank constituted under
sub-section ( 1) may from time to time be
increased by—
* * * * *
(c) such amounts as the Board of
Directors of the corresponding new bank
may, after consultation with the Reserve
Bank and with the previous sanction of the
Central Government, raise by public issue
of shares in such manner as may be
prescribed, so, however, that the Central
Government shall, at all times, hold not less
than fifty-one per cent of the paid-up
capital of each corresponding new bank.
(2BB) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 2), the paid-up capital of a
corresponding new bank constituted under
sub-section ( 1) may, from time to time and
before any paid-up capital is raised by public
issue under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2B), be
reduced by—
(a) the Central Government after
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by
cancelling any paid-up capital which is lost,
or is unrepresented by available assets;
(b) the Board of Directors, after
consultation with the Reserve Bank and
with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, by paying off any paid-up
capital which is in excess of the wants of
the corresponding new bank:
Provided that in a case where such capital
is lost, or is unrepresented by available assets
because of amalgamation of another

65
corresponding new bank or a corresponding
new bank as defined in clause ( b) of section 2
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 with the
corresponding new bank, such reduction may
be done, either prospectively or retrospectively,
but not from a date earlier than the date of
such amalgamation.
(2BBA) ( a) A corresponding new bank may,
from time to time and after any paid-up capital
has been raised by public issue under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2B), by resolution
passed at an annual general meeting of the
shareholders entitled to vote, voting in person,
or, where proxies are allowed, by proxy, and
the votes cast in favour of the resolution are
not less than three time the number of the
votes, if any, cast against the resolution by the
shareholders so entitled and voting, reduce its
paid-up capital in any ways.
* * * * *
(2C ) The entire paid-up capital of a
corresponding new bank, except the paid-up
capital raised by public issue under clause ( c)
of sub-section ( 2B), shall stand vested in an
allotted to, the Central Government.
* * * * *
(2E) No shareholder of the corresponding
new bank, other than the Central Government,
shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in
respect of any shares held by him in excess of
one per cent, of the total voting rights of all
the shareholders of the corresponding new
bank:
“Provided that the shareholder holding any
preference share capital in the corresponding
new bank shall, in respect of such capital, have
a right to vote only on resolutions placed before
such corresponding new bank which directly
affects the rights attached to his preference
shares:
Provided further that no preference
shareholder shall be entitled to exercise voting
40 of 1980.

66
rights in respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of one per cent of the total voting
rights of all the shareholders holding preference
share capital only.”.
* * * * *
—————
EXTRACTS FROM THE B ANKING C OMPANIES
(ACQUISITION AND T RANSFER OF U NDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1980
(40 OF 1980)
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BANKS
AND SHARE CAPITALS OF THE CORRESPONDING
NEW BANKS
3. (1)* * * * *
(2A) Subject to the provisions of this Act,
the authorised capital of every corresponding
new bank shall be one thousand five hundred
crores of rupees divided into one hundred fifty
crores fully paid-up shares of ten rupees each:
Provided that the Central Government may,
after consultation with the Reserve Bank and
by notification in the Official Gazette, increase
or reduce the authorised capital as it thinks fit,
so, however, that after such increase or
reduction, the authorised capital shall not
exceed three thousand crores or be less than
one thousand five hundred crores, of rupees.
* * * * *
(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 2), the paid-up capital of every
corresponding new bank constituted under sub-
section ( 1) may from time to time be increased
by—
* * * * *
Establishment
of
corresponding
new banks
and
business
thereof.

67
(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors
of the corresponding new bank may, after
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with
the previous sanction of the Central
Government, raise whether by public issue or
preferential allotment or private placement, of
equity shares or preference shares in accordance
with the procedure as may be prescribed, so,
however, that the Central Government shall, at
all times hold not less than fifty-one per cent
of the paid-up capital consisting of equity
shares of each corresponding new bank:
Provided that the issue of preference shares
shall be in accordance with the guidelines
framed by the Reserve Bank specifying the class
of preference shares, the extent of issue of each
class of such preference share (whether
perpetual or irredeemable or redeemable) and
the terms and conditions subject to which, each
class of preference shares may be issued.
(2BB) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 2), the paid-up capital of a
corresponding new bank constituted under
sub-section ( 1) may, from time to time and
before any paid-up capital is raised by public
issue or preferential allotment or private
placement under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2B),
be reduced by—
(a) the Central Government, after
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by
cancelling any paid-up capital which is lost,
or is unrepresented by available assets;
(b) the Board of Directors, after
consultation with the Reserve Bank and
with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, by paying off any paid-up
capital which is in excess of the wants of
the corresponding new bank:
Provided that in a case where such
capital is lost, or is unrepresented by
available assets because of amalgamation of
another corresponding new bank or a
corresponding new bank as defined in
clause ( d) of section 2 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1970 with the
corresponding new bank, such reduction
5 of 1970.

68
may be done, either prospectively or
retrospectively, but not from a date earlier
than the date of such amalgamation.
(2BBA) ( a) A corresponding new bank may,
from time to time and after any paid-up capital
has been raised by public issue or preferential
allotment or private placement under clause ( c)
of sub-section ( 2B), by resolution passed at an
annual general meeting of the shareholders
entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where
proxies are allowed, by proxy, and the votes
cast in favour of the resolution are not less
than three times the number of the votes, if
any, cast against the resolution by the
shareholders so entitled and voting, reduce its
paid-up capital in any way.
* * * * *
(2C ) The entire paid-up capital of a
corresponding new bank except the paid-up
capital raised from public by public issue or
preferential allotment or private placement
under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2B), shall stand
vested in, and allotted to, the Central
Government.
* * * * *
(2E) No shareholder of the corresponding
new bank, other than Central Government, shall
be entitled to exercise voting rights in respect
of any shares held by him in excess of one per
cent of the total voting rights of all the
shareholders of the corresponding new bank:
Provided that the shareholder holding any
preference share capital in the corresponding
new bank shall, in respect of such capital, have
a right to vote only on resolutions placed before
such corresponding new bank which directly
affects the rights attached to his preference
shares:
Provided further that no preference
shareholder shall be entitled to exercise voting
rights in respect of preference shares held by
him in excess of one per cent of the total voting
rights of all the shareholders holding preference
share capital only.
* * * *

69
EXTRACT FROM THE S TATE F INANCIAL C ORPORATION
ACT, 1951
(63 OF 1951)
* * * * *
7. (1)* * * * *
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this
sub-section, such of the bonds and debentures
issued by the Financial Corporation as are
guaranteed by the State Government as to the
repayment of the principal and payment of
interest and receipts issued by it for such of
deposits as are guaranteed by the State
Government as to the repayment of the
principal and payment of interest shall be
deemed to be included among the securities
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882 and also to be approved securities
for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and
the Banking Regulations Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA
ACT, 1955
(23 OF 1955)
* * * * *
12. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this section,
the shares of the State Bank shall be deemed
to be included among the securities enumerated
in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
and also to be approved securities for the
purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938, and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
Additional
capital of
Financial
Corporation
and
borrowing
powers.
Shares to be
approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.

70
EXTRACT FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA
(SUBSIDIARY B ANKS) A CT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
* * * * *
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this section,
the shares of subsidiary Bank shall be deemed
to be included among the securities enumerated
in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
and also to be approved securities for the
purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938, and the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
—————
E
XTRACT FROM THE W AREHOUSING C ORPORATIONS
ACT, 1962
(58 OF 1962)
5. (1)*  *  * * *
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts mentioned in this sub-section, the
shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation
shall be deemed to be included among the
securities enumerated in section 20 of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be
approved securities for the purpos of the
Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949.
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE R EGIONAL R URAL B ANKS
ACT, 1976
(21 OF 1976)
* * * * *
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Acts hereinafter mentioned in this section,
the shares of a Regional Rural Bank shall be
deemed to be included among the securities
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882, and shall also be deemed to be
approved securities for the purposes of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
————
Shares to be
approved
securities.
Shares to be
guaranted
by Central
Government
and to be
trusted or
approved
securities.
Shares to be
approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1882.
10 of 1949.

71
EXTRACT FROM THE I NDUSTRIAL F INANCE
CORPORATION (TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKING
AND R EPEAL) A CT, 1993
(23 OF 1993)
* * * * *
10. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the
shares, bonds and debentures of the Company
shall be deemed to be approved securities for
the purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
————
EXTRACT FROM THE I NDUSTRIAL F INANCE
CORPORATION (TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKING
AND R EPEAL) A CT, 1997
(7 OF 1997)
* * * * *
11. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the
shares, bonds and debentures of the Company
shall be deemed to be approved securities for
the purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882,
the Insurance Act, 1938 and the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACT FROM THE U NIT T RUST OF I NDIA
(TRANSFER OF U NDERTAKING AND R EPEAL)
ACT, 2002
(58 OF 2002)
* * * * *
17. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, the
shares, bonds, debentures and units of the
specified undertakings shall be deemed to be
approved securities for the purposes of
the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the Insurance
Act, 1938 and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
* * * * *
Shares,
bonds and
debentures
to be
deemed to
be approved
securities.
Shares,
bonds and
debentures
to be
deemed to
be approved
securities.
Shares,
bonds,
debentures
and units to
be deemed
to be
approved
securities.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1882.
4 of 1938.
10 of 1949.

72
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970
and the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
Undertakings) Act, 1980 and to make consequential
amendments in certain other enactments.
————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance)