STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE BENAMI TRANSACTIONS
(PROHIBITION) BILL, 2011
FIFTY-EIGHTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2012 / Sravana, 1934 (Saka)
58

FIFTY-EIGHTH  REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE BENAMI TRANSACTIONS
(PROHIBITION) BILL, 2011
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 26 June, 2012
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 August, 2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  13 August, 2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2012 /Sravana, 1934 (Saka)

COF No. 58
Price : Rs. 104.00
© 2012 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
I. Background ................................................................................. 1
II. Short title, extent and commencement .................................... 8
III. Prohibition of Benami Transaction ........................................... 14
IV . Authorities .................................................................................. 19
V . Attachment, Adjudication and Confiscation ......................... 23
VI. Appellate Tribunal ..................................................................... 28
VII. Appeal to High Court ................................................................ 30
VIII. Offences and Penalties............................................................... 31
IX. Miscellaneous ............................................................................. 33
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
9 January, 2012, 9 April, 2012, 18 May, 2012 and
 7 June, 2012 ................................................................................ 37
II. The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 ................... 46

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
*22. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
*23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
*26. Shri P . Rajeeve
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*28. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
29. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
30. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
**31. Shri Naresh Agrawal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
* Nominated to be the Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f. 4th May , 2012.
** Nominated to be the Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fifty-eighth Report on
the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011.
2. The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 introduced in
Lok Sabha on 18 August, 2011, was referred to the Committee on
13 September, 2011 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from Bombay Chamber
of Commerce and Industry (BCCI), Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII) and National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP).
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 9 January, 2012 took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue).
6. At the sitting held on 9 April, 2012, the Committee heard the
views of the representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII).
7. The Committee, at their sittings held on 18 May and 7 June,
2012 considered and adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman
to finalise the same and present it to the Hon’ble Speaker/Parliament.
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and the Confederation
of Indian Industry (CII) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing
the requisite material and information which were desired in connection
with the examination of the Bill.
9. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Bombay
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI), Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII) and National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP)
for placing before them their considered views on the Bill in the form
of memoranda.

(vi)
10. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
NEW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
15 June, 2012 Chairman,
25 Jyaistha,  1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

REPORT
I. BACKGROUND
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
1.1 The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 (hereafter
referred to as BTPA) was formulated by the Ministry of Law as a follow
up of the 57th Report of the Law Commission. The Law Commission also
examined implications of the provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882
and other statutory modifications of the benami law as contained in the
Code of Civil Procedure, the Transfer of Property Act, the Indian Penal
Code and the Income Tax Act. This Report was submitted on 7th August,
1973 by the Law Commission after studying the benami system as operating
in India and England. On 19th May, 1988 an Ordinance was promulgated
to prohibit the right to recover property held benami and for matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto.
1.2 Thereafter, the Law Commission was requested to take up the
question of benami transactions for detailed examination and to give its
considered views as early as possible so that a Bill to replace the Ordinance
could be drafted on the basis of its recommendations and got passed by
the Parliament. The Law Commission vide  its 130th Report on
August 14, 1988 recommended passing of appropriate legislation and
accordingly, the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill 1988, drafted after
getting the Report, was piloted by the Ministry of Law and enacted by
Parliament. It came into force on 19.05.1988. The Ministry of Finance was
tasked with implementation of this Act. The Act defines benami
transactions, prohibits them and further provides that violation of the
Act is punishable with imprisonment and fine. The Act prohibits recovery
of the property held benami from benamidar by the real owner. Properties
held benami are liable for confiscation.
Recommendations of Second Administrative Reforms Commission
1.3 The Second Administrative Reforms Commission in its fourth
Report presented in January, 2007 on Ethics in Governance inter-alia stated
on prohibition of Benami Transactions as follows:—
“….unfortunately, in the last 18 years, Rules have not been
prescribed by the Government for the purposes of sub-section (1)

2
of Section 5, with the result that the Government is not in a position
to confiscate properties acquired by the real owner in the name of
his benamidars. The wealth amassed by corrupt public servants is
often kept in ‘Benami’ accounts or invested in properties in others’
names. Strict enforcement of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1988, could unearth such properties and make property
accumulation difficult for corrupt officers and also work as a
deterrent for others. Steps should be taken for immediate implemen-
tation of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988.”
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 vis-à-vis the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011
1.4 The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 came into force
immediately after its enactment and still remains in force. The Act
prohibited the benami transactions and thus curbed the practice of benami.
To this extent the objective and purpose of bringing in the Act were
fulfilled.
1.5 The Ministry in a background note furnished to the Committee
stated that though the power to make rules was available to the Central
Government under the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, no
rules could be prescribed due to procedural infirmities. During the process
of formulating the rules for implementing certain provisions of the Act,
it was found that the provisions of the aforesaid Act are inadequate to
deal with benami transactions as the Act, inter-alia,—(i) does not contain
any specific provision for vesting of confiscated property with the Central
Government; (ii) does not have any provision for an appellate mechanism
against an action taken by the authorities under the Act, while barring
the jurisdiction of a Civil Court; (iii) does not confer the powers of the
Civil Court upon the authorities for its implementation. To remove these
infirmities, several consultations were held with the Ministry of Law and
Justice. Later it was realized that it would not be possible to remove the
infirmities by making some amendments but a fresh legislation shall be
required to comprehensively deal with all the issues.
1.6 Further, matters of procedure relating to its administration,
notice of hearing to parties concerned, service of notice and orders, powers
of the competent authority relating to gathering of evidence etc. have to
be provided; and the word ‘wife’ needed to be replaced with the word
‘spouse’ and property purchased in the name of certain other family
members is to be allowed under the Act.
1.7 In view of the circumstances stated above, a comprehensive
legislation, in place of the Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 has

3
become necessary in order to prohibit holding property in benami and
restrict right to recover or transfer property held benami and also to provide
a mechanism and procedure for confiscation of property held benami.
It is, therefore, the Government felt necessary to repeal the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 and enact a new comprehensive
legislation to deal with benami transactions. As the procedural infirmities
have been taken care of, it shall be possible to make rules for effective
implementation of the Act.
Salient features of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011
1.8 The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011, inter-alia ,
provides for the following, namely:—
(i) it prohibits benami transactions by any person, except in the
case of benami transactions entered into in the name of spouse,
brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant;
(ii) it provides that Benami property arising out of prohibited
Benami transaction is liable to confiscation by the Central
Government and such property shall vest absolutely in the
Central Government without paying any compensation;
(iii) it prohibits right of the benamidar to recover property held
benami;
(iv) it provides that the Initiating Officer, the Approving Authority
and the Administrator shall be the authorities for the purposes
of the Bill;
(v) it provides that the Adjudicating Authority and the
Appellate Tribunal established under the Prevention of
Money-Laundering Act, 2002 shall respectively be the
Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal for the
purposes of the Bill and any person aggrieved by an order
of Adjudicating Authority may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal;
(vi) it provides that any party aggrieved by any decision or order
of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High
Court on any question of law;
(vii) it enables the Central Government, in consultation with the
Chief Justice of the High Court, to designate one or more
Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts for the
purpose of the Bill;

4
(viii) it provides penalty for entering into prohibited benami
transactions and for furnishing any false documents in any
proceeding under the Bill;
(ix) it provides for transfer of any suit or proceeding in respect
of a benami transaction pending in any Court (other than
High Court) or Tribunal or before any authority to the
Appellate Tribunal as provided in the Bill;
(x) it also proposes to make consequential amendments in the
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.
Relevance of United Nations Convention against Corruption
1.9 India ratified the United Nations Convention Against
Corruption (UNCAC) in the year 2011. Questioned on addressing the
International Convention against Corruption adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations to prevent corruption and black money
through the Bill, the Ministry stated as follows:—
“The United Nations Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) is
primarily to promote and strengthen measures to prevent and
combat corruption more efficiently and effectively. However, some
provisions of the Convention may be relevant in the context of this
Bill. Such provisions are quoted below:—
“ Article 23. Laundering of proceeds of crime
1. Each State Party shall adopt, in accordance with fundamental
principles of its domestic law, such legislative and other
measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences,
when committed intentionally:
(a) (i) The conversion or transfer of property, knowing
that such property is the proceeds of crime, for
the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit
origin of the property or of helping any person
who is involved in the commission of the
predicate offence to evade the legal consequences
of his or her action;
(ii) The concealment or disguise of the true nature,
source, location, disposition, movement or
ownership of or rights with respect to property,
knowing that such property is the proceeds of
crime;

5
(b) Subject to the basic concepts of its legal system:
(i) The acquisition, possession or use of property,
knowing, at the time of receipt, that such property
is the proceeds of crime;
(ii) Participation in, association with or conspiracy
to commit, attempts to commit and aiding,
abetting, facilitating and counselling the
commission of any of the offences established in
accordance with this article.’’
“ Article 31. Freezing, seizure and confiscation
1. Each State Party shall take, to the greatest extent possible
within its domestic legal system, such measures as may be
necessary to enable confiscation of:
(a) Proceeds of crime derived from offences established
in accordance with this Convention or property
the value of which corresponds to that of such
proceeds;
(b) Property, equipment or other instrumentalities used in
or destined for use in offences established in accordance
with this Convention.
2. Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary
to enable the identification, tracing, freezing or seizure of
any item referred to in paragraph 1 of this article for the
purpose of eventual confiscation.
3. Each State Party shall adopt, in accordance with its domestic
law, such legislative and other measures as may be necessary
to regulate the administration by the competent authorities
of frozen, seized or confiscated property covered in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article.
The provisions contained in the Bill to some extent help in achieving
the aforesaid directives of the UNCAC as prohibition of benami
transactions would be a deterrence against concealment or disguise
of the ownership as such property is liable for confiscation under
the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011.”

6
The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and The Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988
1.10 On being pointed out the desirability of comprehensive
legislation to check the unaccounted money by amalgamating the two
Acts viz. (i) the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002; and (ii) the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, the Ministry in a written
reply stated as follows:—
“The objectives of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
and the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 are not the
same. PMLA deals with money laundering which involves
disguising financial assets so that they can be used without detection
of the illegal activity that produced them. Thus, PMLA is restricted
only to proceeds of crime, i.e. property obtained as a result of
criminal activity relating to scheduled offences.
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill operates on a different
plane. It is not restricted to proceeds of crime only because its
objective is to prohibit a benami transaction so that the beneficial
owner would be compelled to keep the property in his own name
only and the legal complexities owing to the apparent ownership
not being the real ownership, could be avoided. The prohibition
would apply irrespective of the nature or source of the funds
invested in the property. Thus, the Benami law applies equally to
both a property acquired through proceeds of crime and a property
acquired through legitimate means and hence its scope is wider
than PMLA. Though, a benami transaction could be used to disguise
the real ownership of a property to prevent detection of the illegal
activity that produced it, but that may not always be the case. This
is because a benami transaction could be entered into for several
other purposes also like defrauding creditors, avoiding payment
of taxes or social reasons.
In view of the above, the Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Bill has
been proposed as a separate legislation and not as a part of the
PMLA. Further, except for the common institutional set up for
adjudication and appeal, there is no overlap with the provisions
of the law regarding money laundering and hence there is no scope
of any confusion in this regard.”
1.11 In this regard, the Ministry further added:—
“The PMLA deals with money laundering which involves disguising
financial assets so that they can be used without detection of the

7
illegal activity that produced them. It is possible that the property
obtained as proceeds of crime may be disguised by holding it in
the name of a benamidar. The Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1988 has made all such transactions illegal. To this extent the
BTPA has been useful in prevention of money laundering.”
1.12 The  Committee note that an Ordinance was promulgated
on 19th May, 1988 to prohibit the right to recover property held benami
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. The
Ordinance was replaced with the Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1988. The purpose of bringing out the Ordinance in curbing benami
transactions was lost over the years as no rules for implementation of
the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 were framed. The
Committee fail to understand as to why the Government went into a
slumber after promulgation of Ordinance in a hurry and enactment of
law to prohibit benami transactions. The Committee are perturbed to
note that the Act was kept in “cold storage”, even as the recommendations
for immediate implementation of the benami law were made by Second
Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) way back in January, 2007.
It is, thus, evident that the Government was not sincere in
operationalising of the benami law. The Committee would expect that
at least now the Government will bring in this long overdue legislation
with due seriousness and implement it at the earliest.
1.13 Even after taking such an unduly long time for introducing
the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 to repeal the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 with a view to enacting a
comprehensive legislation to deal with benami transactions, the
Committee are surprised to find that the Bill needs modification with
a view to harmonizing it with the observations/recommendations of
the Second ARC on prohibition of benami transactions, and the United
Nations Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC). Moreover, certain
specific shortcomings in the clauses have been noticed during the course
of Committee’s deliberations in some provisions of the Bill as
introduced. These have been dealt with in detail in the later sections
of this Report. The Committee recommend enactment of the Bill without
any further delay subject to the observations made/modifications
suggested in this Report.
1.14 The long title of the Bill reads as follows:—
“ A Bill to consolidate and amend the law relating to benami
transactions, prohibit holding property in benami and restrict right
to recover or transfer property held benami, and provide mechanism
and procedure for confiscation of property held benami and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”

8
1.15 The Committee find that there is no reference in the Bill
to the mandate derived from United Nations Convention Against
Corruption (UNCAC). The Committee, therefore, desire that the
reference to this UNCAC may be made in the Bill to make it clear that
the various provisions of the Bill have an international basis.
II. SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT
2.1 Clause 1, inter-alia seeks to extend the provisions of the Bill to
the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
2.2 The Committee, keeping in view the economic gravity
involved in benami transactions, desire the Government to extend the
provisions of the Bill to the State of Jammu and Kashmir also in
consultation with the State Government.
2.3 Clause 1 (3) of the Bill reads “It shall come into force on such
date as the Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement
of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision”.
2.4 The Committee desire the Ministry that adequate care should
be taken so that the relevant and linked provisions are notified
simultaneously.
Clause 2(g): Benami Transactions
2.5 This clause defines “ benami transactions”.
2.6 Clause 2(g) provides as under:—
“benami transaction means,—
(A) a transaction or arrangement—
(a) where a property is transferred to, or is held by, a person
for a consideration provided, or paid by, another person;
and
(b) the property is held for the immediate or future benefit,
direct or indirect, of the person providing the
consideration, except when the property is held by—
(i) a karta, or a member of a Hindu undivided family,
as the case may be, and the property is held for

9
his benefit or benefit of other members in the
family; or
(ii) a person standing in a fiduciary capacity for the
benefit of another person towards whom he
stands in such capacity and includes a trustee,
executor, partner, agent, director of a company
or legal adviser, a depository or a participant
as an agent of a depository under the
Depositories Act, 1996 and any other person as
may be notified by the Central Government for
this purpose;
(B) a transaction or arrangement in respect of a property carried
out or made in a fictitious name; or
(C) a transaction or arrangement in respect of a property where
the owner of the property is not aware of, or, denies
knowledge of, such ownership.”
2.7 The Definition of benami transaction as provided in the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 is given below:—
“Benami transaction means any transaction in which property is
transferred to one person for a consideration paid or provided by
another person.”
2.8 Exclusions from benami transaction as per the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 are given below:—
“(i) Purchase of property by any person in the name of his wife
or unmarried daughter.
(ii) Prohibition of the right to recover property held benami does
not apply—
(a) where the person in whose name the property is held
is a coparcener in a Hindu undivided family and the
property is held for the benefit of the coparceners in
the family; or
(b) where the person in whose name the property is held
is a trustee or other person standing in a fiduciary
capacity, and the property is held for the benefit of
another person for whom he is a trustee or towards
whom he stands in such capacity.”

10
2.9 The rationale for the proposal in the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Bill, 2011 as given by the Ministry is furnished below:—
“The exclusions from the applicability of benami law are similar
except that in the case of purchase of property by any person
in the name of his wife or unmarried daughter, which was
excluded in BTPA, 1988, it has now been included as a non-
prohibited benami transaction (instead of as an exclusion from the
definition).”
2.10 In this regard, the Ministry further added as follows:—
“From the stand point of the transferor, it is wholly immaterial as
to from where the consideration comes. The transferor is concerned
with the payment of consideration for the transfer and once it is
received by him from and on behalf of the transferee, in reality or
ostensibly he would have no regard for any other matter. The
circumstances in which another person pays or provides the
consideration to the transferee for being passed on to the transferor
may be manifold. A person may provide consideration money to
the transferee out of charity or under some jural relationship such
as creditor and debtor or the like. The final relationship between
such other person and the transferee has nothing to do or may
have nothing to do with the jural relationship between the transferor
and transferee. The intention of the other person paying or providing
the consideration is in substance the main factor to be considered
and is of great importance. If that other person really intends that
he should be the real owner of the property, then only the transferee
may be characterized as a benamidar, whether the transferee is a
fictitious person or a real person having no intention to acquire
any title by means of the transfer. It was perhaps for this very
reason that intention of the person actually paying or providing
consideration to the transferee was incorporated as an essential
element in the provisions of section 82 of the Indian Trusts Act.
It would appear to be unreasonable to rest the provisions relating
to benami transactions on the payment or provision of consideration
alone by a person other than transferee. To have such a provision
in a sweeping language may make the Act unworkable in actual
implementation. The actual payment or provision of consideration
has been made the dominant factor, but by itself it may have no
real substance unless the person providing the consideration does
so with the intention of actually benefiting himself.
In view of the above, it is proposed that the payment alone by the
other person should not be the only consideration for deciding a

11
benami transaction rather intention of the other person paying or
providing the consideration should be considered for deciding a
benami transaction. Therefore, to hold a transaction or an
arrangement as benami, it is proposed to provide an additional test
that the benamidar should be holding the property for the benefit
of the person providing the consideration. It is also proposed that
property held by a coparcener of a Hindu undivided family for
the benefit of the coparcener in the family and property held by
a person standing in fiduciary capacity be excluded from the
definition of benami transaction.
2.11 The National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP)
submitted the following views in regard to Clause 2(g):—
“ An exception has been carved out where a property is held by
a person standing in a fiduciary capacity . Most of the lawyers will
act in a fiduciary capacity. In fact, a legal advisor has been specifically
included in the exception. Thus, properties held and managed in
tax heavens by lawyers will be out of the ambit of the Act.
Most of the benami properties will be held either in the name of
near relatives or by lawyers ……acting in a fiduciary capacity.
Leaving all these categories out will severely restrict the operation
of the Act to only those cases where properties are held in the
name of trusted employees, servants, etc. It is therefore doubtful
if the Act in its present form will achieve the avowed objective of
prohibiting the holding of property in benami.”
2.12 To a specific query as to if a person has given a loan to another
person, and that is the consideration paid for the property , how such
cases would be treated under the provisions of the Bill, the CII in a post-
evidence reply stated as follows:—
“Payment should be defined in the bill and if the substance of
transaction shows that the nature of the transaction shows its
irreversibility then such unsecured loans may be included in such
definition. However, the proposed bill must also include safeguards
such that bonafide transactions are not unnecessarily subject to
harassment and do not find themselves trapped within the fold of
malafide benami transactions.”
2.13 The Committee believe that definitions in any legislation
is important for effective implementation and achievement of the
objectives enshrined in the Acts. However, the Committee are unhappy
to note that the present Bill fails miserably on this count. For instance,
the relevant terms such as “transaction”, “arrangement”, “consideration

12
provided or paid” have not been defined in the Bill. Further, the terms
namely, “trustee”, “executor”, “partner”, “agent”, “director of a company
or legal adviser” have neither been defined nor added by way of
explanations in the Bill. Though some of these terms have been widely
used in other laws and many of these terms have been used without
specifically defining them, the Committee feel that specific definition
of these terms in context of the Bill will remove ambiguity and leave
no scope for misinterpretation and obviate delegated legislation. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to review the
definition clauses of the Bill, so as to include proper definitions for
every relevant term in the Bill itself.
2.14 The Committee note that the Second Administrative Reforms
Commission in its fourth Report presented in January, 2007 on Ethics
in Governance inter-alia stated on the subject of prohibition of Benami
Transactions that the wealth amassed by corrupt public servants is
often kept in ‘ Benami’ accounts or invested in properties in others
names. The Committee are, however, dismayed to note that instead of
strengthening the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, the
Government enlarged the scope of exemptions from the purview of the
Benami Transactions. The Committee also find credence in the view
expressed by the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP)
on exemption being proposed for a number of categories, as it would
severely restrict the operation of the proposed law, thereby affecting
the achievement of the avowed objective of prohibiting the benami
transactions. The Committee are of the view that the proposed
exemptions under Clause 2 (A)(b) should be pruned and there should
be no exemption other than purchasing property by any person in the
name of his/her spouse or unmarried daughter on the lines of the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988. Otherwise with such a
long list of exemptions, the very purpose of the proposed measure
would be defeated. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to amend Clause 2(A)(b) suitably by taking this aspect
into consideration.
Clause 2(j): Fair Market Value
2.15 According to this clause, “fair market value” in relation to a
property means:—
“(i) the price that the property would ordinarily fetch on sale in
the open market on the relevant date; and
(ii) where the price referred to in sub-clause (i) is not
ascertainable, such price as may be determined in accordance
with the rules made under this Act.”

13
2.16 Determination of “relevant date” is important in arriving at
fair market value of the property.
2.17 The Committee note that the term “relevant date” has neither
been defined nor provided by way of an explanation in the Bill. They
would expect that Clause 2 (j) of the Bill will be accordingly amended.
Clause 2(p): Property
2.18 Clause 2(p) reads as follows:—
“property” means property of any kind, whether movable or
immovable, tangible or intangible, and includes any right or interest
in such property and where the property is capable of conversion
into some other form, then the property in such converted form.
2.19 Some provisions of the UNCAC relevant to Clause 2(p) are
given below:—
“ Article 31. Freezing, seizure and confiscation
4. If such proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted,
in part or in full, into other property , such property shall be
liable to the measures referred to in this article instead of
proceeds.
5. If such proceeds of crime have been intermingled with
property acquired from legitimate sources, such property
shall, without prejudice to any powers relating to freezing
or seizure, be liable to confiscation up to the assessed value
of the intermingled proceeds.
6. Income or other benefits derived from such proceeds of crime,
from property into which such proceeds of crime have been
transformed or converted or from property with which such
proceeds of crime have been intermingled shall also be liable
to the measures referred to this article, in the same manner
and to the same extent as proceeds of crime.”
2.20 The Committee are of the view that the definition of
“property” in Clause 2(p) of the Bill is loosely worded and leaves
much scope for misinterpretation. For instance, it is not clear as to
whether the benami property or proceeds thereof that have been
transformed or converted, in part or in full, into other property be
treated as property. The Committee feel that there is a need to bring
in more clarity by modifying Clause 2(p) for achieving convergence

14
with the UNCAC. The Committee, therefore, desire that the definition
of the term “property” is, accordingly, rephrased.
III. PROHIBITION OF BENAMI  TRANSACTION
Clause 3: Prohibition of Benami Transaction
3.1 This clause contains provisions relating to prohibition of benami
Transactions.
Clause 3 (1) reads as under:—
“(1) No person shall, on and after the commencement of this Act,
enter into any benami transaction.
Clause 3 (2) reads as follows:—
Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to a benami
transaction entered into by any person, being an individual, in the
name of his–
(a) spouse;
(b) brother or sister; or
(c) any lineal ascendant or descendant.”
3.2 Giving such a wide exception could be dangerous as most benami
properties are reportedly purchased in the name of one of these relatives
and thus may escape confiscation. Asked to justify the exemptions
provided under Clause 3(2), the Ministry in a post-evidence reply informed
the Committee as under:—
“In the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 [BTPA], benami
transactions in the name of relatives, except in the name of wife
or unmarried daughter, are prohibited (section 3 of BTPA). In the
proposed Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 [BTPB], benami
transactions except in the name of spouse, brother or sister or any
lineal ascendant or descendant are prohibited (clause 3 of BTPB).
This means that properties subject to such transactions in the name
of such relatives would not be liable for confiscation. However,
such transactions are included in the definition of “ benami
transaction”. Therefore, deterrence in the form of prohibition of
right to recover the property and prohibition to re-transfer the
property by the benamidar to the beneficial owner would still be
applicable for such transactions (clauses 5 and 6).

15
The reasons for not prohibiting benami transactions with close
relatives are following:—
(i) Cases of joint ownership of property with relatives, i.e. where
a person acquires a property but, holds it in joint name with
a relative is an extremely common occurrence in India. Such
single or joint ownership with a female relative is also being
encouraged as a conscious social policy by State and Central
Government by reducing the rate of stamp duty, if the sole
owner or one of the owners, is a female relative. Prohibiting
such transactions would cause hardship.
The provisions regarding property held with relatives in the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill (BTPB) strike a balance
by allowing property transactions involving relatives, while
at the same time, not allowing the beneficial owner from
claiming at a later date that he never intended the transferee
(blood relation or spouse) to become owner of the property.
It recognizes that the transfer of a property to a person, for
a consideration provided or paid, by another person but with
the intention that the property is held for the benefit of the
person providing the consideration is a benami transaction.
However, it does not prohibit such transactions in the case
of transfer to blood relations, but such transaction still remains
a benami transaction. It does provide a deterrent, because in
case of a benami transaction with a relative (and with any
other person), the beneficial owner is prohibited from filing
or defending any suit for enforcing right of recovery of the
property on the ground that he is the real owner (clause 5).
If any unaccounted money is used in a transaction with
relatives as above, action can be taken under the Income Tax
Act and the PMLA (if the transactions arise from proceeds
of crime).”
3.3 In view of the above, when asked as to whether the Ministry
considered the implications of the exemption where a benami property
has been registered in name of family members, without their approval,
a written reply as furnished by the Ministry is given below:—
“Registering a property in the name of a family member is allowed
under the BTPB as it is not a prohibited benami transaction. Therefore
there would not be any incentive to register a property in the name
of family members without their approval. Also, such transactions
can generally be made only with the signature of the transferee,

16
hence this would be a case of fraud for which the provisions of
the CrPC would be attracted.
As mentioned, under the provisions of the proposed Bill, purchase
of property for own benefit but recorded in the name of family
members as listed in clause 3(2) of the Bill is not a prohibited
benami transaction. Since such a transaction shall still qualify to be
a benami transaction (though not a prohibited one), all of the
following provisions shall apply—
(a) No suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect of a
benami property against the person in whose name the
property is held can be made on behalf of a person claiming
to be the real owner of such property. [Clause 5(1)]
(b) No defence based on any right in respect of a benami property,
shall be allowed in any suit, claim or action by a person
claiming to the real owner. [Clause 5(2)]
(c) A benami property shall not be allowed to be retransferred
to the beneficial owner. (Clause 6)
These provisions would deter the person from registering
the property, while remaining its beneficial owner, in name
of family members with or without their approval.”
3.4 To a specific query asked by the Committee as to whether
exemptions provided under Clause 3(2) would help or hinder the pursuit
of benami transactions, the CII submitted a post-evidence reply as
follows:—
“Section 3 (2) of the Bill excludes certain specified transactions
from the purview of prohibition altogether. Benami transactions in
India have been prevalent for more than 2 centuries in recorded
judicial history. The motive of such benami transactions should be
the ideal barometer to exclude such transactions. Providing an
automatic immunity on account of transactions specified under
Section 3(2) is likely to cause some benami transaction which should
otherwise lead to confiscation slip through the net.
Transactions under Section 3 (2) sometimes may be carried out
with ulterior motives, like (a) desire to defeat the creditors;
(b) desire to defeat the operation of law under government’s service
rules or (c) desire to defeat the reach of revenue.
…..these transactions carried out with a malafide intention should
be expressly excluded and no protection of law should be provided
in such cases.”

17
3.5 The CII in their post-evidence reply stated as follows:—
“The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 should provide
for creation of a Registry for compulsory registration and
maintenance of record of the benami transactions. This would ensure
transparency and facilitate to take care of the diverse future
situations in which the benami transactions, which may be otherwise
quite legitimate but yet fall outside Clause 2(g) (b) or Clause 3(2)
of the Bill, may become necessary. In this regard, the concept
underlying the provisions of Section 187 C of the Companies
Act, have served a very useful purpose and can be adapted in the
Bill.”
3.6 Asked to furnish the Government‘s views on the suggestions
made, the Ministry informed as under:—
“Section 187C of the Companies Act provides for disclosure of
relevant particulars when shares are held in the name of a person
who does not hold the beneficial interest in such shares. The
disclosure is required to be made both by the ostensible owner as
well as by the beneficial owner.
Under the provisions of the proposed Bill, when property is held
by a Karta or a member of HUF for benefit of members of HUF
or when property is held by a person standing in a fiduciary capacity
for the benefit of another person (including a trustee, executor,
partner, agent, director of a company or legal advisor, a depository
participant or any other person as may be notified), the transaction
is not included in the definition of “ benami transaction”. Further,
a benami transaction in the name of spouse, brother or sister or any
lineal ascendant or descendant is not proposed to be prohibited.
All other benami transactions are proposed to be prohibited.
Registering the benami transactions would not be feasible as the
persons engaging in benami transactions would never disclose such
information because they would be liable for all the legal
consequences under the proposed Bill.”
3.7 The Committee are not inclined to agree to the Ministry’s
view on benami transactions in the name of the close relatives being
treated as non-prohibitive. The Committee are of the view that placing
a transaction under non-prohibitive list amounts to helping a culprit
whose primary goal is to get the property out of the legal net. The
argument regarding deterrence advanced by the Ministry does not
satisfy the Committee. The Committee feel that this long list of

18
exempted and non-prohibitive transactions does not go well with the
real objective of the proposed law viz. to curb the menace of benami
transactions. The Committee would like the Government to look into
the entire gamut of exempted as well as non- prohibitive list of
transactions and make it minimal as far as possible so that no
unscrupulous element could circumvent the provisions of the law. At
the same time, they also desire that income-tax authorities and
authorities under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 should
act in a coordinated manner with registration authorities so that any
illegal transaction could be tracked.
Clause 4: Property held benami liable to confiscation
3.8 Clause 4 of the Bill which provides for property held benami
liable to confiscation reads as under:—
“ Any property , which is subject-matter of benami transaction, not
being a benami transaction referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause 3,
shall be liable to be confiscated by the Central Government.”
3.9 The Committee observe that Clause 4 on “Property held
benami liable to confiscation” is silent on applicability of the
Clause to agricultural land, which is a State subject. The Committee
desire that necessary clarification may be provided in the enabling
Clause, specifying the manner of confiscating the benami property
involving agricultural land after examining the constitutional/legal
position.
Clause 6: Prohibition to re-transfer property in benamidar
3.10 Clause 6 of the Bill provides for prohibiting re-transfer property
in benamidar.
Clause 6 reads as follows:—
“No person, being benamidar shall re-transfer the benami property
held by him to the beneficial owner or any other person acting on
his behalf.”
3.11 The Committee note that the proposed Clause 6 is not explicit
as to whether this infringes the provisions of the Transfer of Property
Act, 1882. It also needs to be clarified whether Clause 6 directly or
indirectly confers ownership of such benami property on benamidar.
The Committee desire that Clause 6 of the Bill may be amended
accordingly.

19
IV . AUTHORITIES
Clause 9: Power of authorities regarding summons, production of
documents and to give evidence, etc.
4.1 Clause 9 reads:—
‘‘(1) The authorities shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books of account and
other documents;
(d) issuing commissions;
(e) receiving evidence on affidavits; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, any authority under this Act
may requisition the service of any police officer or of any
officer of the Central Government or State Government
or of both to assist him for all or any of the purposes
specified in sub-section (1), and it shall be the duty of
every such officer to comply with such requisition or
direction.”
4.2 The Ministry justified the proposed Clause 9 on the ground
that the powers of civil court were not prescribed under the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988. Therefore, the Government felt
necessary to provide powers of civil court to various authorities under
the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 so that they can effectively
discharge their duties.
4.3 The National Institute of Public Finance and Policy made the
following suggestion in regard to the proposed Clause 9(1)(b):—
“In order to find out information about benami deals, the authorities
need to have the power of calling for information from banks.
It is therefore suggested that in section 9(1)(b) dealing with the
power of authorities regarding summons etc., “enforcing the

20
attendance of any person including any officer of a banking
company and examining him on oath may be substituted.”
4.4 It is noticed that Section 11(b) of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 empowers the Adjudicating Authority to enforce
the attendance of any person, including any officer of a banking company
or a financial institution or a company, and examining him on oath.
4.5 Keeping in view the provisions under section 11(b) of the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and suggestion made for
empowering the authorities to summon the banks, the Committee
recommend that Clause 9(1)(b) should be suitably amended to include
“any officials of a banking company or a financial institution or a
company”. The words “banking company”, and “financial institution”
may also be defined in the Bill.
Clause 10: Power to call for information
4.6 Clause 10 of the Bill reads as under:—
“The Initiating Officer or the Adjudicating Authority shall have
power to require any officer or authority of the Central Government
or State Government or a local authority or any person or authority
who is responsible for registering and maintaining books of account
and other documents containing a record of any transaction relating
to any property or any other person to furnish such information
in relation to such persons, points or matters as in his opinion will
be useful for or relevant to the purposes of this Act.”
4.7 The Committee note that unlike the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002, the proposed Act has no separate chapter dealing
with obligations of any officer or authority of the Central Government
or State Government or a local authority to render assistance for all
or any of the purposes specified in sub-clause (1) of clause 9, particularly
for registering and maintaining books of account and other documents
and furnishing information under Clause 10. The Committee also note
that the term “record/documents” has not been defined in the Bill.
Similarly, the manner and procedures to be prescribed for maintaining
books of account and other documents as well as furnishing of
information in such a way that it provides all information particularly
source of property to facilitate unearthing benami transactions have
also not been indicated in Clause 10.
4.8 The Committee further note that in Notes on clauses of the
Bill, it has been mentioned that Clause 10 seeks to provide that the

21
Initiating Officer or the Approving Authority or the Adjudicating
Authority shall have power to call for information. However, the word
“Approving Authority” has been found missing in Clause 10. The
Committee would expect the Government to make amendments
accordingly.
4.9 The inherent difficulty of tracking the source of money in a
benami transaction continues to be the main challenge and this has not
been addressed even in the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011.
In this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:—
“Tracking the source of money in a benami transaction is a challenge
because by its very nature a benami transaction is known only to
the parties who are part of the arrangement and none of them
would disclose such a transaction as both the benamidar and the
beneficial owner are offenders under the benami law. Since it is a
collusive transaction, the detection of such transaction would usually
happen if there is a dispute between the parties. However, there
are various other laws like Income- tax Act, Prevention of Corruption
Act and Prevention of the Money Laundering Act which deal with
source and nature of the money involved in various transactions.”
4.10 On the same issue, the CII in a post-evidence reply stated as
under:—
“The Bill has specified a robust mechanism for enforcement.
However the Bill imposes sole reliance on revenue department for
enforcement of the provisions of the bill. Under Section 10 of the
Bill, the power to call for records or other documents from other
authorities……. This makes the detection process reactive and rest
with the Initiating Officer alone.
The Bill should consider certain “point of occurrence of transaction”
detection mechanism to detect benami transactions. An example of
which could be to obtain mandatory references from authorities
concerned (contemplated under Section 10 of the Bill) with
registration of various types of properties whether movable or
immovable. Suspicious transactions meeting certain defined
characteristics should be strictly and mandatorily be reported to
the Initiating Officer.
In continuation to above suggestion, Initiating Officer should
entertain applications from affected parties ( e.g. Creditors defeated
through Benami transaction) to recognize and initiate investigations
into Benami transactions provided there is some prima facie evidence
in existence.”

22
4.11 The Committee agree with the concern of the Ministry that
tracking the source of money in a benami transaction is a challenge.
In this regard, Committee would suggest that such constraint could be
addressed by creating an in-built mechanism in the proposed Act
whereby suspicious transactions are mandatorily referred to the
Initiating Officer or Approving Authority. Clause 10 may be modified
accordingly.
Clause 11: Power of authority to impound documents
4.12 Clause 11(1) provides as under:—
“Where any books of account or other documents are produced
before the authority in any proceedings under this Act and the
authority in this behalf has reason to believe that any of such books
of account or other documents are required to be impounded and
retained for any inquiry under this Act, it may impound and retain
such books of account or other documents for a period not exceeding
three months from the date of attachment made by the Adjudicating
Authority under sub-section (3) of section 15.”
4.13 Clause 11(3) reads as follows:—
“On the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1), the
books of account and other documents shall be returned to the
person from whom such books of account or other documents were
impounded unless the Approving Authority or Adjudicating
Authority permits retention of such books of account and other
documents beyond the said period.”
4.14 The Committee note that the word “attachment” is not
defined in the Bill whereas under clause 11(3), books of account or
other documents are proposed to be retained from the date of attachment
made by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (3) of
section 15, though the retention of such documents should be done
normally only after obtaining the approval of the Adjudicating
Authority, not the Approving Authority. Further, Clause 11(1) is not
clear as to whether the Initiating Officer or Approving Authority could
on their own impound and retain books of account or other documents
without an order from the Adjudicating Authority. The Committee are
of the view that if the records are relevant for filing of appeal, the
Approving Authority may be empowered to retain the documents until
filing of an appeal or for a stipulated period from the date of confiscation
order issued by the Adjudicating Authority. Similarly, a maximum
time-limit may be prescribed for Adjudicating Authority also for

23
retaining the (impounded) documents under Clause 11(3). The
Committee would recommend that Clause 11(1) and (3) may be suitably
amended.
V . ATTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND CONFISCATION
Clause 13: Notice and Attachment of property involved in prohibited
benami transaction
5.1 Clause 13 (1) to (3) reads as follows:—
“(1) Where the Initiating Officer, on the basis of material in his
possession, has reason to believe that any person, not being
a person referred in sub-section (2) of section 3, is a benamidar
in respect of a property, he may, after recording reasons in
writing, issue a notice to such person to show cause within
such time as may be specified in the notice why such property
should not be treated as benami property .
(2) Where a notice under sub-section (1) specifies any property
as being held by a benamidar referred to in that sub-section,
a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other
person who is a beneficial owner.
(3) Where the Initiating Officer is of the opinion that the person
in possession of the property held benami may alienate such
property during the period specified in the notice, he may,
with the previous approval of the Approving Authority, by
order in writing, attach provisionally such property in the
manner as may be prescribed.”
5.2 The Committee note that it is not clear as to whether the
manner of attachment of property involved in money-laundering
as provided in the Second Schedule to the Income-Tax Act, 1961
(43 of 1961) would also be applicable for the purposes of Clause 13(3)
of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011, and desire that,
suitable inclusion/amendment may be made in Clause 13 (3) of the
Bill.
5.3 Clause 13(4) reads:—
“The Initiating Officer, after making such inquires and calling for
such reports or evidence as he deems fit and taking into account

24
all relevant materials, shall, within a period of ninety days from
the date of issue of notice under sub-section (1),—
(a) where the provisional attachment has been made under sub-
section (3),—
(i) pass an order continuing the provisional attachment of
the property with the prior approval of the Approving
Authority, till the date of the order made by the
Adjudicating Authority under sub- section (3) of section
15; or
(ii) revoke the provisional attachment of the property with
the prior approval of the Approving Authority;
(b) where provisional attachment has not been made under sub-
section (3),—
(i) pass an order provisionally attaching the property till
the date of order made by the Adjudicating Authority
under sub-section (3) of section 15; or
(ii) decide not to attach the property as specified in the
notice, with the prior approval of the Approving
Authority.”
5.4 The Committee note that Initiating Officer gets prior approval
of Approving Authority at every stage during the process of
implementing certain provisions of the proposed Act [(Clauses 12, 13(3),
13(4)(a) and 13(4)(b)(ii)]. However, prior approval of Approving
Authority is not taken by the Initiating Officer for passing an order
provisionally attaching the property under Clause 13(4)(b)(i). The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Clause 13(4)(b)(i) may be suitably
amended to get prior approval of Approving Authority so that
uniformity in procedure relating to provisional attachment of property
is ensured.
5.5 Clauses 13(1) and 13(4)(a) (ii) of the Bill appear to be
contradictory to each other as the initiating officer who has recorded
reasons in writing for attachment has also been given power to revoke
the provisional attachment order with the prior approval of approving
authority. Asked to clarify as to whether the power to revoke the
provisional attachment be conferred on appellate authority, the Ministry
in a written response inter-alia stated as follows:—
“The provisional attachment proposed to be made by the Initiating
Officer under clause 13(3) is a precautionary measure so that a

25
person holding a benami property would not be able to dispose of
such property when he comes to know that proceedings are being
initiated under the proposed Bill. In case, the Initiating Officer is
satisfied that the property is not a benami property, he shall, with
prior approval of the Approving Authority , revoke the provisional
attachment. If he is of the view that it is a benami property, then,
only if the Approving Authority concurs, the attachment would be
allowed to continue. Such a case would be referred to the
Adjudicating Authority within 15 days. Therefore, the decision to
revoke or to continue the provisional attachment would be taken
only with prior approval of the Approving Authority. Thus, a check
has been introduced as the decision would be subject to overview
of the Approving Authority ...”
5.6 Questioned on safeguards proposed in the Bill to protect the
genuine investors, the Ministry in a reply stated as follows:—
“The intent behind the proposed Bill is to bar the practice of benami
so that there is no legal complexity due to the apparent ownership
being different from the real ownership. A genuine investor is
expected to make investment in his own name only and therefore
there would be no question of any harassment in this regard. The
Bill prescribes detailed procedure with adequate checks and balances
and opportunity for appeal so as to avoid any injustice in a genuine
case. The following provisions are proposed to avoid injustice in
a genuine case:—
(i) The show cause notice under clause 13(1) can be issued only
after recording reasons in writing.
(ii) The provisional attachment can be extended further only with
prior approval of Approving Authority .
(iii) A reference to the Adjudicating Authority, which shall be an
independent authority under PMLA, is mandatory and has
to be made within 15 days from attachment of the property.
(iv) The Adjudicating Authority is empowered to suo motu strike
out the name of any party improperly joined.
(v) It shall be mandatory for the Adjudicating Authority to pass
a speaking order within one year.
(vi) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Adjudicating
Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal
established under PMLA.

26
(vii) Any question of law arising out of an order of the Appellate
Tribunal can also be raised as an appeal to the High Court.”
5.7 On the same issue, the CII in a post-evidence reply informed
the Committee as under:—
“Section 2 (g)(A)(b) and Section 3 (2) attempts to prevent genuine
transactions to be classified as benami. The application of these
sections will prevent punishment of any genuine or bonafide
transactions. However, there is a lot of discretion bestowed on the
initiating officer to pursue specific cases. This leave room for
harassment.”
5.8 The Committee observe that Clauses 13(1) and 13(4)(a) (ii) of
the Bill appear to be contradictory to each other as the initiating officer
who has recorded reasons in writing for attachment has also been given
power to revoke the provisional attachment order with the prior
approval of approving authority. Such provision of empowering the
Initiating Officer to revoke the provisional attachment of property is
prone to misuse. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that an
appropriate authority other than the Initiating Officer may be
designated for recommending revocation of provisional attachment to
Approving Authority. Further, adequate checks and balances may be
prescribed for checking the use of discretionary powers bestowed on
the Initiating Officer so that genuine transactions are not subjected to
avoidable harassment.
Clause 15: Adjudication of benami property
5.9 Clause 15 of the Bill provides for adjudication of benami property .
Clause 15(1) reads as under:—
“On receipt of a reference under sub-section (5) of section 13, the
Adjudicating Authority shall serve notices, to furnish such
documents, particulars or evidence as is considered necessary on
a date to be specified therein, on the following person, namely:—
(a) the person specified as a benamidar therein;
(b) any person referred to as the beneficial owner therein or
identified as such;
(c) any interested party, including a banking company;
(d) any person who has made a claim in respect of the property.”

27
5.10 It is noticed that section 8 of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 provides the Adjudicating Authority to serve a
notice of not less than thirty days on such calling upon him to indicate
the sources of his income etc.
5.11 The Committee note that unlike section 8 of the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act, 2002, no time-limit has been prescribed for
serving a notice by the Adjudicating Authority to the person concerned
under Clause 15(1) of the Bill. The Committee desire that necessary
amendments may thus be made for this purpose.
Clause 16: Confiscation and Vesting of benami property
5.12 Clause 16 of the Bill relates to confiscation and vesting of
benami property by the Adjudicating Authority.
Clause 16(1) reads as under:—
“Where any property is attached under sub-section (3) of
section 15, the Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the person concerned, make an order
confiscating the property held to be a benami property.”
5.13 The “ Adjudicating Authority has been defined in Clause 2 (a)
of the Bill which reads as under:—
“ Adjudicating Authority means the Adjudicating Authority
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Prevention of
Money-Laundering Act, 2002.”
5.14 Clause 16 of the Bill is silent on the rules and procedures
to be prescribed for manner of confiscating benami property by the
Adjudicating Authority. It is also not clear as to whether all the powers
conferred on the Adjudicating Authority by or under the Prevention
of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and rules and procedures prescribed
thereunder should also be applicable for the purposes of the proposed
Act. The Committee would expect that suitable amendments are made
in Clause 16(1) of the Bill.
Clause 17: Management of Properties
5.15 Clause 17 provides for management of properties confiscated
under this Act which reads as under:—
“(1) The Administrator shall have the power to receive and manage
the property, in relation to which an order of confiscation

28
under sub-section (1) of section 16 has been made, in such
manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, notify as many of its officers as it thinks fit,
to perform the functions of an Administrator.
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the
Central Government may direct, to dispose of the property
which is vested in the Central Government under
section 16.”
5.16 Asked to clarify as to whether the Administrator proposed
under Clause 17 is the final authority, and how the property would be
disposed of before the final decision is taken, the Ministry submitted
their written response as follows:—
“For disposal of the acquired property the Administrator shall be
governed by the rules that may be prescribed in this regard. The
disposal of property shall be undertaken only after all opportunities
of appeal available under the proposed Bill are exhausted and the
order for confiscating the property has attained finality.”
5.17 The Committee note that contrary to the reply of the Ministry,
Clause 17(1) is silent on the rules to be prescribed for disposal of the
acquired property by the Administrator. The Committee also note that
the rank of officers to be notified to perform the functions of an
Administrator has not been mentioned in Clause 17(2). The Committee
would recommend that Clause 17(1) and (2) may be amended
accordingly. The Committee also desire that upkeep and proper
maintenance of the properties acquired by the Administrator must be
ensured.
VI. APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
Clause 19: Establishment of Appellate Tribunal
6.1 Clause 19 of the Bill provides for establishment of Appellate
Tribunal.
Clause 19 reads: “Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate
Tribunal established under section 25 of the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002 shall be the Appellate Tribunal for the
purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise
the powers conferred on it by or under this Act.”

29
6.2 Asked to furnish the reasons for utilizing the existing Appellate
Tribunal set up under section 25 of the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002 for the purposes of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill,
2011, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as follows:—
“The Appellate Tribunal established under section 25 of the
Prohibition of Money Laundering Act, 2002 is proposed to be the
Appellate Tribunal for the purpose of this Bill. This has been
proposed as the Appellate Tribunal under the PMLA is an existing
and running institution and can be entrusted with additional work.
This way we shall be making effective use of existing resources and
the time and money required in creating a new set-up can be
avoided.”
6.3 The Committee are of the view that it would be unreasonable
to expect from the Appellate Tribunal functioning under the Prevention
of Money Laundering (PML) Act, 2002 to expedite and dispose off a
large number of cases falling under both the PML Act, 2002 and the
proposed Act in a time-bound manner, that too without any
corresponding increase in the existing sanctioned strength of the
Tribunal. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
set up an Appellate Tribunal exclusively for speedy disposal of the
cases under the proposed Act.
Clause 20: Appeals to Appellate Tribunal
6.4 Clause 20 empowers any person to prefer appeal to Appellate
Tribunal.
Sub-clause (1) of Clause 20 reads as follows:—
“ Any person aggrieved by an order of Adjudicating Authority may
prefer an appeal in such form and along with such fee, as may be
prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal against the order passed by
the Adjudicating Authority under clause 15 within forty-five days
from the date of such order.”
6.5 It is noticed that section 26 of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 enables the Director or any person aggrieved by
an order made by the Adjudicating Authority under this Act, to prefer
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
6.6 The Committee note that section 26 of the Prevention of
Money Laundering Act, 2002 enables a Director of the Central
Government to prefer appeal before the Appellate Tribunal. However,
the proposed Act does not have such provision, as a result the Initiating

30
Officer or Approving Authority would lose an opportunity of filing
an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal under Clause 20(1) against the
order of the Adjudicating Authority. Further, it is not clear as to whether
an appeal could also be filed against the order passed by the
Adjudicating Authority under Clause 16(1) related to confiscating the
property held to be a benami property. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Clause 20(1) should be suitably amended in this regard.
6.7 Sub-clause (4) of Clause 20 provides as under:—
“The Appellate Tribunal, as far as possible, may hear and decide
such appeal within a period of two years from the last date of the
month in which the appeal is filed.”
6.8 As the aggrieved party has further opportunity of filing an
appeal to High Court, the Committee recommend that the time-limit
for disposal of appeals by the Appellate Tribunal may be reduced to
one year from the proposed period of two years.
VII. APPEAL TO HIGH COURT
Clause 24: Appeal to High Court
7.1 Clause 24 of the Bill provides for appeal to High Court which
inter-alia reads as follows:—
“(1) Any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within one
hundred and twenty days from the date of communication
of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on
any question of law arising out of such order.
(2) The High Court may entertain any appeal after the said period
of one hundred and twenty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal within the period specified in sub-section (1).”
7.2 It is noticed that section 42 of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 allows any person aggrieved by any decision or
order of the Appellate Tribunal to file an appeal to the High Court within
sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of
the Appellate Tribunal. Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not
exceeding sixty days.

31
7.3 The Committee would like the Government that in line with
section 42 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, the period
of time of filing appeal to the High Court under Clause 24 (1) and (2)
should be reduced to sixty days for speedy disposal of cases.
VIII. OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Clause 27: Penalty for benami transaction
8.1 Clause 27 of the Bill deals with the penalty for benami transaction
which reads as follows:—
“(1) Where any person enters into a benami transaction, not being
a benami transaction reffered to in sub-section (2) of section 3,
in order to defeat the provisions of any law or to avoid
payment of statutory dues or to avoid payment to creditors,
the beneficial owner, benamidar and any other person
who abets or induces any person to enter into such
benami transaction, shall be guilty of the offence of benami
transaction.
(2) Whoever is found guilty of the offence of benami transaction
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
months, but which may extend to two years and shall also
be liable to fine which may extend to twenty-five per cent.
of the fair market value of the property.”
Clause 28: Penalty for false information
8.2 Clause 28 provides for penalty for false information which reads
as under:—
“ Any person who wilfully gives false information to any authority
or furnishes any false document in any proceeding under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than three months but which may extend to two years or
with fine which may extend to ten per cent. of the fair market value
of the property”.
8.3 The consequences of entering into a benami transaction as per
the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 as furnished by the
Ministry is given below:—
“(a) Prosecution for entering into a benami transaction resulting
with imprisonment for a term which may extend up to three
years or with fine or with both.

32
(b) All properties held benami shall be subject to acquisition by
such authority, in such manner and after following such
procedure as may be prescribed.
8.4 The rationale for the above modified proposal in the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011 as furnished by the Ministry is given
below:—
“Prosecution has been widened to include an abettor in the case
of a benami transaction.”
8.5 Questioned on the reduction of upper-limit of imprisonment
to two years in the Bill from three years in the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988, the Ministry furnished a written reply as under:—
“In the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011, it is proposed
that the offence of benami transaction shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 6 months,
but which may extend to 2 years. Under the provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment of upto 2 years, the accused is subjected to a summons
trial. The trial of a summons case reduces the time by half as
compared to a regular trial as there are no separate proceedings
for framing of charges before proceeding with trial. It only requires
the particulars of the offence to be conveyed to the accused. Thus,
the upper limit of tenure of imprisonment has been kept at 2 years
so as to enable a summons trial for offences which will expedite
the prosecution proceedings as procedures in a summons trial are
simpler and less time consuming. This will help in speedy disposal
of cases.”
8.6 On the same issue, the CII in a post-evidence reply informed
the Committee as follows:—
“….the point of indifference between (a) entering into a
benami transaction, and (b) carrying out a legally acceptable
transaction, needs to be calibrated so that the cost of carrying out
a benami transaction is higher than the benefit of doing a benami
transaction.
This bill proposes three components of punishement, namely;
(i) Confiscation of the property under Section 4; (ii) Imposition
of 25% of Fair Market Value of the property as a fine under
Section 27 (2); and (iii) a jail sentence of 6 months extending
upto 2 years under Section 27 (2).

33
On the other hand, the cost of carrying out a non-benami transaction
using one’s own income on a post-tax basis involves a maximum
income tax of 33% payable on the individual’s income to buy the
property in one’s own name.
A comparison of the two scenarios above suggests that
the punishment needs to be made stiffer. The Bill should
consider increasing the quantum of fine and jail term from 2 years
to 3 years to increase the disincentive to enter into a benami
transaction.”
8.7 As regards punishment for prohibited benami transactions,
the maximum punishment of imprisonment of two years as proposed
in the Bill is lesser than the maximum punishment of imprisonment
of three years under the existing Act i.e. the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988. The Committee do not find any merit in the
reasons advanced by the Ministry for reduction of period of
imprisonment. The Committee are of the strong view that procedures/
proceedings in prosecuting the cases should not compromise with
the quantum of punishment they deserve. Moreover, the proposed
Act has a number of provisions for speedy disposal of cases like
Appellate Tribunal and Special Courts. As pointed out by the
Second Administrative Reforms Commission, stiffer punishment should
be provided so that it would work as a deterrent for others. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the maximum punishment of
imprisonment of three years under the existing Act i.e. the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 should be retained in the proposed
law.
IX. MISCELLANEOUS
Clause 31: Exemption
9.1 Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
exempt any property or class of properties from the operation of the
proposed Act which reads as under:—
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any
property or class of properties from the operation of this Act.
(2) Every notification issued under Sub-clause (1) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.”
9.2 The Committee find that no parameters have been prescribed
for providing exemption to any property or class of properties from

34
the operation of the proposed Act. The Committee are of the view that
though every notification to be issued under Clause 31 (1) would be
laid before each House of Parliament, an exhaustive list of parameters
for being eligible for exemption under Clause 31 may be provided by
way of Rules. Accordingly, Clause 31 may be suitably amended.
Clause 41: Legal Heir
9.3 Clause 41 of the Bill relates to legal heir which reads as
follows:—
“(1) Where a person dies during the course of any proceeding
under this Act, any proceeding taken against the deceased
before his death shall be deemed to have been taken against
the legal heir and may be continued against the legal heir
from the stage at which it stood on the date of the death of
the deceased.
(2) Any proceeding which could have been taken against the
deceased if he had survived, may be taken against the legal
heir and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly .
(3) Where any property of a person has been held benami under
section 15, then it shall be lawful for the legal heir of such
person to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, in place
of such person and the provisions of section 20 shall, so far
as may be, apply, or continue to apply, to such appeal.”
9.4 The Committee note that the word “legal heir” has not been
defined in the Bill. It is also not clear whether all legal heirs including
minor of the deceased would fall under Clause 41. The Committee
would, therefore, recommend the Government to review Clause 41 and
amend it suitably so that innocent legal heirs are protected against the
proceedings under the proposed Act. The Committee also desire that
legal heirs in any case should not be sent to jail for the offences
committed by their parents/guardians. In such cases, only confiscation
of property will suffice.
Clause 43: Power to make rules
9.5 Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules which reads as follows:—
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.

35
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) determination of the price where the price is not
ascertainable under clause (j) of section 2;
(b) the powers and functions to be exercised by the
authority under section 8;
(c) any other matter under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(d) the manner of provisional attachment of the property
under sub-section (3) of section 13;
(e) the manner to receive and manage property under sub-
section (1) of section 17;
(f) the form in which appeal shall be filed the fee for filing
the appeal under sub-section (1) of section 20.”
9.6 In order to ensure that the proposed Act would not go the
way of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988, the Committee
would recommend that a maximum period of six months from the
enactment of the law be prescribed to make rules under Clause 43.
Clause 45 – Power to remove difficulties
9.7 Clause 45 empowers the Central Government to remove
difficulties which reads:—
“(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the Central Government may , by order, published
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary
for removing the difficulty .
(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry
of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.”
9.8 Regarding Clause 45(2) of the Bill, the Committee feel that
there should be no time restriction for issue of orders to remove
difficulties, which may arise while giving effect to the provisions of

36
the Bill particularly in public interest, especially as Clause 45(3) provides
for such orders being laid as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
Clause 45(2) should be deleted in the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
15 June, 2012 Chairman,
25 Jyaistha,  1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

37
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9th January, 2012 from
1130 hrs. to 1430 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
4. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Prem Das Rai
7. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Yashvir Singh
11. Shri Manicka Tagore
12. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
13. Shri M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
15. Shri Raashid Alvi
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
17. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
18. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao

38
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
Part I
(1130 hrs. to 1250 hrs.)
WITNESSES
2. *** *** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
Part II
(1250 hrs. to 1425 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri R.S. Gujral, Finance Secretary and Revenue Secretary
2. Shri M.C. Joshi, Chairman, Central Board of Direct Taxes
(CBDT)
3. Shri K.M. Nair, Member
4. Shri Ashutosh Dikshit, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Sunil Gupta, Joint Secretary
3. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) in connection with examination of the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011. The major issues discussed
during the briefing included delay in bringing the Bill to repeal Benami
Transactions Prohibition Act, 1988, exclusion of property purchased in
the name of brother or sister and lineal ascendants and descendants from
the ambit of benami transactions, grounds for reduction in penalty,
safeguards to protect genuine investors, setting up of separate tribunal,
lacunae in certain clauses of the Bill, defining terms like property and
*** Does not pertain to this report.

39
transaction etc. and comparable laws in other countries dealing with
Benami transactions etc. The Chairman directed the representatives of
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to furnish a comprehensive
background note on the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011
alongwith replies to the points raised by the Members during the
discussion at an early date.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

40
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9th April, 2012 from 1430 hrs.
to 1645 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Prem Das Rai
7. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
8. Shri Yashvir Singh
9. Shri Manica Tagore
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Piyush Goyal
12. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
13. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh – Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan – Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma – Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora – Under Secretary

41
Part I
(1430 hrs. to 1515 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
1. Shri Anshuman Magazine, Chairman and MD, CB Richard
Ellis, South Asia Pvt. Ltd.
2. Shri Kalyan Chakarabarty, Director, Red Fort Capital
3. Shri Babu Khan, Director and Head – Infrastructure, CII
4. Shri Sunil K. Misra, Director – Public Policy, CII
2. The Committee heard the representatives of the Confederation
of Indian Industry (CII) in connection with examination of the ‘ Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011’. The major issues discussed during
the briefing included exclusion of property purchased in the name of
brother or sister and lineal ascendants and descendants from the ambit
of benami transactions, grounds for reduction in penalty , safeguards to
protect genuine investors, lacunae in certain clauses of the Bill, defining
terms like property and transaction etc. and comparable laws in other
countries dealing with Benami transactions etc. possible effectiveness of
the Bill in prevention of benami transactions, United Nation‘s International
convention against corruption, synchronisation of Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Bill, 2011 and Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002,
tracking the source of benami transactions, measures for further
strengthening the Bill etc. The Chairman directed the representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) to furnish replies to the points
raised by the Members during the discussion within a week‘s time.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
(1515 hrs. to 1645 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
3. *** *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned at 1645 hours.
*** Does not pertain to this report.

42
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Friday , the 18th May, 2012 from 1000 hrs.
to 1030 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Prem Das Rai
5. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Naresh Agrawal
7. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
8. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
9. Shri Piyush Goyal
10. Shri P . Rajeeve
11. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
12. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
13. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
14. Shri Naresh Agrawal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

43
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) The Companies Bill, 2011; and
(ii) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011.
3. As some Members desired more time to consider and formulate
their views on the above draft reports, the Committee decided to postpone
the adoption of the draft reports to 7 June, 2012.
The Committee then adjourned.

44
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Thursday , the 7th June, 2012 from 1130 hrs.
to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Prem Das Rai
5. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
6. Shri Yashvir Singh
7. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri P . Rajeeve
9. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
10. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
11. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
12. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
13. Shri Piyush Goyal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

45
Part I
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.)
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011; and
(ii) The Companies Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee adopted the above draft reports with some minor
modifications as suggested by Members. The Committee authorised the
Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the modifications suggested
and present the same to Hon’ble Speaker/Parliament.
Part II
(1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.)
4. *** *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Does not pertain to this report.

46
CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commence-
ment.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION OF BENAMI TRANSACTION
3. Prohibition of benami transaction.
4. Property held benami liable to
confiscation.
5. Prohibition of right to recover property
held benami.
6. Prohibition to re-transfer property in
benamidar.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 56 of 2011
THE BENAMI TRANSACTIONS (PROHIBITION)
BILL, 2011
________
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
________
APPENDIX II

47
CHAPTER III
AUTHORITIES
7. Authorities.
8. Jurisdiction of authorities.
9. Powers of authorities regarding
summons, production of documents and
to give evidence, etc.
10. Power to call for information.
11. Power of authority to impound
documents.
12. Power to cause inquiry or investigation.
CHAPTER IV
A
TTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND C ONFISCATION
13. Notice and attachment of property
involved in prohibited benami transaction.
14. Manner of service of notice.
15. Adjudication of benami property.
16. Confiscation and vesting of benami
property .
17. Management of properties confiscated
under this Act.
18. Possession of the property.
CHAPTER V
A
PPELLATE TRIBUNAL
19. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
20. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.
CLAUSES

48
21. Powers of Appellate Tribunal.
22. Rectification of mistakes.
23. Right to representation.
24. Appeal to High Court.
CHAPTER VI
S
PECIAL COURTS
25. Special Courts.
26. Application of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before
Special Court.
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND P ENALTIES
27. Penalty for benami transaction.
28. Penalty for false information.
29. Previous sanction.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. Certain transfers to be null and void.
31. Exemption.
32. Power of Central Government to issue
directions, etc.
33. Findings under other laws not
conclusive for proceedings under this
Act.
34. Application of other laws not barred.
C
LAUSES

49
35. Bar of Jurisdiction.
36. Offences to be non-cognizable.
37. Offences by companies.
38. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain
grounds.
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.
40. Transfer of pending cases.
41. Legal heir.
42. Overriding effect of Act.
43. Power to make rules.
44. Rules to be laid before Parliament.
45. Power to remove difficulties.
46. Repeal and saving.
47. Amendment of enactment.
THE SCHEDULE
C
LAUSES

50
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to
benami transactions, prohibit holding property in
benami and restrict right to recover or transfer
property held benami, and provide mechanism and
procedure for confiscation of property held benami
and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-
second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates
may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed
as a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 56 of 2011
THE BENAMI TRANSACTIONS (PROHIBITION)
BILL, 2011
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

51
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “ Adjudicating Authority” means the
Adjudicating Authority appointed under sub-
section ( 1) of section 6 of the Prevention of
Money-Laundering Act, 2002;
(b) “ Administrator” means an Income-Tax
Officer as defined in clause ( 25) of section 2
of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(c) “ Appellate Tribunal” means the
Appellate Tribunal established under
section 25 of the Prevention of
Money-Laundering Act, 2002;
(d) “ Approving Authority” means a Joint
Commissioner of Income-Tax as defined in
clause ( 28C) of section 2 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961;
(e) “authority” means an authority
referred to in section 7;
(f) “benami property” means any property
which is the subject-matter of a benami
transaction;
(g) “ benami transaction” means,—
(A) a transaction or arrangement—
(a) where a property is
transferred to, or is held by, a person
for a consideration provided, or paid
by, another person; and
(b) the property is held for the
immediate or future benefit, direct
or indirect, of the person providing
the consideration, except when the
property is held by—
(i) a karta, or a member of a
Hindu undivided family , as the
case may be, and the property is
Definitions.
15 of 2003.
43 of 1961.
15 of 2003.
43 of 1961.

52
held for his benefit or benefit of
other members in the family; or
(ii) a person standing in a
fiduciary capacity for the benefit
of another person towards whom
he stands in such capacity and
includes a trustee, executor,
partner, agent, director of a
company or legal adviser, a
depository or a participant as an
agent of a depository under the
Depositories Act, 1996 and any
other person as may be notified
by the Central Government for
this purpose;
(B) a transaction or arrangement in
respect of a property carried out or made
in a fictitious name; or
(C) a transaction or arrangement in
respect of a property where the owner
of the property is not aware of, or, denies
knowledge of, such ownership;
(h) “ benamidar ” means a person or a
fictitious person, as the case may be, in whose
name the benami property is transferred or
held and includes a name lender;
(i) “beneficial owner” means a person,
whether his identity is known or not, for
whose benefit the benami property is held by
a benamidar;
(j) “fair market value” in relation to a
property , means—
(i) the price that the property would
ordinarily fetch on sale in the open
market on the relevant date; and
(ii) where the price referred to in sub-
clause (i) is not ascertainable, such price
as may be determined in accordance with
the rules made under this Act.
22 of 1996.

53
(k) “Initiating Officer” means an Assistant
Commissioner of Income-tax as defined in
clause ( 9A) of section 2 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961;
(l) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notified” shall be construed
accordingly;
(m) “High Court” means—
(i) the High Court within the
jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party
ordinarily resides or carries on business
or personally works for gain; and
(ii) where the Government is the
aggrieved party, the High Court within
the jurisdiction of which the respondent,
or in a case where there are more than
one respondent, any of the respondents,
ordinarily resides or carries on business
or personally works for gain;
(n) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a company;
(iv) a firm (including a limited
liability partnership under the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008);
(v) an association of persons or a
body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not;
(vi) every artificial juridical person,
not falling within any of the preceding
sub-clauses.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
clause, an association of persons or a body
of individuals or an artificial juridical person
43 of 1961.
6 of 2009.

54
shall be deemed to be a person, whether or
not such person or body or artificial juridical
person was formed or established or
incorporated with the object of deriving
income, profits or gains;
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(p) “property” means property of any
kind, whether movable or immovable,
tangible or intangible, and includes any right
or interest in such property and where the
property is capable of conversion into some
other form, then the property in such
converted form;
(q) “Schedule” means the Schedule
appended to this Act;
(r) “Special Court” means a Court of
Session designated as Special Court under
sub-section ( 1) of section 25;
(s) “transfer” includes sale, purchase or
any other form of transfer of right, title,
possession or lien.
CHAPTER II
P
ROHIBITION OF BENAMI TRANSACTION
3. (1) No person shall, on and after the
commencement of this Act, enter into any benami
transaction.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1)
shall apply to a benami transaction entered into
by any person, being an individual, in the name
of his–
(a) spouse;
(b) brother or sister; or
(c) any lineal ascendant or descendant.
Prohibition
of benami
transaction.

55
4. Any property, which is subject-matter of
benami transaction, not being a benami transaction
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3, shall
be liable to be confiscated by the Central
Government.
5. (1) No suit, claim or action to enforce any
right in respect of any property held benami
against the person in whose name the property
is held or against any other person shall lie by,
or, on behalf of, a person claiming to be the real
owner of such property.
(2) No defence based on any right in respect
of any property held benami, whether against the
person in whose name the property is held, or,
against any other person, shall be allowed in
any suit, claim or action by or on behalf of a
person claiming to be the real owner of such
property .
6. No person, being benamidar shall re-transfer
the benami property held by him to the beneficial
owner or any other person acting on his behalf.
CHAPTER III
A
UTHORITIES
7. The following shall be the authorities for
the purposes of this Act, namely:—
(a) the Initiating Officer;
(b) the Approving Authority; and
(c) the Administrator.
8. (1) The authorities shall exercise all or any
of the powers and perform all or any of the
functions conferred on, or, assigned, as the case
may be, to it under this Act or the rules framed
thereunder in accordance with such directions as
the Central Government may issue for the
exercise of powers and performance of the
functions by all or any of the authorities.
Property
held benami
liable to
confiscation.
Prohibition
of right to
recover
property
held benami.
Prohibition
to re-
transfer
property in
benamidar.
Authorities.
Jurisdiction
of authori-
ties.

56
(2) In issuing the directions or orders referred
to in sub-section (1), the Central Government may
have regard to any one or more of the following
criteria, namely:—
(a) territorial area;
(b) classes of persons;
(c) classes of cases; and
(d) any other criterion specified by the
Central Government in this behalf.
9. (1) The authorities shall, for the purposes
of this Act, have the same powers as are vested
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person
and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books
of account and other documents;
(d) issuing commissions;
(e) receiving evidence on affidavits; and
(f) any other matter which may be
prescribed.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, any authority
under this Act may requisition the service of any
police officer or of any officer of the Central
Government or State Government or of both to
assist him for all or any of the purposes specified
in sub-section (1), and it shall be the duty of every
such officer to comply with such requisition or
direction.
10. The Initiating Officer or the Adjudicating
Authority shall have power to require any officer
or authority of the Central Government or State
Government or a local authority or any person
Powers of
authorities
regarding
summons,
production
of docu-
ments and
to give
evidence,
etc.
Power to
call for
information.
5 of 1908.

57
or authority who is responsible for registering
and maintaining books of account and other
documents containing a record of any transaction
relating to any property or any other person to
furnish such information in relation to such
persons, points or matters as in his opinion will
be useful for or relevant to the purposes of this
Act.
11. (1) Where any books of account or other
documents are produced before the authority in
any proceedings under this Act and the authority
in this behalf has reason to believe that any of
such books of account or other documents are
required to be impounded and retained for
any inquiry under this Act, it may impound
and retain such books of account or other
documents for a period not exceeding three
months from the date of attachment made by the
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 3) of
section 15.
(2) The person, from whom the books of
account and other documents were impounded,
shall be entitled to obtain copies of the books of
account or other documents impounded under
sub-section ( 1).
(3) On the expiry of the period specified
under sub-section ( 1), the books of account and
other documents shall be returned to the person
from whom such books of account or other
documents were impounded unless the
Approving Authority or Adjudicating Authority
permits retention of such books of account and
other documents beyond the said period.
12. The Initiating Officer, after obtaining prior
approval of the Approving Authority, shall have
power to cause to be conducted any inquiry or
investigation in respect of any person, place,
property , assets, documents, books of account or
any other relevant matters and it shall be
competent upon him to exercise the powers
conferred under sub-section ( 1) of section 9.
Power of
authority to
impound
documents.
Power to
cause
inquiry or
investiga-
tion.

58
CHAPTER IV
ATTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND C ONFISCATION
13. (1) Where the Initiating Officer, on the
basis of material in his possession, has reason to
believe that any person, not being a person
referred in sub-section ( 2) of section 3, is a
benamidar in respect of a property, he may,
after recording reasons in writing, issue a notice
to such person to show cause within such time
as may be specified in the notice why
such property should not be treated as benami
property .
(2) Where a notice under sub-section ( 1)
specifies any property as being held by a
benamidar referred to in that sub-section, a copy
of the notice shall also be served upon such other
person who is a beneficial owner.
(3) Where the Initiating Officer is of the
opinion that the person in possession of the
property held benami may alienate such property
during the period specified in the notice, he may,
with the previous approval of the Approving
Authority, by order in writing, attach
provisionally such property in the manner as may
be prescribed.
(4) The Initiating Officer, after making such
inquiries and calling for such reports or evidence
as he deems fit and taking into account all
relevant materials, shall, within a period of ninety
days from the date of issue of notice under sub-
section ( 1),—
(a) where the provisional attachment has
been made under sub-section ( 3),—
(i) pass an order continuing the
provisional attachment of the property
with the prior approval of the Approving
Authority, till the date of the order made
by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-
section ( 3) of section 15; or
Notice and
attachment
of property
involved in
prohibited
benami
transaction.

59
(ii) revoke the provisional attachment
of the property with the prior approval
of the Approving Authority;
(b) where provisional attachment has not
been made under sub-section ( 3),—
(i) pass an order provisionally
attaching the property till the date of
order made by the Adjudicating
Authority under sub-section (3) of section
15; or
(ii) decide not to attach the property
as specified in the notice, with the prior
approval of the Approving Authority.
(5) Where the Initiating Officer passes an
order continuing the provisional attachment of
the property under sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) or
passes an order provisionally attaching the
property under sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-
section (4), he shall, within fifteen days from such
attachment, draw up a statement of the case and
refer it to the Adjudicating Authority .
14. (1) A notice under sub-section ( 1) of
section 13 may be served on the person named
therein either by post or as if it were a summons
issued by a Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908.
(2) Any notice referred to in sub-section ( 1)
may be addressed—
(i) in case of an individual, to such
individual;
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing
partner or the manager of the firm;
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided
family, to karta or any member of such family;
(iv) in the case of a company, to the
principal officer thereof;
Manner of
service of
notice.
5 of 1908.

60
(v) in the case of any other association
or body of individuals, to the principal officer
or any member thereof;
(vi) in the case of any other person (not
being an individual), to the person who
manages or controls his affairs.
15. (1) On receipt of a reference under sub-
section ( 5) of section 13, the Adjudicating
Authority shall serve notices, to furnish such
documents, particulars or evidence as is
considered necessary on a date to be specified
therein, on the following person, namely:—
(a) the person specified as a benamidar
therein;
(b) any person referred to as the beneficial
owner therein or identified as such;
(c) any interested party, including a
banking company;
(d) any person who has made a claim in
respect of the property.
(2) Where such property is held jointly by
more than one person, such notice shall be served
to all persons holding such property .
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall,
after—
(a) considering the reply, if any, to the
notice issued under sub-section ( 1);
(b) making or causing to be made such
inquiries and calling for such reports or
evidence as he deems fit; and
(c) taking into account all relevant
materials,
provide an opportunity of being
heard to the person specified as a
benamidar therein, the Initiating Officer,
and any other person who claims to be the
Adjudica-
tion of
benami
property.

61
owner of such property, and, thereafter, pass
an order—
(i) holding the property not to be a
benami property and revoking the
attachment order; or
(ii) holding the property to be a
benami property and confirming the
attachment order.
(4) Where the Adjudicating Authority is
satisfied that some part of the properties in
respect of which reference has been made to him
is benami property , but is not able to specifically
identify such part, he shall record a finding to
the best of his judgment as to which part of
properties is held benami.
(5) Where in the course of proceedings before
him, the Adjudicating Authority has reason to
believe that a property, other than a property
referred to him by the Initiating Officer is benami
property, it shall provisionally attach such
property and such property shall be deemed to
be a property referred to it on the date of
receipt of the reference under sub-section ( 5) of
section 13.
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may , at any
stage of the proceedings, either on the application
of any party, or suo motu, strike out the name of
any party improperly joined or add the name of
any person whose presence before the
Adjudicating Authority may be necessary to
enable it to adjudicate upon and settle all the
questions involved in the reference.
(7) No order under sub-section ( 3) shall be
passed after the expiry of one year from the end
of the month in which the reference under section
13 was received.
16. (1) Where any property is attached under
sub-section ( 3) of section 15, the Adjudicating
Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of
Confiscation
and vesting
of benami
property.

62
being heard to the person concerned, make an
order confiscating the property held to be a
benami property .
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to
a property held or acquired by a person from the
benamidar for adequate consideration, without his
having knowledge of the benami transaction.
(3) Where an order of confiscation has been
made under sub-section ( 1), all the rights and
title in such property shall vest absolutely in the
Central Government free of all encumbrances and
no compensation shall be payable in respect of
such confiscation.
(4) Any right of any third person created in
such property with a view to defeat the purposes
of this Act shall be null and void.
(5) Where no order of confiscation is made
upon the proceedings under this Act attaining
finality, no claim shall lie against the Government.
17. (1) The Administrator shall have the
power to receive and manage the property , in
relation to which an order of confiscation under
sub-section ( 1) of section 16 has been made, in
such manner and subject to such conditions, as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, notify as many
of its officers as it thinks fit, to perform the
functions of an Administrator.
(3) The Administrator shall also take such
measures, as the Central Government may direct,
to dispose of the property which is vested in the
Central Government under section 16.
18. ( 1) Where an order of confiscation in
respect of a property under sub-section ( 1) of
section 16 has been made, the Administrator
shall proceed to take the possession of such
property .
Manage-
ment of
properties
confiscated
under this
Act.
Possession
of the
property.

63
(2) The Administrator shall,—
(a) by notice in writing, order within
seven days of the date of the service of notice
to any person, who may be in possession of
the benami property, to surrender or deliver
possession thereof to him or any other person
duly authorised in writing by him in this
behalf;
(b) in the event of non-compliance of the
order referred to in clause ( a), or if in his
opinion, taking over of immediate possession
is warranted, for the purpose of forcibly
taking over possession, requisition the service
of any police officer to assist him and it shall
be the duty of such officer to comply with
such requisition.
CHAPTER V
A
PPELLATE TRIBUNAL
19. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the
Appellate Tribunal established under section 25
of the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
shall be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes
of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall
exercise the powers conferred on it by or under
this Act.
20. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of
the Adjudicating Authority may prefer an appeal
in such form and along with such fee, as may
be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal against
the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority
under section 15 within forty-five days from the
date of such order.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may entertain any
appeal after the said period of forty-five days, if
it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section
(1), the Appellate Tribunal may , after giving the
Establish-
ment of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
15 of 2003.

64
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being
heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal, as far as possible,
may hear and decide such appeal within a period
of two years from the last date of the month in
which the appeal is filed.
21. An Appellate Tribunal shall have the
power—
(a) to determine a case finally, where the
evidence on record is sufficient;
(b) to take additional evidence or to
require such evidence to be taken by the
Adjudicating Authority, where the
Adjudicating Authority has refused to admit
evidence, which ought to have been admitted;
(c) to require any document to be
produced or any witness to be examined for
the purposes of proceeding before it;
(d) to frame issues which appear to the
Appellate Tribunal essential for adjudication
of the case and refer them to the Adjudicating
Authority for determination;
(e) to pass final order and affirm, vary or
reverse an order of adjudication passed by
the Adjudicating Authority and pass such
order as may be necessary to meet the ends
of justice.
22. (1) The Appellate Tribunal or the
Adjusticating Authority or as the case may be,
the initiating Officer, in order to rectify any
mistake apparent on the face of the record, may
amend any order made by it, within a period of
one year from the end of the month in which the
order was passed.
(2) No amendment shall be made under sub-
section (1) if such amendment is likely to affect
any person prejudicially, unless he has been given
Powers of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Rectification
of mistakes.

65
notice of the intention to do so and has been
allowed an opportunity of being heard.
23. (1) A person preferring an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal under this Act may either
appear in person or take the assistance of an
authorised representative of his choice to present
his case before the Appellate Tribunal.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
section, the expression “authorised
representative” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it under sub-section ( 2) of section
288 of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(2) The Central Government may authorise
one or more authorised representatives or any of
its officers to act as presenting officers and every
person so authorised may present the case with
respect to any appeal before the Appellate
Tribunal.
24. (1) Any party aggrieved by any decision
or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an
appeal to the High Court within one hundred
and twenty days from the date of communication
of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal
to him on any question of law arising out of such
order.
(2) The High Court may entertain any appeal
after the said period of one hundred and twenty
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal within the period specified in sub-
section ( 1).
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a
substantial question of law is involved in any
case, it shall formulate that question.
(4) The appeal shall be heard only on the
question so formulated, and the respondents
shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to
argue that the case does not involve such
question.
Right to
representa-
tion.
Appeal to
High Court.
43 of 1961.

66
(5) Nothing in this sub-section shall be
deemed to take away or abridge the power of
the court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the
appeal on any other substantial question of law
not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case
involves such question.
(6) The High Court shall decide the question
of law so formulated and deliver such judgment
thereon containing the grounds on which such
decision is founded and may award such cost as
it deems fit.
(7) The High Court may determine any issue
which—
(a) has not been determined by the
Appellate Tribunal; or
(b) has been wrongly determined by the
Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a decision
on such question of law as is referred to in
sub-section ( 1).
(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, relating to appeals to the High Court shall,
as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals
under this section.
CHAPTER VI
S
PECIAL COURTS
25 . ( 1) The Central Government, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court, shall for trial of an offence punishable
under this Act, by notification, designate one or
more Courts of Session as Special Court or Special
Courts for such area or areas or for such case or
class or group of cases as may be specified in the
notification.
(2) While trying an offence under this Act,
a Special Court shall also try an offence other
than an offence referred to in sub-section (1), with
Special
Courts.
5 of 1908.

67
which the accused may, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same
trial.
(3) The Special Court shall not take
cognizance of any offence punishable under this
Act except upon a complaint in writing made
by—
(i) the authority; or
(ii) any officer of the Central Government
or State Government authorised in writing
in this behalf by the Central Government by
a general or special order made in this behalf
by that Government.
(4) Every trial under this section shall be
conducted as expeditiously as possible and an
endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial
within six months from the date of filing of the
complaint.
26. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, shall apply to the proceedings
before a Special Court and for the purposes of
the said provisions, the Special Court shall be
deemed to be a Court of Session and the
persons conducting the prosecution before the
Special Court, shall be deemed to be a public
prosecutor:
Provided that the Central Government may
also appoint for any case or class or group of
cases a Special Public Prosecutor.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be
appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special
Public Prosecutor under this section unless
he has been in practice as an advocate for
not less than seven years, under the Union or a
State.
(3) Every person appointed as a Public
Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under
Application
of Code of
Criminal
Procedure,
1973 to
proceedings
before
Special
Court.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

68
this section shall be deemed to be a Public
Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of
section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and the provisions of that Code shall have effect
accordingly.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES AND P ENALTIES
27. (1) Where any person enters into a benami
transaction, not being a benami transaction
reffered to in sub-section (2) of section 3, in order
to defeat the provisions of any law or to avoid
payment of statutory dues or to avoid payment
to creditors, the beneficial owner, benamidar
and any other person who abets or induces any
person to enter into such benami transaction, shall
be guilty of the offence of benami transaction.
(2) Whoever is found guilty of the offence of
benami transaction referred to in subsection ( 1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months, but
which may extend to two years and shall also
be liable to fine which may extend to twenty-
five per cent. of the fair market value of the
property .
28. Any person who wilfully gives false
information to any authority or furnishes any
false document in any proceeding under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three months but
which may extend to two years or with fine which
may extend to ten per cent. of the fair market
value of the property.
29. No prosecution shall be instituted against
any person in respect of any offence under
section 27 without the previous sanction of the
Approving Authority.
Penalty for
benami
transaction.
Penalty for
false
information.
Previous
sanction.
2 of 1974.

69
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
30. Where, after the issue of a notice under
section 13, any property referred to in the said
notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever,
such transfer shall, for the purposes of the
proceedings under this Act, be ignored and if
such property is subsequently confiscated by the
Central Government under section 16 then, the
transfer of such property shall be deemed to be
null and void.
31. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, exempt any property or class of
properties from the operation of this Act.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-
section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
32. (1) The Central Government may, from
time to time, issue such orders, instructions and
directions to the authorities as it may deem fit
for the proper administration of this Act and such
authorities and all other persons employed in
execution of this Act shall observe and follow
such orders, instructions and directions of the
Central Government.
(2) No orders, instructions or directions under
sub-section ( 1) shall be issued so as to—
(a) require any authority to decide
a particular case in a particular manner;
or
(b) interfere with the discretion of the
Adjudicating Authority in exercise of his
functions.
Certain
transfers to
be null and
void.
Exemption.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions,
etc.

70
33. No finding of any officer or authority
under any other law shall be conclusive for
the purposes of any proceedings under this
Act.
34. The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not, save as hereinafter expressly
provided, in derogation of any other law for the
time being in force.
35. Save as otherwise provided under this
Act, no order passed or declaration made under
this Act shall be appealable except as provided
therein and no civil court shall have jurisdiction
in respect of any matter which the Appellate
Tribunal or any Authority is empowered by or
under this Act to determine, and no injunction
shall be granted by any court or other authority
in respect of any action taken or to be taken in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under
this Act.
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, an offence
under this Act shall be non-cognizable and bailable.
37. (1) Where a person committing a
contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act or of any rule, direction or order made
there under is a company, every person who, at
the time the contravention was committed, was
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company,
for the conduct of the business of the company
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to
be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1), shall
render any such person liable to punishment if
he proves that the contravention took place
without his knowledge.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where a contravention of any of
Findings
under other
laws not
conclusive
for
proceedings
under this
Act.
Application
of other
laws not
barred.
Bar of
Jurisdiction.
Offences to
be non-
cognizable.
Offences by
companies.
2 of 1974.

71
the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction
or order made thereunder has been committed
by a company and it is proved that the
contravention has taken place with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect
on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such director,
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be
deemed to be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this
section,—
(i) “company” means any body corporate
and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means
a partner in the firm.
38. No notice, summons, order, document or
other proceeding, furnished or made or issued
or taken or purported to have been furnished or
made or issued or taken in pursuance of any of
the provisions of this Act shall be invalid, or shall
be deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any
mistake, defect or omission in such notice,
summons, order, document or other proceeding
if such notice, summons, order, document or
other proceeding is in substance and effect in
conformity with or according to the intent and
purpose of this Act.
39. No prosecution, suit or other proceeding
shall lie against the Government or any officer
of the Government or the Appellate Tribunal or
the Adjudicating Authority established under this
Act, for anything done or intended to be done
in good faith under this Act.
40. (1) Every suit or proceeding in respect of
a benami transaction pending in any Court (other
than the High Court) or Tribunal or before any
Notice, etc.,
not to be
invalid on
certain
grounds.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Transfer of
pending
cases.

72
authority on the date of the commencement of
this Act shall stand transferred to the Appellate
Tribunal or the Adjudicating Authority, as the
case may be, referred to in this Act having
jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) Where any suit, or other proceeding
stands transferred from any court (other than
High Court) or Tribunal or other authority to the
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 1),—
(a) the court, Tribunal or other authority
shall, as soon as may be, after such transfer,
forward the records of such suit, or other
proceeding to the Appellate Tribunal;
(b) the Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt
of such records, proceed to deal with such
suit, or other proceeding, so as may be, in
the same manner as in the case of a reference
made under sub-section ( 5) of section 15,
from the stage which was reached before such
transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo
as the Appellate Tribunal may deem fit.
41. (1) Where a person dies during the course
of any proceeding under this Act, any proceeding
taken against the deceased before his death shall
be deemed to have been taken against the legal
heir and may be continued against the legal heir
from the stage at which it stood on the date of
the death of the deceased.
(2) Any proceeding which could have been
taken against the deceased if he had survived,
may be taken against the legal heir and all the
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
(3) Where any property of a person has been
held benami under section 15, then it shall be
lawful for the legal heir of such person to prefer
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, in place of
such person and the provisions of section 20 shall,
so far as may be, apply, or continue to apply, to
such appeal.
Legal heir.

73
42. The provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
43. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) determination of the price where the
price is not ascertainable under clause ( j) of
section 2;
(b) the powers and functions to be
exercised by the authority under section 8;
(c) any other matter under sub-section
(1) of section 9;
(d) the manner of provisional attachment
of the property under sub-section ( 3) of
section 13;
(e) the manner to receive and
manage property under sub-section ( 1) of
section 17;
(f) the form in which appeal shall be filed
the fee for filing the appeal under sub-section
(1) of section 20.
44. Every rule made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the
Overriding
effect of
Act.
Power to
make rules.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament.

74
rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
45. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulty.
(2) No order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(3) Every order made under this section shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament.
46. (1) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1988 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything
done or any action taken or purported to have
been done or taken including any rule,
notification, inspection, order or notice made or
issued or any appointment, confirmation or
declaration made or any licence, permission,
authorisation, exemption granted or any
document or instrument executed or any
direction given under the Act hereby repealed
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been
done or taken under the corresponding provision
of this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of section
281A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the operation
of the said section shall continue in the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
saving. 45 of 1988.
43 of 1961.

75
47. The enactment specified in the Schedule
is hereby amended to the extent and in the
manner as given below:—
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 47)
A
MENDMENTS TO THE P REVENTION OF M ONEY-
LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
1. In section 6,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words
“conferred by or under this Act”, the words,
brackets and figures “or the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any
other law for the time being in force” shall
be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 15), after the words
“other provisions of this Act”, the words,
brackets and figures “or the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any
other law for the time being in force,” shall
be inserted.
2. In section 11, in sub-section ( 1), after the
words “purposes of this Act”, the words, brackets
and figures “or the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any other law for the
time being in force” shall be inserted.
3. In section 25, after the words “authorities
under this Act”, the words, brackets and figures
“or the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act,
2011 or any other law for the time being in force”
shall be inserted.
4. In section 35,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the words
“other provisions of this Act”, the words,
brackets and figures “or the Benami
Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any
Amendment
of enact-
ment.

76
other law for the time being in force” shall
be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), after the words
“discharging its functions under this Act”,
the words, brackets and figures “or the
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 2011
or any other law for the time being in force”
shall be inserted;
(iii) in sub-section ( 3), after the words
“under this Act”, the words, brackets and
figures “or the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 2011 or any other law for
the time being in force” shall be inserted.

77
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 was enacted to
prohibit benami transactions and the right to recover property held
benami. However, the said Act, inter alia , provides that—(a) all the
properties held benami  shall be subject to acquisition by such
authority in such manner and after following such procedure as
may be prescribed; (b) no amount shall be payable for the acquisition
of any property held benami ; (c) the purchase of property by any
person in the name of his wife or unmarried daughter for their benefit
would not be benami transaction; (d) the securities held by a depository
as registered owner under the provisions of the Depositories Act, 1996
or participant as an agent of a depository would not be benami
transactions.
2. During the process of formulating the rules for implementing
certain provisions of the Act, it was found that the provisions of the
aforesaid Act are inadequate to deal with benami transactions as the Act,
inter alia, —(i) does not contain any specific provision for vesting of
confiscated property with the Central Government; (ii) does not have any
provision for an appellate mechanism against an action taken by the
authorities under the Act, while barring the jurisdiction of a Civil Court;
(iii) does not confer the powers of the Civil Court upon the authorities
for its implementation.
3. In view of the circumstances stated above, a comprehensive
legislation, in place of the Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 has
become necessary in order to prohibit holding property in benami and
restrict right to recover or transfer property held  benami  and also to
provide a mechanism and procedure for confiscation of property held
benami.
4. It is, therefore, felt necessary to repeal the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988 and enact a new comprehensive legislation to deal
with benami transactions. The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill, 2011,
inter alia , provides for the following, namely:—
(i) it prohibits benami transactions by any person, except in
the case of benami transactions entered into in the name
of spouse, brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or
descendant;

78
(ii) it provides that Benami property arising out of prohibited
Benami transaction is liable to confiscation by the Central
Government and such property shall vest absolutely in the
Central Government without paying any compensation;
(iii) it prohibits right of the benamidar to recover property held
benami;
(iv) it provides that the Initiating Officer, the Approving Authority
and the Administrator shall be the authorities for the purposes
of the Bill;
 (v) it provides that the Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate
Tribunal established under the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002 shall respectively be the Adjudicating
Authority and the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of
the Bill and any person aggrieved by an order of
Adjudicating Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal;
(vi) it provides that any party aggrieved by any decision or order
of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High
Court on any question of law;
(vii) it enables the Central Government, in consultation with the
Chief Justice of  the High Court, to designate one or more
Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts for the
purpose of the Bill;
(viii) it provides penalty for entering into prohibited benami
transactions and for furnishing any false documents in any
proceeding under the Bill;
(ix) it provides for transfer of any suit or proceeding in respect
of a benami transaction pending in any Court (other than
High Court) or Tribunal or before any authority to the
Appellate Tribunal as provided in the Bill;
 (x) it also proposes to make consequential amendments in the
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.

79
5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail various provisions in
the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW D ELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE
The 3rd August,  2011.

80
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This Clause, inter alia , seeks to extend the provisions
of the Bill to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause contains provisions relating to prohibition
of benami transactions. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no
person shall, on and after the commencement of this Act, enter into any
benami transaction. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that nothing
contained in sub-clause (1) shall apply to a benami transaction entered
into by any person, being an individual, in the name of his spouse, brother
or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant.
Clause 4.—This clause provides that any property, which is subject
matter of benami transaction, not being a benami transaction referred to
in sub-clause (2) of clause 3, shall be liable to be confiscated by the
Central Government.
Clause 5.— This clause contains provisions relating to prohibition
of right to recover property held benami. Sub-clause (1) of this clause
provides that no suit, claim or action to enforce any right in respect of
any property held benami against the person in whose name the property
is held or against any other person shall lie by, or, on behalf of, a person
claiming to be the real owner of such property. Sub-clause (2) of said
clause provides that no defence based on any right in respect of any
property held benami, whether against the person in whose name the
property is held, or, against any other person, shall be allowed in any
suit, claim or action by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real
owner of such property.
Clause 6.—This clause provides that no person, being benamidar
shall re-transfer the benami property held by him to the beneficial owner
or any other person acting on his behalf.
Clause 7.—This clause provides the initiating officer, the Approving
Authority and the Administrator as the Authorities for the purposes of
this legislation.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to the jurisdiction of authorities.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the authorities shall exercise

81
all or any of the powers and perform all or any of the functions conferred
on, or, assigned, as the case may be, to it under this Act or the rules
framed thereunder in accordance with such directions as the Central
Government may issue for the exercise of powers and performance of
the functions by all or any of the authorities. Sub-clause (2) of said clause
provides that in issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub-section (1),
the Central Government may have regard to any one or more of —(a)
territorial area; (b) classes of persons; (c) classes of cases; and (d) any
other criterion specified by the Central Government in this behalf.
Clause 9.—This clause deals with the powers of authorities regarding
summons, production of documents and to give evidence, etc. Sub-clause (1)
of this clause provides that the authorities shall, for the purposes of this
Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of (a) discovery
and inspection; (b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining
him on oath; (c) compelling the production of books of account and other
documents; (d) issuing commissions; (e) receiving evidence on affidavits;
and (f) any other matter which may be prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of this
clause provides that any authority under this Act may requisition the
service of any police officer or of any officer of the Central Government
or State Government or of both to assist him for all or any of the purposes
specified in sub-clause (1), and it shall be the duty of every such officer
to comply with such requisition or direction.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to power to call for information. It
seeks to provide that the Initiating Officer or the Approving Authority
or the Adjudicating Authority shall have power to require any officer
or authority of the Central Government or State Government or a local
authority or any person or authority who is responsible for registering
and maintaining books of account and other documents containing a
record of any transaction relating to any property or any other person
to furnish such information in relation to such persons, points or matters
as in his opinion will be useful for or relevant to the purposes of this
Act.
Clause 11.—This clause relates to the power of authority to impound
documents. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where any books
of account or other documents are produced before the authority in any
proceedings under this Act and the authority in this behalf has reason
to believe that any of such books of account or other documents are
required to be impounded and retained for any inquiry under this Act,
it may impound and retain such books of account or other documents
for a period not exceeding three months from the date of attachment
made by the Adjudicating Authority under Sub-clause (3) of clause 15.

82
Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that the person, from whom the
books of account and other documents were impounded, shall be entitled
to obtain copies of the books of account or other documents impounded
under sub-clause (1). Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on the
expiry of the period specified under sub-clause (1), the books of account
and other documents shall be returned to the person from whom such
books of account or other documents were impounded unless the
Approving Authority or the Adjudicating Authority permits retention of
such books of account and other documents beyond the said period.
Clause 12.—This clause contains provisions relating to power of
Authority to require certain officers to exercise certain powers. It provides
that the Initiating Officer, after obtaining prior approval of the Approving
Authority, shall have power to cause to be conducted any inquiry or
investigation in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents,
books of account or any other relevant matters and it shall be competent
upon him to exercise the powers conferred under sub-clause (1) of
clause 9.
Clause 13.—This clause relates to notice and attachment of property
involved in prohibited benami transaction. Sub-clause (1) of this clause
provides that where the Initiating Officer, on the basis of material in his
possession, has reason to believe that any person, not being a person
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3, is a benamidar in respect of a
property , he may, after recording reasons in writing, issue a notice to
such person to show cause within such time as may be specified in the
notice why such property should not be treated as benami property.
Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that where a notice under
sub-section (1) specifies any property as being held by a benamidar referred
to in that sub-section, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such
other person who is a beneficial owner. Sub-clause (3) of said clause
provides that where the Initiating officer is of the opinion that the person
in possession of the property held benami may alienate such property
during the period specified in the notice, he may, with the previous
approval of the Approving Authority , by order in writing, attach
provisionally such property in the manner as may be prescribed. Sub-
clause (4) of this clause provides that the Initiating Officer, after making
such inquiries and calling for such reports or evidence as he deems fit
and taking into account all relevant materials, shall, within a period of
ninety days from the date of issue of notice under sub-section (1)—(a) where
the provisional attachment has been made under sub-section (3)—(i) pass an
order continuing the provisional attachment of the property with the
prior approval of the Approving Authority, till the date of the order
made by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 15;
or (ii) revoke the provisional attachment of the property with the prior

83
approval of the Approving Authority; (b) where provisional attachment
has not been made under sub-clause (3)—(i) pass an order provisionally
attaching the property till the date of order made by the Adjudicating
Authority under sub-clause (3) of clause 15; or (ii) decide not to attach
the property as specified in the notice, with the prior approval of the
Approving Authority . Sub-clause (5) of said clause provides that where
the Initiating Officer passes an order continuing the provisional attachment
of the property under sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or passes an order
provisionally attaching the property under sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of
sub-clause (4), he shall, within fifteen days from such attachment, draw
up a statement of the case and refer it to the Adjudicating Authority.
Clause 14.—This clause relates to manner of service of notice.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that a notice under sub-section (1)
of clause 13 may be served on the person named therein either by post
or as if it were a summons issued by a Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any notice
referred to in sub-clause (1) may be addressed—
(i) in case of an individual, to such individual;
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing partner or the manager
of the firm;
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, to karta or any
member of such family;
(iv) in the case of a company, to the principal officer thereof;
(v) in the case of any other association or body of individuals,
to the principal officer or any member thereof;
(vi) in the case of any other person (not being an individual), to
the person who manages or controls his affairs.
Clause 15.—This clause deals with the adjudication of benami
property. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that on receipt of a
reference under sub-section (5) of section 13, the Adjudicating Authority
shall serve notices, to furnish such documents, particulars or evidence
as is considered necessary on a date to be specified therein, on—(a) the
person specified as a benamidar therein; (b) any person referred to as the
beneficial owner therein or identified as such; (c) any interested party,
including a banking company; (d) any person who has made a claim in
respect of the property. Sub-clause (2) of said clause provides that where
such property is held jointly by more than one person, such notice shall
be served to all persons holding such property. Sub-clause (3) provides

84
that the Adjudicating Authority shall, after (a) considering the reply, if
any, to the notice issued under sub-clause (1); (b) making or causing to
be made such inquiries and calling for such reports or evidence as it
deems fit; and (c) taking into account all relevant materials, provide an
opportunity of being heard to the person specified as a benamidar therein,
the Initiating Officer, and any other person who claims to be the owner
of such property, and, thereafter, pass an order—(i) holding the property
not to be a benami property and revoking the attachment order; or
(ii) holding the property to be a benami property and confirming the
attachment order. Sub-clause (4) of said Clause states that where the
Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that some part of the properties in
respect of which reference has been made to him is benami property, but
is not able to specifically identify such part, he shall record a finding
to the best of his judgment as to which part or properties is held benami.
Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that where in the course of
proceedings before it, the Adjudicating Authority has reason to believe
that a property, other than a property referred to him by the Initiating
Officer is benami property, it shall provisionally attach such property and
such property shall be deemed to be a property referred to it on the date
of receipt of the reference under Sub-clause (5) of clause 13. Sub-clause
(6) of this clause provides that the Adjudicating Authority may, at any
stage of the proceedings, either on the application of any party, or
suo motu, strike out the name of any party improperly joined or add the
name of any person whose presence before the Adjudicating Authority
may be necessary to enable him to adjudicate upon and settle all the
questions involved in the reference. Sub-clause (7) of this clause provides
that no order under sub-section (3) shall be passed after the expiry of
one year from the end of the month in which the reference under
clause 13 was received.
Clause 16.—This clause relates to confiscation and vesting of benami
property . Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where any property
is attached under sub-section (3) of section 15, the Adjudicating Authority
shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned,
make an order confiscating the property held to be a benami property.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that nothing in sub-clause (1) shall
apply to a property held or acquired by a person from the benamidar
for adequate consideration, without his having knowledge of the benami
transaction. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that where an order
of confiscation has been made under sub-section (1), all the rights and
title in such property shall vest absolutely in the Central Government
free of all encumbrances and no compensation shall be payable in respect
of such confiscation. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that any right
of any third person created in such property with a view to defeat
the purposes of this Act shall be null and void. Sub-clause (5) of this

85
clause provides that where no order of confiscation is made upon the
proceedings under this Act attaining finality , no claim shall lie against
the Government.
Clause 17.— This clause deals with the management of properties
confiscated under this Act. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the
Administrator shall have the power to receive and manage the property ,
in relation to which an order of confiscation under sub-clause (1) of
clause 16 has been made, in such manner and subject to such conditions,
as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
notify as many of its officers as it thinks fit, to perform the functions
of an Administrator. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the
Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government
may direct, to dispose of the property which is vested in the Central
Government under clause 16.
Clause 18.—This clause relates to the possession of the property.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where an order of confiscation
in respect of a property under sub-clause (1) of clause 16 has been
made, the Administrator shall proceed to take the possession of such
property. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Administrator
shall,—
(a) by notice in writing, order within seven days of the date of
the service of notice any person, who may be in possession
of the benami property, to surrender or deliver possession
thereof to him or any other person duly authorised in writing
by him in this behalf;
(b) in the event of non-compliance of the order referred to in
clause (a), or if in his opinion, taking over of immediate
possession is warranted, for the purpose of forcibly taking
over possession, requisition the service of any police officer
to assist him and it shall be the duty such officer to comply
with such requisition.
Clause 19.— This clause relates to the establishment of Appellate
Tribunal. It provides that subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate
Tribunal established under section 25 of the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002 shall be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes
of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the powers
conferred on it by or under this Act.
Clause 20.—This clause contains provisions relating to the Appeals
to Appellate Tribunal. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any

86
person aggrieved by an order of Adjudicating Authority may prefer an
appeal in such form and along with such fee, as may be prescribed, to
the Appellate Tribunal against the order passed by the Adjudicating
Authority under clause 15 within forty-five days from the date of such
order. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal
may entertain any appeal after the said period of forty-five days, if it
is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from
filing the appeal in time. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on
receipt of an appeal under sub-clause (1), the Appellate Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such orders thereon as it thinks fit. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides
that the Appellate Tribunal, as far as possible, may hear and decide such
appeal within a period of two years from the last date of the month in
which the appeal is filed.
Clause 21.—This clause relates to the powers of Appellate Tribunal.
It provides that an Appellate Tribunal shall have the power; (a) to
determine a case finally, where the evidence on record is sufficient;
(b) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken by
the Adjudicating Authority, where the Adjudicating Authority has refused
to admit evidence, which ought to have been admitted; (c) to require any
document to be produced or any witness to be examined for the purposes
of proceeding before it; (d) to frame issues which appear to the Appellate
Tribunal essential for adjudication of the case and refer them to the
Adjudicating Authority for determination; (e) to pass final order and
affirm, vary or reverse an order of adjudication passed by the Adjudicating
Authority and pass such order as may be necessary to meet the ends of
justice.
Clause 22.—This clause deals with the rectification of mistakes. Sub-
Clause (1) of this clause provides that the Appellate Tribunal or the
Adjudicating Authority, or as the case may be, the Adjudicating Officer,
in order to rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the record, amend
any order made by it, within a period of one year from the end of the
month in which the order was passed. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that no amendment shall be made under sub-clause (1) if such
amendment is likely to affect any person prejudicially, unless he has been
given notice of the intention to do so and has been allowed an opportunity
of being heard.
Clause 23.—This clause relates to right to representation. Sub-clause
(1) of this clause provides that a person preferring an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal under this Act may either appear in person or take
the assistance of an authorised representative of his choice to present his
case before the Appellate Tribunal. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause

87
provides that the Central Government may authorise one or more
authorised representatives or any of its officers to act as presenting officers
and every person so authorised may present the case with respect to any
appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 24.—This clause contains provisions relating to the appeals
to High Court. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any party
aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file
an appeal to the High Court within one hundred and twenty days from
the date of communication of the decision or order of the Appellate
Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of such order. Sub-
clause (2) of this clause provides that the High Court may entertain any
appeal after the said period of one hundred and twenty days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
the appeal within the period specified in sub-clause (1). Sub-clause (3)
of this clause provides that where the High Court is satisfied that a
substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall formulate that
question. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the appeal shall
be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents shall,
at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not
involve such question. Sub-clause (5) of this clause provides that nothing
in this sub-clause shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power
of the court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other
substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the
case involves such question. Sub-clause (6) of this clause provides that
the High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver
such judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision
is founded and may award such cost as it deems fit. Sub-clause (7) of
the said clause provides that the High Court may determine any issue
which; (a) has not been determined by the Appellate Tribunal; or (b) has
been wrongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a
decision on such question of law as is referred to in Sub-clause (1). Sub-
clause (8) of this clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this
Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to
appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of
appeals under this section.
Clause 25.—This clause deals with the Special Courts. Sub-clause
(1) of this clause provides that the Central Government, in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the High Court, shall for trial of an offence
punishable under this Act, by notification, designate one or more Courts
of Session as Special Court or Special Courts for such area or areas or
for such case or class or group of cases as may be specified in the
notification. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that while trying
an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence other

88
than an offence referred to in sub-clause (1), with which the accused may,
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the Special Court shall not take
cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except upon a
complaint in writing made by (i) the authority; or (ii) any officer of the
Central Government or State Government authorised in writing in this
behalf by the Central Government by a general or special order made
in this behalf by that Government. Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides
that every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously
as possible and an endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within
six months from the date of filing of the complaint.
Clause 26.—This clause relates to application of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court. Sub clause(1) of
this clause provides that save as otherwise provided in this Act, the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to
the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the
said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of
Session and the persons conducting the prosecution before the
Special Court, shall be deemed to be a public prosecutor. However, the
Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or
group of cases a Special Public Prosecutor. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause provides that a person shall not be qualified to be appointed as
a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section
unless he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven
years, under the Union or a State. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides
that every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public
Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor
within the meaning of clause (u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 and the provisions of that Code shall have effect
accordingly.
Clause 27.—This clause deals with the penalty for benami transaction.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where any person enters into
a benami transaction, not being a person referred to in Sub clause(2) of
clause 3, in order to defeat the provisions of any law or to avoid payment
of statutory dues or to avoid payment to creditors, the beneficial owner,
benamidar and any other person who abets or induces any person to enter
into such benami transaction, shall be guilty of the offence of benami
transaction. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that whoever is
found guilty of the offence of benami  transaction referred to in
Sub-clause (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than six months’ but which may extend to two years
and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to twenty-five per cent.
of the fair market value of the property .

89
Clause 28.—This clause deals with the penalty for false information.
It provides that any person who wilfully gives false information to any
authority or furnishes any false document in any proceeding under this
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than three months but which may extend to two years or with
fine which may extend to ten per cent. of the fair market value of the
property .
Clause 29.—This clause provides that no prosecution shall be
instituted against any person in respect of any offence under clause 27
without the previous sanction of the Approving Authority .
Clause 30.—This clause relates to certain transfers to be null and
void. It provides that where, after the issue of a notice under clause 13,
any property referred to in the said notice is transferred by any mode
whatsoever, such transfer shall, for the purposes of the proceedings under
this Act, be ignored and if such property is subsequently confiscated by
the Central Government under section 16 then, the transfer of such
property shall be deemed to be null and void.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to exemption. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification, exempt
any property or class of properties from the operation of this Act. Sub-
clause(2) of the said clause provides that every notification issued under
Sub-clause (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 32.—This clause deals with the power of Central Government
to issue directions, etc. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the
Central Government may , from time to time, issue such orders, instructions
and directions to the authorities as it may deem fit for the proper
administration of this Act and such authorities and all other persons
employed in execution of this Act shall observe and follow such orders,
instructions and directions of the Central Government. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause provides that no orders, instructions or directions under
sub-clause (1) shall be issued so as to (a) require any authority to decide
a particular case in a particular manner; or (b) interfere with the discretion
of the Adjudicating Authority in exercise of his functions.
Clause 33.—This clause provides that no finding of any officer or
authority under any other law shall be conclusive for the purposes of
any proceedings under this Act.
Clause 34.—This clause relates to the application of other laws not
barred. It provides that the provisions of this Act shall be in addition
to, and not, save as hereinafter expressly provided, in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force.

90
Clause 35.—This clause relates to bar of jurisdiction. It provides
that save as otherwise provided under this Act, no order passed or
declaration made under this Act shall be appealable except as provided
therein and no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
which the Appellate Tribunal or any Authority is empowered by or under
this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court
or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance
of any power conferred by or under this Act.
Clause 36.—This clause relates to offences to be non-cognizable. It
provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, an offence under this Act shall be non-cognizable and
bailable.
Clause 37.—This clause deals with the offences by companies.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where a person committing
a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction
or order made thereunder is a company , every person who, at the time
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company as well
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that nothing contained in
Sub-clause (1), shall render any such person liable to punishment if he
proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in Sub-clause (1), where a contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the contravention has
taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer
of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to
be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 38.—This clause relates to notice, etc., not to be invalid on
certain grounds. It provides that no notice, summons, order, document
or other proceeding, furnished or made or issued or taken or purported
to have been furnished or made or issued or taken in pursuance of any
of the provisions of this Act shall be invalid, or shall be deemed to be
invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in such
notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding if such notice,
summons, order, document or other proceeding is in substance and
effect in conformity with or according to the intent and purpose of this
Act.

91
Clause 39.—This clause relates to protection of action taken in good
faith. It provides that no prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie
against the Government or any officer of the Government or the Appellate
Tribunal or the Adjudicating authority established under this Act, for
anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
Clause 40.—This clause contains provisions relating to transfer of
pending cases. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every suit or
proceeding in respect of a benami transaction pending in any Court (other
than High Court) or Tribunal or before any authority on the date of the
commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal
or the Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be, referred to in this Act
having jurisdiction in the matter. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that where any suit, or other proceeding stands transferred from any
court (other than High Court) or Tribunal or other authority to the
Appellate Tribunal under sub-clause (1)—(a) the court, Tribunal or other
authority shall, as soon as may be, after such transfer, forward the records
of such suit, or other proceeding to the Appellate Tribunal; (b) the
Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with
such suit, or other proceeding, so as may be, in the same manner as in
the case of a reference made under sub-clause (5) of clause 15, from the
stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage
or de novo  as the Appellate Tribunal may deem fit.
Clause 41.—This clause relates to legal heir. Sub-clause (1) of this
clause provides that where a person dies during the course of any
proceeding under this Act, any proceeding taken against the deceased
before his death shall be deemed to have been taken against the legal
heir and may be continued against the legal heir from the stage at which
it stood on the date of the death of the deceased. Sub-clause (2) of the
said clause provides that any proceeding which could have been taken
against the deceased if he had survived may be taken against the legal
heir and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. Sub-clause (3)
of the said clause provides that where any property of a person has been
held benami under clause 15, then it shall be lawful for the legal heir of
such person to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, in place of
such person and the provisions of clause 20 shall, so far as may be, apply,
or continue to apply, to such appeal.
Clause 42.—This clause provides that the provisions of this Bill
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to power of the Central Government
to make rules. Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central

92
Government by notification in the Official Gazette to make rules for
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause enumerates various matters in respect of which the Central
Government may make rules. These include (a) determination of the
price where the price is not ascertainable under sub-clause (j) of clause
2; (b) the powers and functions to be exercised by the authority under
section 8; (c) any other matter under item (f) of sub-clause (1) of clause
9; (d) the manner of provisional attachment of the property under sub-
clause (3) of clause 13; (e) the manner to receive and manage property
under sub-clause (1) of clause17; (f) the form in which appeal shall be
filed and the fee for filing the appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 20.
Clause 44.—This clause deals with the rules to be laid before
Parliament. It provides that every rule made under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.
Clause 45.—This clause relates to power to remove difficulties.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that if any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by
order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary
for removing the difficulty. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act. Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides
that every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 46.—This clause contains provisions relating to repeal and
saving. Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988 is hereby repealed. Sub-clause (2) of this clause
provides that notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken or purported to have been done or taken including any rule,
notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any
appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any licence, permission,
authorisation, exemption granted or any document or instrument executed
or any direction given under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as

93
it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have
been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that notwithstanding the repeal
of section 281A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the operation of the said
section shall continue in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Clause 47.—This clause provides that the enactment specified in the
Schedule is amended to the extent and manner as given in the Schedule.
The Schedule to this Bill contains amendments to the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002.

94
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Initiating Officer,
Approving Authority and Administrator shall be the authorities for the
purposes of the proposed legislation. The Initiating Officer, the Approving
Authority and the Administrator for the purposes of the Bill would
respectively be the Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, the Joint
Commissioner of Income-tax and the Income-tax Officer as defined under
the Income-tax Act, 1961.
2. The Adjudicating Authority appointed under section 6 of the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 and the Appellate Tribunal
established under section 25 of the said Act shall respectively be the
Adjudicating Authority and the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of
the proposed legislation.
3. Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide for Special Courts. The
Central Government may designate one or more Courts of Session as
Special Court or Special Courts.
4. As it is proposed to utilise the services of the serving officers
or members under the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Prevention of the
Money-Laundering Act, 2002, respectively, and also to utilise the services
of Courts of Sessions as Special Courts, for the purposes of the proposed
legislation, no additional expenditure, both recurring and non-recurring,
from the Consolidated Fund of India is likely to be involved.

95
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of
which such rules may be made. These matters include (a) determination
of the price where the price is not ascertainable under sub-clause (j) of
clause 2; (b) the powers and functions to be exercised by the authorities
under section 8; (c) any other matter under item (f) of sub-clause (1) of
clause 9; (d) the manner of provisional attachment of the property under
sub-clause (3) of clause 13; (e) the manner to receive and manage property
under sub-clause (1) of clause 17; (f) the form in which appeal shall be
filed and the fee for filing the appeal under sub-clause (1) of clause 20.
2. The rules made under the proposed legislation shall be required
to be laid before the Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters
of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.

96
LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to benami  transactions,
prohibit holding property in benami and restrict right to recover
or transfer property held benami, and provide mechanism
and procedure for confiscation of property held
benami and for matters connected
therewith or incidental
thereto.
_______
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of  Finance )

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”