1 
 
77 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF  PLANNING  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in  
Sixty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the 
 Ministry of Planning]  
 
 
 
SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


2 
 
 
SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Sixty Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Planning] 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 18 October, 2013 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......    (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................………….....    1 
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................………………..  
 
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies .........................................………….  
 
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………......  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……….  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27 September, 2013................ 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Sixty Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance 
on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Planning 
…………………………..……………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

4 
 
 COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh       -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi    -  Deputy Secretary 
                                                      
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised by the 
Committee, present this Seventy Seventh Report on action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixty Ninth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sa bha) 
on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Planning.  
 2. The Sixty Ninth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2013.  Replies indicating action taken on all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 22 July, 2013.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on          
27 September, 2013. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Sixty Ninth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;             YASHWANT SINHA 
27 September, 2013                                                           Chairman, 
05  Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on Finance  
 

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
         REPORT 
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) d eals 
with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in their Sixty -ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of 
Planning which was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 April, 2013 and simultaneously laid 
in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.   The Report contained 6 recommendations.  Action taken notes have been 
received from the Government on 22 July, 2013 in respect of all the recommendations 
contained in the Report.  The replies have been analysed and categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3,4, 5, and 6. 
                                                                                                        Total: 06  
(Chapter II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:  Nil 
                                                                                                        Total: Nil 
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         Total: Nil 
 (Chapter IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Nil 
                                                                                                   Total :     Nil 
(Chapter V) 
3.   The Committee desire that the replies to the r ecommendations/ Observation 
contained in Chapter I of this Report be furnished to them expeditiously, in any case not 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 

7 
 
4.   The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on so me 
of their recommendations. 
5.  From the scrutiny of Action Taken replies furnished by the Ministry of 
Planning, the Committee find that the replies are either silent or elusive in respect 
of some of the issues raised in the recommendations, which are dea lt with in 
Chapter-I of the Report.  The Committee  would expect the Ministry to be more 
careful in future and furnish comprehensive replies as per procedures being 
followed and intimated to them from time to time. 
A.                   Analysis of Demands for Grants (2013-14) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 6. Upon noticing that recurrent and substantial under utilization of funds allocated at 
the stage of Budget Estimates (BE) as well as Revised Estimates (RE) occurred under 
some of the heads like „Public Finance Management System‟, the Committee 
recommended the Ministry to identify the shortcomings in formulation of budget 
estimates and effectively monitor utilization of funds.  The Committee also desired to be 
apprised about the details of the specific schemes  f or which a separate lump sum 
provision of Rs. 5,000 crore had been made under the head „New Programmes‟ in BE 
2013-14. 
7. The Ministry of Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, have inter alia stated as 
under: 
 “Public Finance Management System (PFMS)  -  The budget provision for 
2012-13 were framed keeping in view the expenditure projected in Detailed 
Project Report for National Rollout of Plan Accounting and Public Finance 
Management System, which was placed before Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) for approval.  EFC in its meeting held on 19/9/2012 approved the same 
with total outlay of Rs.1088.60 crore over a period of 5 years (12th Five Year 
Plan).  The Cabinet approval for the proposal of EFC is still in process.  Hence, 
the expenditure during fi nancial year 2012 -13 could not be incurred as per 
BE/RE 2012 -13 The possession of hired accommodation at Shivaji Stadium 
Annexe Building could not be taken over due to administrative reasons till 
August, 2012.  The expenditure on its renovation etc. could not be done during 
2012-13.   The actual expenditure on the scheme till the close of financial year 
2012-13 was Rs.24.20 crore.  The Cabinet approval is expected during 2013 -14 

8 
 
for national rollout of this scheme, which involves the creation of posts at va rious 
levels with incremental effect on expenditure on account of the establishment as 
well as infrastructural cost during 2013 -14. The hired accommodation is now 
being renovated during current financial year and, therefore, the requirement of 
fund for 2013-14 has been included, accordingly, in the BE for 2013-14”. 
8.  The Ministry of Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, have further stated  that 
specific Schemes being taken up as per Finance Minster‟s announcement in Budget 
Speech for 2013 -14 against the  lump sum provision of Rs.5000 crore under their 
Demands for Grants are as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Budget 
Para No. 
Name of the Scheme Ministry/Department 
concerned 
Amount   
(Rs. crore) 
1 19 Scheme to address 
Women Empowerment 
Ministry of Women & Child 
Development 
200.00 
2 21 Corpus fund to Maulana 
Azad Education 
Foundation 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 100.00 
3 49 Pilot Programme on 
Nutri-Farms for 
introducing new crop 
varieties 
Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation 
200.00 
4 51 Pilot scheme to replant 
and rejuvenate coconut 
gardens in Kerala 
Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation 
75.00 
5 52 Equity grants to Farmer 
Producer Organizations 
(FPO) 
Department of Agriculture/ 
Department of Financial 
Services 
150.00 
6 73 Additional allocation to 
India Micro Finance 
Equity Fund 
Department of Financial 
Services/Ministry of Micro, 
Small & Medium 
Enterprises 
100.00 
7 87 New Public Sector Bank 
for Women 
Department of Financial 
Services/RBI 
1000.00 
8 103 Schemes for Science & 
Technology Innovations 
Ministry of Science & 
Technology 
200.00 
9 104 Grants for Institutions of 
Excellence to selected 
four Institutions 
Ministry of HRD/Ministry of 
Culture 
400.00 
10 107 Capacity Building for 
Panchayati Raj 
Institutions 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj 200.00 

9 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Budget 
Para No. 
Name of the Scheme Ministry/Department 
concerned 
Amount   
(Rs. crore) 
11 112 Nirbhaya Fund – dignity 
and safety of women 
Ministry of Women & Child 
Development/ Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
1000.00 
12 113 Financial assistance for 
Skill-trained Youth  
Department of Economic 
Affairs 
1000.00 
13  Others (to be specified)  375.00 
   Total 5000.00 
 
9. In response to a specific query as to whether these New Schemes were finalized 
and got approved by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of the Ministry of Finance, 
the Ministry of Planning have stated as under: 
“… the schemes announced in the budget for which amount was budgeted under 
Planning Commission‟s demand are now being transferred to line Ministry‟s 
demand in the Supplementary Budget by making techni cal adjustment…. As 
such, the line Ministries/Departments are to take approval of the EFC for these 
schemes. 
…As per available information, EFC for the scheme Establishment of Women‟s 
Bank was held on 29.07.2013 and as the amount provided is less than Rs. 100 
crore, schemes Replanting and Rejuvenate Coconut Gardens in Kerala and 
Equity Grant to Farmer Producer Organization (FPO) are not required to be 
placed before the EFC…” 
10. It has also been noticed from the reply furnished by the Ministry that Rs. 100 
crore, originally provided  as „Corpus fund to Maulana Azad Education Foundation‟ in 
the Ministry of Planning‟s Demands for Grants is not proposed to be transferred to the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs in the Supplementary Budget.  Similarly, out of Rs. 400  crore 
originally provided as „Grants for Institutions of Excellence to selected four Institutions‟ 
in the Ministry of Planning‟s Demands for Grants, Rs. 300 crore is now being transferred 
to Ministry of HRD (Rs. 200 crore) /Ministry of Culture (Rs. 100 cr ore) in the 
Supplementary Budget.  
11. Thus, out of Rs. 5000 crore budgeted under the Ministry of Planning‟s Demands 
for Grants, while Rs. 4425 crore  is now being transferred to line Ministry‟s demand in 

10 
 
the Supplementary Budget, the Schemes for which  th e remaining amount of Rs. 575 
crore is to be utilized are yet to be specified. 
12. As there had been recurrent and substantial under utilization of funds 
under some of the heads such as „Public Finance Management System‟, the 
Committee had recommended to the Ministry to identify the shortcomings in 
formulation of budget estimates and effectively monitor utilization of funds.  The 
Ministry admitted that under utilization of budgeted funds for this Scheme  was 
on account of want of necessary approvals and ce rtain administrative reasons. 
The Committee   are unhappy to note that although the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) had approved the Scheme way back on 19.09.2012,  the Cabinet 
approval for the same  is yet to be obtained even after a period of approxi mately 
one year. The Committee feel that such avoidable delay would not only lead to 
locking up the scarce funds but also surrendering them at a later stage. The 
Committee urge upon the Government to accord priority to such an important 
Scheme and grant necessary approvals at the earliest so that the allocated funds 
earmarked in 2013-14 are fully utilized. 
13. The Committee note that in BE 2013 -14, a lump sum provision of Rs. 5000 
crore under the head “New Programmes” had been made in the Ministry of 
Planning‟s Demand for Grants, out of which, Rs. 375 crore was earmarked for 
certain unspecified Schemes without identifying the line Ministries. The 
Committee further note that out of Rs. 5000 crore, Rs. 4425 crore  is now being 
transferred to line Ministry‟s de mands in the Supplementary Budget in respect of 
New Schemes pertaining to the respective Ministries/ Departments. The 
Committee are unhappy that Rs. 200 crore initially allocated to the line Ministries 
is now not proposed to be transferred to them, thereby  leaving an unspecified 
amount of  Rs. 575 crore  in the Ministry of Planning‟s Demands.  The Committee 
also strongly disapprove the extant practice being followed by the Ministry of 
Planning in allocating funds in their Demands for Grants without identify ing the 
line Ministries.  This practice is a clear violation of budgetary guidelines. The 
Committee would recommend to the Government to avoid this practice in future. 

11 
 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of the Schemes for 
which  the remaining amount  of Rs. 575 crore is to be utilized.   
B.    Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)  
(Recommendation Sl. No.2)  
14. Considering that in the absence of legislation, Unique Identification Authority of 
India (UIDAI) is functioning  without any legal basis, the Committee insisted the 
Government to address the various shortcomings/issues pointed out in their earlier 
report on 'National Identification Authority of India Bill 2010'  and bring forth a fresh 
legislation.  The Committee al so desired details such as number of aadhaar cards 
issued during the last three years vis -à-vis target set; number, nature and redressal 
mechanism of complaints and punishment awarded in the matter of issue of cards; and 
the cost per card. 
15. As regards the NIDAI Bill, the Ministry of Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, 
have stated as follows:- 
“…… With regard to the Observations of the Standing Committee on Finance 
on the National Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010, the draft Note for 
the Ca binet has been forwarded to Planning Commission.   The same had 
been submitted to the PMO for the approval of the Prime Minister as the 
Minister in Charge.  It had been decided that the matter be first examined by 
a Group of Ministers.  The matter was cons idred by Group of Ministers in its 
meeting held on 1st July, 2013 and a formal view is being taken shortly.” 
16. So far as the target and achievement with regard of issue of aadhaar cards and 
the cost per card,  the Ministry of Planning, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated 
that:- 
“UIDAI has been authorized to enroll 60 crore residents by March 2014 through 
the multiple registrar approach. As against this, UIDAI has enrolled 36.58 crore 
residents and a further 10.94 crore residents have been enrolled by  RGI. Total 
enrolments by the end of June 2013 is 47.52 crore. The total Aadhaar generation 
upto the end of June 2013 is 37.37 crore. 
…….The average cost per card is estimated to range between Rs.100 to 
Rs.157.” 
 

12 
 
17. The total budgetary allocations made fo r UIDAI since its inception upto 
31.03.2014 is Rs. 5440.30 crore, as per details given below: 
S.No Financial 
Year 
Amount 
(Rs. crore) 
1. 2009-10     25.65*  
2. 2010-11   268.41*  
3. 2011-12 1187.52*  
4. 2012-13 1338.72*  
5. 2013-14 2620.00^  
TOTAL 5440.30  
*Actual Expenditure 
^ Budget Estimates 
18. On the issue of existence of Redressal Mechanism of complaints , the Ministry of 
Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as under: 
“Grievance cell has been set up in each of the Regional Offices of UIDAI to 
attend to the complaints of residents.  …… to facilitate residents to update and 
correct their Aadhaar data, on-line self-service portal (SSUP) and update through 
Post have been launched in November 2012. In order to manage the queries and 
grievances during the enrolment and post enrolment stages and to serve as a 
central point of contact to the residents and all other partner of UIDAI, a Contact 
Centre was established in July 2010.  The Contact Centre supports the residents 
through two support channels - phone and e -mail. The residents can contact the 
contact centre through either of the support channels for any queries related on 
Aadhaar scheme. A new Contact Centre has been on board since Feb. 2013 with 
branches at Jamshedpur and Pune…..”    
19. As regards punishments awarded in the matter of issue of Aadhaar, the Ministry 
of Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted the following:- 
“…….As and when instances of non -compliance of prescribed 
processes/guidelines  are detected or brought to the notice of UIDAI, show 
cause notices are issued against erring Enrolment Agencies / Operators/ 
Supervisors and appropriate action is taken from time to time.  
 …….To dis-incentivize the casual approach of partners towards demographic 
data quality penalties are prescribed. Sum of Rs.1,16,28,200/ - has been 
imposed as penalty between April 2012 to April 2013”. 

13 
 
20. The Committee note that out of 60 crore residents to be enrolled by UIDAI 
by March 2014, 47.52 crore residents (79.2%) have been enrolled and 37.37 crore 
(62.28%) Aadhaar cards have been generated till June, 2013. The number of 
residents to be enrolled and cards to be generated by March, 2014 are 12.48 crore 
(20.8%) and 22.63 crore (37.72%) respectively. While the details regarding number 
of Aadhaar cards generated has been furnished, the reply is silent as regard to 
the number of cards issued. In the absence of the desired information, the 
Committee are unable to ascertain the poss ible time lag in generation of Aadhaar 
cards and their issue. The Committee desire that the time lag between generation 
of cards and their issue, if any, be reduced and immediate steps be taken to 
ensure speedy distribution of cards. 
21. Further, the total  budgetary allocations made for UIDAI since its inception 
upto BE 2013 -14 is Rs 5440.30 crore, out of which Rs. 2820.30 crore has been 
utilized upto 31.03.2013 and the remaining amount of Rs. 2620 has been allocated 
in BE 2013 -14. The Ministry have informe d that the average cost per card is 
estimated to range from Rs 100 to Rs 157. Taking the average cost per card to be 
Rs. 130, the total expenditure for issue of 60 crore cards is estimated to about Rs 
7800 crore. Thus,  the expected requirement of funds du ring 2013 -14 is Rs. 
4979.70 crores, whereas only Rs. 2620 crore has been kept for BE 2013 -14, which 
is thus grossly inadequate.   Given the tardy progress in enrollment/ generation 
of aadhar cards,  being done without legislative approval, it is doubtful t hat UIDAI 
could achieve the targets envisaged during 2013 -14. The Committee are 
constrained to observe a disturbing approach in the budgetary exercise of the 
Ministry by fixing inflated targets without commensurate budgetary allocations. 
The Committee woul d, therefore, expect the Government to review enrolment 
progress/funds requirement and project realistic requirement of the funds after 
legislative approval. 
22. Regarding grievance redressal mechanism, the Ministry have stated that 
the Cell has been set u p in each of the Regional Office of UIDAI.  The Committee 
are of the view that given the magnitude of pan India enrolment and huge 

14 
 
generation of aadhar cards, functioning of Grievance redressal Cell at Regional 
level is insufficient and needs to be improve d. The Committee are dissatisfied to 
note that the action taken reply is elusive on the number and nature of complaints 
received regarding issue of Aadhaar Cards. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details in this regard particularly in the lig ht of recent judgement 
of the Supreme Court mentioning that no person should suffer for not possessing 
the Aadhaar card.  The Government must in the meantime issue instructions to 
State Governments and to all other authorities that  it should not be made 
mandatory for any purpose. 
23.  The Committee have time and again insisted the Government to address 
the various shortcomings/issues pointed out in their earlier Reports and bring 
forth a fresh legislation on UIDAI. However, in the action taken replies,  th e 
Ministry have mentioned that the matter is yet to be placed before the Cabinet.    
The Committee, therefore, again urge upon the Government to bring the requisite 
legislation in the next session of Parliament.   
C. Productive Employment and Skill Development 
(Recommendation Sl. No.3)  
24.  Considering that the Government had set an ambitious target of skilling 50 
million people in the 12 th plan period including 9 million in 2013 -14 and upon noticing 
that the existing training capacity in the countr y is 4.5 million and it needed to be more 
than doubled to achieve the target, the Committee while insisting the Government to 
achieve this objective by increasing the training capacity desired to be apprised about 
the progress made in this regard.  The Com mittee also inter alia recommended that like 
Right to Education there should be compulsory skill development programme; 
Backward Region Districts be given priority and skill development programme 
dovetailed with MNREGA & BRGF. The Committee also desired th e Planning 
Commission to consider establishing a mechanism to ensure monitoring, evaluation and 
implementation of various skill development initiatives undertaken by various Central 
Ministries/Departments as well as State Governments and private entities. 

15 
 
25. On the issue of enhancing existing skill development capacity, the Ministry of 
Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, have  inter alia stated as under: 
“The need to enhance the existing skill development capacity both in the 
government run institutions  as well as private sector institutions has been 
recognized as a priority area in the 12 th Plan.  Governments both at the 
Centre and the States are taking necessary initiatives to put in place 
physical infrastructure, adequate number of trainers, certifica tion and 
assessing bodies, revision of course curriculum, etc. Private sector is 
sought to be incentivized by National Skill Development Corporation to 
strengthen their training capacity. Training initiatives in the PPP mode in 
existing government ITIs and other institutions are also being tried out. 
26. In the context of establishing  a mechanism to ensure monitoring, evolution and 
implementation of various skill development initiatives, the Ministry, in their Action 
Taken Reply have inter alia stated as under: 
“The above recommendations / observations of the Committee are 
sought to be addressed by setting up a National Skill Development 
Agency (NSDA) which will be located in Ministry of Finance. The 
notification for setting up of the NSDA has been issued by the 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance on 6 th June, 
2013…… 
……The National Skill Development Agency aims to provide the much 
needed single point focus to coordinate and harmonize the skill 
development efforts of the Central and State Gov ernments and the private 
sector to achieve the skilling targets of the 12th Plan and beyond.  The 
NSDA will anchor and operationalise the National Skills Qualifications 
Framework (NSQF) to ensure that quality and standards meet sector 
specific requirements and that there is scope for progression as also easy 
entry and exit between work and study.  The Government is trying to 
bridge the regional divides in backward, LWE affected districts through 
various schemes including BRGF and IAP. The NSDA is also mandated to 
ensure that the skilling needs of the disadvantaged and the marginalized 
groups like SCs, STs, OBCs, minorities, women and differently abled 
persons are taken care of. 
  
 
27. The reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on the information sought by 
the Committee about the progress made with regard to increasing the existing 
training capacity to achieve the target of skilling 50 million people in the 12 th Plan 

16 
 
period.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the annual plan to achieve 
the increase in training capacity.  
 
28. The Committee are also surprised at the Ministry‟s silence on their 
recommendation that like the Right to Education, there should be a compulsory 
skill development programme.  The Committee would like to have specific 
comments of the Ministry in this regard. 
 
29. Although the Ministry have stated that the Government is trying to bridge 
the regional divides in Backward, Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected districts 
through various schemes including Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF ) & 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP), the reply is elusive on the recommendation of the 
Committee that Skill Development Programme be dovetailed with MGNREGA & 
BRFG.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken/proposed to 
be taken in this regar d. In this context, the Committee would further like to 
suggest that Security Related Expenditure (SRE) Scheme should dovetail with the 
IAP list, which should also be based on the same criteria as LWE district. 
 
30. The Committee also desired the Planning Commission to consider 
establishing a mechanism to ensure monitoring, evaluation and implementation 
of various skill development initiatives undertaken by various Central 
Ministries/Departments as well as State Governments and private entities. In their 
action taken note,  the Ministry of Planning have stated that this recommendation/ 
observation of the Committee is sought to be addressed by setting up a National 
Skill Development Agency (NSDA) which will be located in Ministry of Finance, for 
which the Not ification has been issued by  the Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance on 6 th June, 2013. The Committee have also been informed 
that the National Skill Development Agency aims to provide the much needed 
single point focus to coordinate and h armonize the skill development efforts of 
the Central and State Governments and the private sector to achieve the skilling 
targets of the 12th Plan and beyond. While expressing satisfaction on notifying a 

17 
 
National Skill Development Agency (NSDA), the Commi ttee hope that the Agency 
will make earnest efforts to meet skilling targets proposed to be achieved.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of further developments in this regard. 
 
D. Streamlining and Restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4)   
31. The Committee upon noticing that 173 Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs)  at 
the end of 11 th Plan would  be restructured into 70 Schemes and each Scheme would 
be reviewed once in two years felt that further streamlining, restructuring and 
rationalizing the number of CSSs would only enhance their productiveness. The 
Committee emphasized that while reviewing the Schemes, an element of accountability 
be built in the mechanism. The Committee also recommended the Government to 
devise means to ensure equitable distribution of benefits of Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes to the deficient States so that they d o not suffer in accessing the funds under 
CSS. Further, while noticing that in 2013-14, resources to the tune of Rs. 5,87,082 crore 
are expected  to be transferred to the States & UTs under share of taxes, non -plan 
grants & loan, and central assistance, th e Committee desired to be apprised of the 
quantum of funds to be saved by restructuring of CSSs and the manner in which these 
funds are proposed to be utilized. 
32. The Ministry of Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, have inter alia  stated as 
under: 
 “…. The Cabinet has approved following:  
(a)      Restructure the existing CSS/ACA Schemes in the Twelfth Five -
Year Plan into 66 Schemes, including Flagship Programmes. 
(b) Endorse 17 Flagship Programmes  with significant outlays for major 
interventions required in health, education, irrigation, urban development, 
infrastructure, including rural infrastructure, skill development, etc.  
(c) Keep at least 10% of the outlay of each CSS/ACA/Flagship 
Scheme as Flexi funds.    
(d)   Classify and budget all Plan schemes under which Central 
Assistance is provided to the States together as Central Assistance to 
State Plans with effect from 2014-15 (BE) onwards.  
(e)  Formulate state specific guidelines for each CSS/A CA/Flagship 
scheme and constitution of an Inter -Ministerial Committee for this 
purpose.  

18 
 
(f)      For each new CSS/ACA/Flagship scheme, at least   25% of funds 
may be contributed by the General Category States and 10% fund by the 
Special Category States inc luding States of J&K, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand.   
(g) Place the funds for all CSS/ACA schemes with the Administrative 
Ministries and transfer CSS/ACA funds to the States through the 
Consolidated Fund of the States concerned. This mode of transfer m ay be 
implemented in a phased manner in BE 2014-2015.  
(h) These arrangements will come into force for the remaining years of the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
It is expected that with the above re -structuring, the concern expressed by 
the SFC regarding ineffici ency due to implementing plethora of schemes would 
be addressed.  Provision of 10% fund as flexi -fund and approval for the 
constitution of an Inter - Ministerial Committee to consider states‟ specific 
guidelines would provide much needed flexibility. In add ition, provision of upto 
75% of funds in all new Centrally Sponsored Schemes for General Category 
States and upto 90% for Special Category States would also address the 
concern of the Committee regarding the difficulties being faced by some of the 
States in accessing Central Assistance in CSSs.” 
33. The Committee in their 32 nd Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on „Appraisal of BPL 
Criteria‟ had inter alia  recommended that the plethora of schemes and 
programmes operating should be streamlined and rationalized to manag eable 
proportions.  The Committee in their subsequent reports had also emphasized 
the restructuring and rationalization of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) to 
enhance their efficiency and scale.   The Ministry of Planning in their action taken 
note have stated that the Cabinet has inter alia  approved  to restructure the 
existing CSS/ACA Schemes in the Twelfth Five -Year Plan into 66 Schemes, 
including Flagship Programmes. The Ministry have further added that with the 
above re -structuring, the concern expre ssed by the Standing Committee on 
Finance regarding inefficiency due to implementing plethora of schemes would 
be addressed.  The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of their 
recommendations, 173 CSSs at the end of 11 th Plan will now be restructur ed into 
66 Schemes including Flagship Programmes in the Twelfth Five -Year Plan.   The 
Committee suggest that the government must continue to make efforts for  

19 
 
further streamlining, restructuring and rationalizing the number of CSSs, which  
will only enhance their productiveness. 
34. The Committee, however, note that the action taken replies are silent on the 
information sought by them with regard to the quantum of funds to be saved by 
restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) and the manner in whi ch 
these funds are proposed to be utilized. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the details in this regard. 
E.     Energy Sector 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6)  
35. Considering that Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)  had not 
been able to fulfill the primary objective of  providing access to electricity to all rural 
households on account of certain inherent weaknesses in its design, the Committee had 
recommended for the comprehensive review of the Scheme and rectification of 
deficiencies noticed with a view to ensure energisation of villages electrified, increased 
access to electricity, upgradation of transformer capacity, improvement in supply of 
electricity etc. 
36.  In this context, the Ministry of Planning, in their Action Taken Reply, h ave stated   
as under: 
“Ministry of Power is in the process of modifying the RGGVY Scheme to ensure 
that the revised scheme addresses the concerns/deficiencies noticed during the 
11th Plan period.  In this context, EFC meeting has already been convened 
under chairmanship of Fina nce Secretary on 21.3.2013.  Final decision in this 
respect would be taken by Cabinet.”  
37. Since several deficiencies had been noticed in implementation of Rajiv 
Gandhi Grameen Vidhyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), the Committee had 
recommended its comprehensive  review. The Ministry of Planning in their action 
taken reply have stated that the Scheme is being modified and the revised 
Scheme would be decided by the Cabinet. Keeping in view the availability of 
power at the grass root level, the Committee are of the considered view that the 
Ministry of Planning should ensure that the process of rectification of 

20 
 
deficiencies of the Scheme is expedited, so that among other things, there is 
improvement in upgradation capacity of transformers and supply of electricity. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of further action taken in this regard.   
 
 
New Delhi;                                     YASHWANT SINHA 
27 September, 2013                                                   Chairman, 
05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Finance 
 

21 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1310 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
                 Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Baliram  
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
   
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
16.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
   2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Subodh Kant Sahai and congratulated 
him on his nomination to the Committee for the year 2013 -14. The Committee thereafter 
took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption :-  
(i)  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(ii)    XX   XX   XX   XX 

22 
 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
(iii)   Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Planning; 
 
(iv)   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(v)    XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
   
3.     The Committee adopted the above draft reports with minor modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the 
modifications suggested and present these Reports to Hon‟ble Speaker/Parliament. 
    
          The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

23 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
PLANNING  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations    06   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government    06         100.00 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,  
3, 4,5 and 6) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the    NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect       
 of which replies of the Government have   NIL  0.00 
 not been accepted by the Committee 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL  0.00 
 of which final reply of the Government is  
 still awaited  
 