1 
 
63 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation]  
 
 
 
SIXTY THIRD REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


2 
 
 
SIXTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Fifty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation]  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6  December, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  6 December, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......   (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies .........................................………  
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29 November, 2012................  14 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations    16 
Contained in the Fifty  Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation ………………… 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2012-13) 
 
  
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
            MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
9.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
10.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
11.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
12.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
13.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
14.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
15.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
16.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Vacant* 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -  Additional Director 
____________________________________________________ 
* Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f 28.10.2012 consequent upon his induction 
to the Union Council of Ministers 

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Sixty Third Report on action taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifty Fourth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha ) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of  Statistics and 
Programme Implementation  
 2. The Fifty Fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2012.  Replies indicating action taken on all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 16 
July, 2012.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 29 
November, 2012. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fourth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
4 December, 2012                                                          Chairman, 
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Finance  
 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabh a) deals 
with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in their Fifty -fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Porgramme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid  
in Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2012. 
 
2.   The Report contained 7 recommendations.  Action taken notes have been 
received from the Government in respect of all the recommendations contained in the 
report. These have been categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 7 
                                                                                                         Total: 6 
(Chapter II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No. 3  
                                                                                                                  
                                 Total:    1 
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         Total: Nil 
 (Chapter IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
                                                                                                   Total :     Nil 
(Chapter V) 
 

7 
 
3.   The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously, in any case not 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
4.   The Committee will now deal wit h the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
 
 National Statistical Commission (Sl.no. 3) 
5. The Committee recommended as under: 
     “The Committee understand that the appointment of a part -time Chairman and 
four part -time Members to constitute the National Statistical Commission (NSC) 
apart from the Secretary, Planning Commission as an ex -officio member and the 
Chief Statistician of India as Secretary to the Commission, was made on the basis 
of the recommendation of Rangarajan Commission. NSC which is yet to get a 
statutory status has now taken over the role of the Governing Council of NSSO. 
As a result, a host of tasks have been p ending with the NSC including formulation 
of standards in respect of methodology for collection of core statistics and taking 
up the role of the Governing Council of the NSSO, implementation of the 
recommendations of the Rangaranjan Committee etc. In view of the tasks and 
responsibilities the NSC has to shoulder, the Committee are of the opinion that 
the NSC with part -time Chairman and part -time Members may not be able to 
deliver the desired outcome in the long run. With a view to providing the NSC with 
firmer footing to enable it to carry out its responsibility without any hindrance, the 
Committee would recommend the Ministry to review the decision to have part-time 
Chairman and Part-time Members for the NSC. They should also take appropriate 
measures for i mplementation of the Committee’s earlier recommendation for 
conferring statutory status upon NSC without any further delay.”  
 
 

8 
 
6. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in their Action 
taken reply stated as under:  
  
 “The Committee appoi nted by the National Statistics Commission under the 
chairmanship of Prof. N.R. MadhavaMenon to look into legislative measures on 
statistical matters has submitted its report to the Commission on 27 th October 
2011. The Commission in its 45 th meeting held o n 29 th& 30 th October 2011 
appreciated and adopted the report of the Menon Committee. The report of the 
Menon Committee along with the recommendations of the Commission thereof 
was received in this Ministry on 9 th November 2011, with a request to take 
urgent steps to implement the recommendations. The Committee has strongly 
recommended that the National Statistical Commission shall not retain the 
concept of a part -time Chairperson and part -time Members and that the 
Commission should consist of a chairperson and not less than four Members, all 
full-time. The recommendations have been processed in this Ministry and a draft 
National Statistical Commission Bill has inter alia been circulated on 22 nd 
December 2011 to Central Ministries/Departments and to States/UT s for their 
comments. The draft Bill is under the examination of the Government on the 
basis of views and suggestions received.” 
7. The Committee had desired in their earlier Report that the National 
Statistical Commission, which is presently being manned by part-time Chairman 
and Members, needs to be strengthened and made a statutory full -time body for 
this purpose. The Madhav Menon Expert Committee, constituted by the Ministry 
to look into legislative matters on statistical matters, had also earlier sugge sted 
making this a permanent body. The Committee would now expect the Ministry to 
speed up the consultative process with regard the draft Bill on this subject and 
bring forth the legislation before Parliament without further delay. 

9 
 
Project – Time and Cost overruns (Sl.no. 5) 
8. The Committee recommended as under: 
   The Committee note that the Implementation Wing of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation is monitoring 11 key infrastructure sectors as well as 
Central Sector Projects in 16 Sectors costing more than Rs. 150 crore. From the reply  
 furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that out of 561 projects on the monitor of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 258 projects i.e. 45.97 % 
have overruns in respect of either time or cost or both. The Committee further note that 
two organizations, namely Railways and NHAI have been particularly lax in furnishing 
timely information on projects to Ministry of Programme Implementation. While 
deprecating these two organizati ons for their non - compliance, the Committee would 
like the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to take up this matter for 
intervention at the highest level. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation should devise better ways of coordinating and monitoring with line 
Ministries for timely reporting of project delays including time/cost overruns.  
 9. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in their Action 
taken reply stated as under: 
”The observations of the Standing Committee on Finance in its 54 th 
Report are being conveyed to the Ministry of Railways from the level of the 
Hon’ble Minister.  Also, the issues of non - reporting of dates of 
commissioning, misreporting of expenditure, inordinate delays in Railway s 
Projects and the status of action initiated by the Railways in prioritizing 
Railways projects as suggested by this Ministry have also been taken up.  
The Ministry of Railways is being further requested to ensure that the 
representatives of the Ministry i s invariably invited ( as is done by the other 
Ministries) in the review meeting of the Railways and a Nodal Officer be 
designated to coordinate with this Ministry on issues pertaining to  monitoring 
of ongoing projects. The non -furnishing of the reply on the earlier 

10 
 
observations of the Standing Committee in its 36 th Report have been pointed 
out in the letter to the Ministry of Railways. 
2. Similarly, along with the observations of the Standing Committee on 
Finance, the issues of non -reporting by NHAI of de tails of project/reasons for 
delay, anomalies in the expenditures reported, are being taken up the Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways from the level of Hon’ble Minister.  They are 
also being requested to ensure the involvement of Ministry of Statistic s and 
Programme Implementation in reviews of NHAI Projects and also to 
designate a Nodal Officer in the Ministry to coordinate with MOSPI on 
monitoring of ongoing projects. 
3. In addition to the above, the Hon’ble Minister of State (IC) of 
Statistics and P rogramme Implementation has recently taken a review of 
NHAI projects of Odisha and the projects of East Coast Railways, in Odisha.  
The Hon’ble Minister proposes to review the status of implementation of 
projects in other states also.” 
10. The Committee note that Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has taken some follow -up action in respect of their 
recommendation for taking appropriate measures to address time/cost overruns 
in project implementation in general and in particu lar the laxity showed by 
Railways and NHAI in furnishing timely information on projects to the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation.  The Committee would now expect the 
Ministry to persist in their efforts to squarely address the issue of ti me/cost 
overruns of project implementation and also work on devising better systemic 
ways of coordinating and regular monitoring with line Ministries for timely 
reporting of project delays including time/cost overruns.  
 
 
 

11 
 
Collection of Statistics – Index of Industrial Production (IIP) ( Sl.no. 7) 
 
11. The Committee recommended as under: 
 “ Steps have been taken from time to time to improve the collection of vital 
economic statistics in the country. However, the Committee are constrained 
to note that even t oday this leaves much to be desired. A recent instance 
was the IIP data for January 2012 which was revised from 6.8 percent to 1.1 
per cent. This raises serious questions about the reliability of the data offered 
by the Ministry. A similar instance has occ urred in India’s trade data when 
the April – October, 2011 export figures were reduced by $ 8.8 billion. The 
Committee are seriously concerned at this flaw which projects not only the 
Government but the entire country in a poor light. The Committee would l ike 
an independent inquiry to be conducted in data errors of such magnitude and 
the report made available to the Committee within three months.” 
  
12. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in their Action 
taken reply stated as under: 
 “In its 49 th meeting held during 30 April -1st May 2012, National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) took note of the above directions and recommended that 
“an expert may be appointed by the MOSPI to look into the issue from the 
records and process in the concerned offices and submit a report”. In 
compliance of the aforesaid directions, Dr. R.B. Barman (Retd. Executive 
Director of RBI) has been appointed on 18.05.2012 to conduct the said 
inquiry and submit his report by 29th June 2012.” 
 
13. The Report of the Indepen dent Inquiry on Data Errors in IIP and Expert (headed 
by Dr. R.B. Barman, Retd. Exe. Director, RBI) submitted on 29 June, 2012 
sated/observed as under: 

12 
 
“The official explaination for this (IIP) is the wrong reporting of sugar 
production for January, 2012 of 134.08 lakh tones, which was corrected to 
58.09 lakh tones at the  time of the first revision………  The data clearly 
show that the production of mistakenly reported 134.08 lakh tones of 
sugar in January 2012 was completely out of alignment with the past 
production.  How could it happen without being detected by ESD, CSO 
responsible for compilation and dessimination of the index?  It is because 
CSO undertakes checking of data for detection of outliners based on per 
cent variation, as mentioned earlier…the me thod of checking the data for 
detection of possible errors, being followed by CSO for a long time, was 
found to be hopelessly inadequate for detecting such an impossible 
event.”  
14. On the issue of erroneous reporting of India’s export data for April-October, 2011 
which were revised downward by $8.8 billion, the R.B. Barman Inquiry Report further 
observed/stated: 
 “The error creeping in the export data was due to erroneous inclusion of 
transactions, more than once, that went into compilation of t hese data by 
DGCI&S.  This went undetected for quite some time because the 
validation checks these data wee subjected did not provide for such a 
check as possibility of such multiple records of same transactions was not 
anticipated earlier…..Customs author ity replaced ICS 1.0 with ICES 1.5 
and started migrating to the new system for transaction processing on 
exports and imports….. It appears that Customs authority depended more 
on gradual shift to new system and the experience of DGCI&S on data 
validation c hecks to detect problems, which did not work in the final 
reckoning.   
 …….The main cause of error in exports figures is multiple counting of 
transactions.  This went on for a long time and its detection eluded 
DGCI&S till a meeting took place in October 2012 involving both sides.  As 
mentioned earlier, data duplication occurred at the stage of generation of 
Dumps by Customs for DTR after shifting to ICES 1.5.  The problem was 
sorted out by adding new data field and introducing validation check for 
uniquely indentifying transactions.”  
 
15. The Committee note that the Independent Inquiry on Data Errors on IIP, 
headed by Dr. R.B. Barman, has been appointed as a result of the Committee’s 
recommendation for ‘an independent inquiry’ into data errors on IIP.  The  
Committee, further note that the R.B. Barman Inquiry report has pointed out how 

13 
 
and where the lapses occurred on IIP data as well as India’s export data for April -
October 2011 which were revised downward by $8 billion.  From the inquiry 
report, the Committee understand that errors occurred in the economic statistics 
data due to ‘mistaken’ reporting and multiple counting  of transactions which 
were undetected for a considerable period of time.  The Committee regret to note 
that the errors in data could have  been easily avoided had there been even a 
modicum of seriousness on the part of the concerned officials/departments 
dealing with such data.  The Committee would, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
initiate the necessary follow-up action on the Barman Inquiry findings and pursue 
the task of data collection and dissemination with due care and seriousness so 
that such lapses do not recur.   
 16. Furthermore, the Committee note with dismay, news reports pointing out 
that the CSO carried out revisions on their web site with regard to GDP growth 
figures for 2008 and 2009 without even issuing as much as a press release.  The 
Committee while disapproving of such arbitrariness and lack of transparency, 
would like the Ministry to explain the position in the matter within  15 days of the 
presentation of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;                         YASHWANT SINHA 
4 December, 2012                                               Chairman, 
        13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance.  
 

14 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th November, 2012 from 1530 hrs to 1730 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram   
3.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
13.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
14.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
 
2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption: -  
(i)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Dema nds for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment); 
 
 
 

15 
 
-2- 
 
(ii)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue); 
 
(iii)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Gr ants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Planning; 
 
(iv)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
 
(v)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.   
 
3.  The Committee adopted the draft rep orts at Sl.no. (iv) without any 
modification and those at Sl.nos. (i), (ii), (iii) and (v) with modifications.    The 
Committee also authorized the Chairman to present all the Reports to Parliament in 
the current session.     
      The Committee adjourned at 1730 hours. 

16 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY FOURTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-
2013) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATIONS  
  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   7   
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government   6  85.72 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,  
4, 5, 6,7, 8,10, 11 and 12) 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   1    14.28 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 3) 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect            
of which replies of the Government have  NIL  0.00 
not been accepted by the Committee 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect  NIL  0.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
 