1 
 
75 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,  
FINANCIAL SERVICES & DISINVESTMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in           
Sixty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services & 
Disinvestment)]  
 
 
 
SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


2 
 
 
SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,  
FINANCIAL SERVICES & DISINVESTMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Sixty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services 
& Disinvestment)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 18 October, 2013 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09  December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09  December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………    1 
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
  
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies .........................................………  
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27 September, 2013................ 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Sixty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Eco nomic 
Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services & Disinvestment)……………………………………  
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -  Additional Director 
3. Shri T. Mathivanan   -  Committee Officer 
                                                           
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Seventy Fifth Report on action taken 
by Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixty Seventh Report 
of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services & Disinvestment).  
 2. The Sixty Seventh Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2013.  Replies indicating action taken on 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the 
Government on 25 July, 2013.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting 
held on 27 September, 2013. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixty Seventh Report of the Committee is 
given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
 27 September, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
 05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
                         

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) deals 
with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in their Sixty -Seventh Report on the Demands for G rants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and 
Disinvestment) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 
April, 2013. 
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Go vernment on 25 July, 2013 
in respect of all the 14 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
analyzed and categorized as follows:-  
 (i) Recommendations / Observations that have been accepted by the  
  Government: 
  Recommendation Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13 and 14 
Total: 14 
(Chapter II) 
 (ii) Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Nil 
  Total: Nil 
(Chapter III) 
 (iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
Total: Nil 
(Chapter IV) 
 (iv) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
  Government are still awaited: Nil 
  Total: Nil 
 (Chapter V) 
 

7 
 
3. The Co mmittee desire that the replies to the recommendations / 
observations contained in the Chapter I of this Report may be furnished to them 
expeditiously, in any case not later than three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
A. SWAVALAMBAN SCHEME 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
5. The Committee while observing that the Swavalamban Scheme aiming at 
encouraging people from unorganized sector to voluntarily save for their retirement 
under the New Pension Scheme (NPS) had not been well received among the people 
over the years, recommended the Ministry of Finance to restructure the Swavalamban 
Scheme and give wide publicity as well in order to attract more and more people from 
unorganised sector.  
6. The Ministry of Finance in their action taken replies have stated inter-alia that:- : 
 “The Swavalamban scheme has been aimed to benefit around 10 lakh 
 additional subscribers every year. However, since the Swavalam ban scheme 
 was launched on 26.9.2010, a  total of only 3.03 lakh subscribers could be 
 benefitted under the Scheme during 2010 -11. Since then, there has been a 
 steady growth in number of beneficiaries under the Scheme. During 2011 -12, a 
 total of 6.44 lak h subscribers and during 2012 -13, 11.04 lakh subscribers have 
 been benefitted under the scheme.  
 The Swavalamban Scheme is at a nascent stage of development and this 
 Department has taken several steps to create awareness of Swavalamban 
 Scheme among workers / labourers in unorganised sector.  
 The steps taken so far by the Government have begun to bring positive 
 results and a total of 20.50 lakh subscribers have already been benefitted under 
 the Swavalamban.  Government has already released a further G rant of Rs. 
 33.70 crore during 2013-14 and this is over and above Rs. 197.91 crore already 
 spent under the Scheme.   As the Scheme has begun to attract the people from 
 unorganised sector, it is being felt that there is no urgent need at present to 
 restructure the Scheme to achieve the objective of the scheme. The Scheme is 

8 
 
 already being given wide publicity in order to attract more and more people from 
 unorganised sector”. 
7. According to the information available in the website of the Ministry of Fin ance 
(Department of Financial Services), the Swavalamban Scheme will be available upto 
the year 2013-14.   
Social Security Benefits to Unorganised Workers  
8. It is reported in the Annual Report (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment that the G overnment have been adopting two -pronged strategy i.e. 
legislative measures and implementation of welfare schemes and programmes has 
been followed to take care of the social security and welfare of unorganized workers. 
The legislative measures include enac tment of the Unorganised Workers’ Social 
Security Act, 2008, etc; and the welfare schemes include the Rashtriya Swasthya 
Bima Yojana (RSBY); the Aam Admi Bima Yojana (AABY); and the Swavalamban 
Scheme, etc.   
9. It is also reported that as per the survey c arried out by the National Sample 
Survey Organisation (NSSO) in the year 2009 -10, the total employment in both 
organized and unorganized sector in the country was 46.5 crore.  Out of this, about 2.8 
crore (6%) were in the organized sector and the balance 4 3.7 crore (94%) in the 
unorganized sector. 
10. With a view to providing social security to unorganized workers, the 
Government enacted the “Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act, 2008”.  Section 
3(1) of the Act provides that the Central Government shall  formulate and notify, from 
time to time, suitable welfare schemes for unorganized workers on matters relating to 
life and disability cover, health and maternity benefits, old age protection and any other 
benefit as may be determined by the Central Governm ent.  Section 3(2) of the Act 
provides that the schemes included in the Schedule 1 of the Act shall be deemed to be 
welfare schemes.  Under Section 3(3) of the Act, the Central Government may, by 
notification, amend the Schedule(s) annexed to the Act.  The  schemes included in 
Schedule 1 to the Act are: - Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme; National 
Family Benefit Scheme; Janani Suraksha Yojana; Handloom Weavers’ 

9 
 
Comprehensive Welfare Scheme; Handicarft Artisans’ Comprehensive Welfare 
Scheme; Pension to Master Craft Persons; National Scheme for Welfare of Fisherman 
and Training and Extension; Janshree Bima Yojana; Aam Admi Bima Yojana; and 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana,. 
11. The Central Government launched the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RSBY) to provide smart card based cashless health insurance, including maternity 
benefit to BPL families in the unorganized sector.  The scheme became operation from 
01.04.2008.  Total number of beneficiaries covered under RSBY as on 31.03.2013 is 
3.44 crore.   
12. The Aam Admi Bima Yojana (AABY) was launched on 02.10.2007 with a view 
to providing insurance cover to the head of family or one earning member of rural 
landless households.  Total number of beneficiaries covered under AABY as on 
31.03.2013 is 4.80 crore. 
13. Against the backdrop of under -achievement under the Swavalamban 
Scheme over the years, being implemented by the Government, the Committee 
had recommended for restructuring of  the Scheme, as in its present form it had 
not been well received among th e people.   In the action taken replies, the 
Ministry of Finance submitted that since the Swavalamban Scheme was 
launched on 26 September, 2010, there has been a steady growth in number of 
beneficiaries under the Scheme, and therefore, there is no urgent n eed at 
present to restructure the Scheme.    However, the Committee note from 
available facts that as against the total coverage target of 40 lakh subscribers 
for the year 2013 -14, so far only about half the number i.e. 20.50 lakh 
subscribers have been enro lled.   Though the enrollment has improved 
marginally, achieving the total coverage target remains doubtful, as the Scheme 
is available only upto March, 2014.   Moreover, the coverage achieved under the 

10 
 
Swavalamban Scheme is not as satisfactory compared to the achievement made 
under other social security schemes, namely, the RSBY; and the AABY.   The 
average beneficiaries enrolled per annum under the RSBY is 57.35 lakh and 
80.15 lakh in the case of the AABY, while it is a mere 6.80 lakh under the 
Swavalamban Scheme.   Thus, it is clearly evident that the steps taken by the 
Ministry under the Swavalamban Scheme wholly inadequate, considering the 
fact that 94 per cent of total employment i.e. 43.70 crore remains in the 
unorganized sector, which warrants extensive coverage under schemes such as 
this.    Unlike other Social Security Schemes, for instance, the RSBY and the 
AABY included in Schedule I of the Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act, 
2008 and deemed to be welfare schemes for unorganized workers, the  
Swavalamban Scheme is yet to find a place in the Schedule despite the Central 
Government having the power to amend the Schedule.    
14. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their recommendation to 
restructure the Swavalamban Scheme to cover more ex tensively the 
unorganized workers, urge the Government to amend the Schedule I of the 
Unorganised Workers’ Social Security Act, 2008 to include the Swavalamban 
Scheme.  
B. Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
15. Since a number of discrepancies in implementation of the scheme “Agricultural 
Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008” was reported, the Committee urged upon 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) to set up an exclusive 

11 
 
monitoring wing for the implementation and monitoring the various schemes under its 
jurisdiction.   Further, in order to preempt such large scale deviation from the 
envisaged objectives of the schemes, the Committee desired that the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of  Expenditure) should oversee the outcome of expenditure 
periodically in such big schemes. 
 
16. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance while informing the 
Committee of the action taken for rectification of the discrepancies in implementation 
of the scheme, have, among other things, stated that:- 
 
 “As regards setting up an exclusive monitoring wing for implementation and 
 monitoring of various schemes is carried out under the provisions of the 
 respective Scheme. However, the Government has not ed and proposes to set 
 up a Monitoring Wing within the Department of Financial Services to monitor the 
 schemes pertaining to this Department”. 
 
17. The Committee are happy to note that the Government proposes to set up 
a monitoring wing within the Depart ment of Financial Services to monitor the 
schemes under its jurisdiction.  However, no mention has been made in the 
action taken reply about overseeing the outcome of expenditure by the 
Department of Expenditure periodically in major schemes of the Central  
Government, as recommended by the Committee.  The Committee desire to 
know the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
C. Financial Inclusion 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
18. The Committee had been repeatedly emphasizing that no other model could 
substitute brick & mortar branches in achieving the goal of financial inclusion. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended inter-alia the Ministry of Finance to review the 
Business Correspondent / Business Facilitator (BC/BF) model for better results, while 
ensuring that it should not become an instrument of exploitation of the rural poor.  

12 
 
They further recommended that social obligations on the part of private banks must 
also be strictly enforced. 
 
19. The Ministry of Finance have stated, among other things, in their action taken 
replies as under:- 
 “a) RBI had already issued instructions to Banks to implement safeguard 
 measures, while adopting Business Correspondent model. Some of them are: 
  (i)    The banks should carry out a detailed review of the performance  of various 
 BCs engaged by them at least once in a year and they should monitor the 
 activities of BCs through their Controlling Offices. 
  (ii)  The banks should constitute Grievance Redressal Machinery within the 
 bank for redressing complaints about se rvices rendered by the BCs and give 
 wide publicity about it through electronic and print media.  
  (iii) The retail outlet/sub -agent of the BC should be personally introduced to the 
 members of public by the bank officials in the presence of village elder s and 
 government functionaries in a public meeting so that there is no 
 misrepresentation/impersonation.  
   (iv) The charges for offering various services should be indicated in a brochure 
 and made available at the retail outlets/with the sub-agents.  
  (v)  As a measure of social audit, there could be periodic block level meetings 
 where Lead District Manager (LDM) of the lead bank could attend such 
 meetings in the district to get a direct feedback and provide such feedback to 
 the controlling offices.  
  (vi) The banks should ensure the preservation and protection of the security 
 and     confidentiality of customer information in the custody or possession of 
 BC.  
 b). New private sector banks are required to ensure that at least 25% of 
 their total b ranches are in semi -urban and rural centres on an ongoing 
 basis”. 
20. The Committee note with strong disapproval that the action taken replies 
are evasive with regard to review and effectiveness of the Business 
Correspondent / Business Facilitator (BC/BF)  model; and fulfillment of the 
obligation of opening of 25 per cent of total branches in semi -urban and rural 
centres by the private banks.  The Ministry have simply chosen to reproduce the 

13 
 
guidelines issued by the RBI and have not spelt out the action tak en by them as 
the nodal agency.  The Committee do not approve of such a routine approach 
and desire to be furnished a detailed reply including overseeing mechanism of 
BC/BF model in this regard.  
D. Recapitalisation of Public Sector Banks 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
21. The Committee expressed their view that the extant practice of following easy 
route of capitalizing the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) from the budget would not only 
numb the PSBs but might also made them inefficient.   The Committee, therefor e, 
recommended the Ministry of Finance to propel the PSBs to generate funds internally 
also for their recapitalization instead of depending on budgetary support alone.  They 
also urged the Ministry to expedite the process of setting up the holding company at 
the earliest.   
 
22.  The Ministry of Finance in their action taken replies have stated, among other 
things, that:- 
 “The capital infusion by the Government in PSBs is done with the twin objective 
 of adequately meeting the credit requirement of the pro ductive sectors of 
 economy as well as to maintain regulatory capital adequacy ratios in PSBs.  
 The Government of India, as the majority shareholder, is committed to keep all 
 PSBs adequately capitalized.  
 The capital infusion in PSBs is in addition to t heir internally generated capital to 
 enable them to maintain a comfortable level of Tier I CRAR of 8% which is 2% 
 over and above the regulatory prescriptions. In the year 2010 -11, Government 
 also infused capital in some PSBs to increase its shareholding  to 58% to create 
 additional headroom to facilitate raising of capital by these PSBs from the 
 market in future, as and when required, without the support of the Government. 
 ……. 
 To meet the long term needs of capital of PSBs, the Government is consideri ng 
 formation of Holding Company under a Special Act of Parliament. A Draft 
 Cabinet Note and Bill on formation of Holding Company duly approved by the 
 Finance Minister is under inter -ministerial consultation. The proposal is at an 

14 
 
 advanced stage of consultation with Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative 
 Department……”  
 
23.  It is seen from the reply that though the Government is stated to have 
created additional headroom for the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) to raise capital 
from the market,  the rep ly is silent whether the Ministry, as recommended by 
the Committee, instructed the PSBs to generate funds internally also for their 
recapitalization.   The Committee would thus like to know the details of capital 
raised by the each PSB as against the capit al infused by the Government during 
the last three years.  They also urge the Government to expedite the process of 
setting up of the Holding Company to meet the long -term needs of capital of 
PSBs. 
E. Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) 
 Recommendation (Para Nos. 9-13) 
24.   Concerning over rising NPAs of the most of Public Sector Banks (PSBs), the 
Committee urged the Government / RBI to constitute a special NPA Management Cell 
at the highest level to review the write -off / up -gradation and restructured advances 
and also to monitor the pace of recovery of NPAs.  They also desired the Ministry to 
submit a report on the results achieved thereof within a period of three months from 
the presentation of this Report.  In the meantime, the names of all willful -defaulters 
(Companies / Directors) should be published appropriately. 
25.    In their action taken replies, the Ministry of Finance while listing out the initiatives 
taken by the Government and RBI to contain NPAs, have stated, among other things, 
that:- 
 “To improve the health of the financial sector, to reduce the NPAs, to improve 
 asset quality of banks, and to prevent slippages, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
 has already issued several instructions from time to time which stipulate that 

15 
 
 each bank is required to hav e a robust mechanism for early detection of signs 
 of distress including prompt restructuring in the case of all viable accounts; to 
 have a loan recovery policy which sets down the manner of recovery of dues, 
 targeted level of reduction (period -wise), no rms for permitted sacrifice/waiver, 
 factors to be taken into account before considering waivers, decision levels, and 
 reporting to higher authorities; monitoring of write -off/waiver cases; valuation of 
 properties including collaterals accepted for their  exposures; and taking 
 recourse to legal mechanisms like SARFAESI Act, 2002, DRTs and Lok 
 Adalats…….Appointment of a Nodal Officer for recovery at the Head 
 Office/Zonal Office/for each DRT…..Thrust on organizing Lok Adalats/Recovery 
 Camps. 
26. It is further stated that - 
 i) The review of the Non performing assets (NPAs) of commercial banks is 
 undertaken at the highest level in RBI by the Board for Financial Supervision 
 (BFS) on a quarterly basis. 
 ii) The issue of NPA has also been a matter of debate and discussion in the 
 meetings of the Financial Stability Development Council (FSDC) of the 
 Government. Besides, the Nominee Directors, from RBI and Government, on 
 Board of PSBs also direct their efforts to help banks in adopting appropriate 
 strategies in dealing with NPAs. 
 iii) During the Annual Financial Inspections (AFI) of RBI, the asset quality of 
 the bank, including asset classification, restructuring of advances and the 
 effectiveness in reducing NPAs of the bank are intensely scrutinised and 
 discussed with the CMD/CEO of the banks and specific concerns incorporated 
 in a Monitorable Action Plan of banks for compliance. 
 iv) The off-site monitoring mechanism with respect to asset quality is fairly 
 exhaustive and aspects e.g. slippages, upgrad ation, recovery and write -off 
 trends, which throw light on banks’ efforts to manage NPAs, changes in asset 
 quality profile and provisions held and made for various categories of NPAs are 
 all discernible and picked up as pointers by RBI for follow -up wit h banks 
 concerned.     
 v) To monitor NPAs and restructuring of advances, RBI has advised all 
 PSBs to take adequate steps to strengthen their risk management systems, 
 credit appraisal and sanction process,  post sanction monitoring and follow -up 
 and, h ave a robust MIS mechanism for early detection of incipient 
 weaknesses/distress and for taking steps for remedial measures and recovery 
 of bank’s dues. 
 vi) Banks have been advised to restructure their NPAs in a transparent and 
 objective manner and in c onformity with the regulatory guidelines only. Further,  
 NPA level in banks are also constantly monitored by RBI. 

16 
 
 The recent guidelines on restructuring, issued on May 30, 2013, seeking to 
 tighten the regime from the year 2015 on classification of restructured advances 
 as non-performing exemplifies the fact that RBI adopts regulatory measures as 
 and when required and they have stood the test of time. 
 Considering the above facts and that the Government is monitoring NPAs on 
 regular basis, it is not ad visable to constitute any further high level NPA 
 Management Cell to review the write -off / up -gradation and restructured 
 advances and also to monitor the pace of recovery of NPAs.   
 As regards, publishing of the names of all willful -defaulters (Companie s / 
 Directors) appropriately, it is stated that Section 45E of the RBI Act, 1934, the 
 Acts establishing Public Sector Banks and the Public Financial Institutions 
 (Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983, provide for obligation of a 
 bank or fin ancial institution to maintain secrecy about the affairs of its 
 constituents. 
 The said provisions do not make a distinction with respect to small or big 
 borrowers and the prohibition from disclosure is applicable to all constituents 
 alike”. 
27. An extract of Sections 45A [c] and 45E of the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934 
related to definition of credit information and prohibition of disclosure of credit 
information is furnished below:- 
“45A [c] “credit information” means any information relating to--- 
(i) the amounts and the nature of loans or advances and other credit facilities  
granted by a banking company to any borrower or class of borrowers; 
(ii) the nature of security taken from any borrower [or class of borrowers] for credit 
facilities [granted to him or to such class]; 
(iii) the guarantee furnished by a banking company for any of is customers [or any 
class of its customers]; 
(iv) the means, antecedents, history of financial transactions and the 
creditworthiness of any borrower or class of borrowers;] 
(v) any other information which the Bank may consider to be relevant for the more 
orderly regulation of credit or credit policy.] 
    45E. Disclosure of information prohibited 
(1) Any credit information contained in any statement submitted by a banking 
company under section 45C o r furnished by the Bank to any banking company 

17 
 
under section 45D, shall be treated as confidential and shall not, except for the 
purposes of this Chapter, be published or otherwise disclosed. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall apply to----- 
(a) the disclosure by a ny banking company, with the previous       
permission of the Bank, of any information furnished to the Bank under 
section 45C; 
(b) the publication by the Bank, if it considers necessary in the public 
interest so to do, of any information collected by it under  section 45C, in 
such consolidated form as it may think fit without disclosing the name of 
any banking company or its borrowers; 
(c) the disclosure or publication by the banking company or by the 
Bank of any credit information to any other banking company or i n 
accordance with the practice and usage customary among bankers or as 
permitted or required under any other law: 
Provided that any credit information received by a banking company 
under this clause shall not be published  except in accordance with the 
practice and usage customary among bankers or as permitted or 
required under any other law.] 
(d)  the disclosures of any credit information under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005.] 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time  being in force, no 
court, tribunal or other authority shall compel the Bank or any banking company 
to produce or to give inspection of any statement submitted by that banking 
company under section 45C or to disclose any credit information furnished by 
the Bank to that banking company under section 45D”. 
 
28. An extract of Sections 3(2) (a) & (c) of the Public Financial Institutions 
(Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983 is given below:- 
 “3. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy 
(2) A public financial institution may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its 
functions, collect from, or furnish to,- 
(a) The Central Government; or 
(b) _______________________ 

18 
 
(c) Any other public financial institution, such credit information or other 
information as it may consider useful for the purpose, in such manner and at 
such time as it may think fit”.  
 
29. According to RBI’s Financial Stability Report, June 2013, approved by the sub -
committee of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC), the strain on 
asset quality continues, although it has shown improvement during the quarter ended 
March, 2013. It is also stated that change in classification for restructured advances 
w.e.f April1, 2015 may have some adverse impact on the NPAs, unless banks take 
preventive measures in this regard. 
30. The Committee find from the action taken replies furnished by the Ministry 
that review of the NPAs of commercial banks is being undertaken at various 
levels such as the RBI; nominee Directors from Government on Board of PSBs; 
and the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC).   However, it is 
very strange to note that the Department of Financial Services, the 
administrative department, which is supposed to monitor the movement of 
NPAs closely, has no NPA management cell .    In view of the apprehensions 
expressed in the RBI’s latest Financial Stability Report published in June, 2013 
that persistence of the current macroeconomic conditions; and the proposed 
change in classification for restructured advances w.e.f April 1, 2015, is likely to 
increase the quantum of NPAs, the Committee would expect the Ministry to take 
this matter more seriously and set up a NPA monitoring cell at the highest level 
in the Department of Financial Services to focus on asset quality of banks so as 
to achieve banking stability and sustainable credit growth.  The NPA Monitoring 
Cell could look into review of top NPA accounts; write -off / up -gradation and 
restructured advances; pace of recovery of NPAs; delay in NPA reporting 

19 
 
mechanism; inadequate f inancing of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) leading to their financial stress and NPA.  The Committee also desire 
to be furnished with a note detailing the effectiveness of several measures taken 
by the Ministry and the RBI in achieving credibl e and sustainable progress on 
asset quality of PSBs.   
31. On another issue regarding publishing of the names of all willful -
defaulters, the Ministry in its submission have stated that Section 45E of the 
RBI, Act, 1934, and the Public Financial Institution s (Obligation as to fidelity and 
secrecy) Act, 1983 provides for obligation of a bank or financial institution to 
maintain secrecy about the affairs of its constituents.  It is, however, not 
clarified as to how, in the public interest and for efficient fun ctioning of public 
sector banks, the disclosure of names of willful defaulters and their NPAs [not 
credit information of all borrowers or other credit information of defaulters] to a 
Parliamentary Standing Committee is prohibited especially when disclosure  of 
such data is permitted under section 3(2) of the Public Financial Institutions 
(Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy) Act, 1983 which provides that a public 
financial institution may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its functions, 
collect from, or furnish credit information to the Central Government .   It is also 
not clarified as to how revealing of such information would affect the orderly 
regulation of credit or credit policy of Banks.  The Committee believe that this 
would rather help thei r recovery process.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the requisite information within one month from the presentation of 
this Report.   

20 
 
F. Disinvestment 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
32. The Committee inter-alia recommended the Department of Disi nvestment to 
conduct a study in regard to return on disinvestment of Central Government’s equity 
from CPSEs.  They also recommended that instead of Offer for Sale of Shares route 
by promoters through Stock Exchange Mechanism, the Government should look for  
market penetration and encourage retail investors.   
 
33. The Ministry of Finance in an action taken reply submitted, among other things, 
as under:- 
 
 “…….Regarding the suggestion of the Committee for conducting a study 
 regarding the returns on disinvest ment of CPSEs during various phases of 
 disinvestment, it may be mentioned that the relevance of the study would be 
 interesting only when disinvestment methodology in all the phases of 
 disinvestment was similar.  It may be added here that in the initial phase of 
 disinvestment, minority shares were sold in bundles to Public Sector Banks and 
 Mutual Funds.  Disinvestment in its next phase was undertaken through 
 strategic sale, i.e. with transfer of management control.  Presently, the 
 disinvestment is und ertaken through sale of shares in the capital market 
 following SEBI Rules and Regulations with regard to IPO/FPO and OFS.  Thus, 
 methodology used being different and there being a big time gap between 
 different phases of disinvestment when the dynamics of market and the 
 Company changed substantially; the results of any study would not be 
 comparable and therefore, no useful purpose would be served in getting a study 
 done.  
 
 The offer for Sale (OFS) is a new mechanism introduced by SEBI recently and 
 is available only to the promoters to sale their shares either for the purposes of 
 complying with the minimum public shareholding or otherwise by the promoters 
 of Top -100 companies by market capitalization.  The mechanism has been 
 found efficient; cost e ffective in terms of money and time; and is quick.  
 Presently SEBI has not kept any separate bucket in the OFS for retail investors 
 and the concept of offering discount to retail investors, like in the case of 
 IPO/FPO.  As and when SEBI allows separate bucket for retail investors and 
 permit discount to the retail investors, the Department will be using that method 
 while following OFS mechanism”.   
34. With regard to conducting an evaluation on return on disinvestment, the 
Committee are not happy with t he retraction by the Ministry in their Action 
Taken Reply from their submission made before the Committee during the 

21 
 
examination of the Demands for Grants (2013 -14) on the ground that such study 
is not comparable and useful.   Though the methodology used i n different 
phases of disinvestment and results thereof may not be comparable, the 
Committee are of the view that such study is desirable and useful to assess the 
returns earned from different methodologies and process of disinvestment; and 
whether the syn ergies between the methodology and dynamics of market 
worked or not.   Such study would also facilitate in setting up the benchmark for 
careful selection of future disinvestment methodologies. Since the likely impact 
on yields depends also on the methodolo gy of disinvestment chosen, going 
forward without analyzing the returns could jeopardize the intention of 
disinvestment.    The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that 
the Ministry should conduct a study in regard to return on disinvestme nt of 
Central Government’s equity from Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs).   
They also expect that the Ministry of Finance, being the administrative Ministry 
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), should take up with them 
the issue of  encouraging retail investors in the disinvestment process, in order 
to ensure that such an arrangement is put in place by SEBI within a period of      
3 months. 
 
New Delhi;             YASHWANT SINHA 
27 September, 2013                                                              Chairman, 
05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on Finance  

22 
 
 MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1310 hrs. 
   PRESENT   
             Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Baliram  
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
   
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
16.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
   2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Subodh Kant Sahai and 
congratulated him on his nomination to the Committee for the year 2013 -14.  The 
Committee thereafter took up the following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption :-  

23 
 
(i)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixty -seventh Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and 
Disinvestment); 
 
(ii)    XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
(iii)   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
(iv)   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
(v)    XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
   
3.     The Committee adopted the above draft reports with minor modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the 
modifications suggested and present these Reports to Hon’ble 
Speaker/Parliament. 
    
          The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

24 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF 
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES & DISINVESTMENT) 
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations    14   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government    14         100.00 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 
8,9,10,11,12,13 and 14) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the    NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect       
 of which replies of the Government have   NIL  0.00 
 not been accepted by the Committee 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL  0.00 
 of which final reply of the Government is  
 still awaited  
 
 