8
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-10)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 March, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2010/ Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CONTENTS
PAGE
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .......................……….…………(iii)
2. INTRODUCTION .................................................……………………...... (v)
Report
3. Background                               1
4. Clause 2 : Investment of trust money
(Substitution of new Section for Section 20)                             10
5. Clause 3 : Section 20 A : Power to purchase redeemable                  20
Stock at premium (Amendment of Section 20 A)
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 11.01.2010 and 10.3.2010
II. The Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman
MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara*
RAJYA SABHA
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar -  Additional Director
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized
by the Committee, present this Eighth Report on the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill,
2009.
 2. The Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009 introduced in Lok Sabha on 3
August, 2009, was referred to the Committee on 9 September, 2009 for examination
and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
 3 The Committee obtained written information on various provisions
contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs).
4. The Committee received written views/memoranda from the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and  the Institute of Company Secretaries of India
(ICSI).
 5.   The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue), Ministry of Law and Justice and the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
on 11 January, 2010.  The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India (ICSI) on 11 January, 2010.
6. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on
10 March, 2010.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue), Ministry of Law and Justice and the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and
information which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and Institute of Company Secretaries of India
(ICSI) for furnishing written views/memoranda and appearing before the Committee for
placing their views.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
New Delhi;                  DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
 10 March, 2010                                                         Chairman,
 19 Phalguna, 1931(Saka)                              Standing Committee on Finance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

REPORT
A. Background
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882 which provides the law relating to Private Trusts and
Trustees is administered by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice.
Trusts in the wider sense of the word, that is to say, obligations annexed to the
ownership of property which arise out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by the
owner for the benefit of another, are constantly created in India. The Indian Trusts Act,
1882 codifies the law relating to private trusts and private trustees under different
subject heads which include (i) Creation of trusts; (ii) Duties and liabilities of trustees;
(iii) Their rights and powers; (iv) Their disabilities; (v) The rights and liabilities of the
beneficiary; (vi) Vacating the office of trustee; (vii) The extinction of trusts and; (viii)
Certain obligations in the nature of trusts.  Section 20 of the Act relating to investment of
trust funds is administered by the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance.
2.  Section 20 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 relating to investment of trust funds
provides as under :
“Where the trust-property consists of money and cannot be applied immediately or at an early
date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee is bound (subject to any direction contained in the
instrument of trust) to invest the money on the following securities, and on no others:—
(a) in promissory notes, debentures, stock or other securities of any State Government or of the
Central Government, or of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland:
Provided that securities, both the principal whereof and the interest whereon shall have been fully
and unconditionally guaranteed by any such Government, shall be deemed, for the purposes of
this clause, to be securities of such Government;
(b) in bonds, debentures and annuities charged or secured by the Parliament of the United
Kingdom before the fifteenth day of August, 1947 on the revenues of India or of the Governor-
General in Council or of any Province:
Provided that, after the fifteenth day of February, 1916, no money shall be invested in any such
annuity being a terminable annuity unless a sinking fund has been established in connection with
such annuity; but nothing in this proviso shall apply to investments made before the date
aforesaid;
(bb) in India three and a half per cent., stock, India three per cent., stock, India two and a half per
cent. stock or any other capital stock which before the 15th day of August, 1947, was issued by
the Secretary of State for India in Council under the authority of an Act of Parliament of the United
Kingdom and charged on the revenues of India or which was issued by the Secretary of State on
behalf of the Governor-General in Council under the provisions of Part XIII of the Government of
India Act, 1935;
(c) in stock or debentures of, or shares in, Railway or other Companies the interest whereon shall
have been guaranteed by the Secretary of State for India in Council or by the Central
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Government or in debentures of the Bombay Provincial Co-operative Bank, Limited, the interest
whereon shall have been guaranteed, by the Secretary of State for India in Council or the State
Government of Bombay;
(d) in debentures or other securities for money issued, under the authority of any Central Act or
Provincial Act or State Act, by or on behalf of any municipal body, port trust or city improvement
trust in any presidency-town or in Rangoon Town, or by or on behalf of the trustees of the port of
Karachi:
Provided that after the 31st day of March, 1948, no money shall be invested in any securities
issued by or on behalf of a municipal body, port trust or city improvement trust in Rangoon Town,
or by or on behalf of the trustees of the port of Karachi;
(e) on a first mortgage of immovable property situate in any part of the territories to which this Act
extends: Provided that the property is not a leasehold for a term of years and that the value of the
property exceeds by one-third, or, if consisting of buildings, exceeds by one-half, the mortgage-
money;
(ee) in units issued by the Unit Trust of India under any unit scheme made under section 21 of the
Unit Trust of India Act, 1963; or
(f) on any other security expressly authorised by the instrument of trust, or by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, or by any rule which the High Court may from
time to time prescribe in this behalf:
Provided that, where there is a person competent to contract and entitled in possession to receive
the income of the trust-property for his life, or for any greater estate, no investment on any
security mentioned or referred to in clauses ( d), (e) and (f ) shall be made without his consent in
writing.”
3.  The Law Commission of India had, in their 17th Report submitted in 1961,
inter alia , recommended amending Section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 and
deleting the provisions pertaining to securities in the Act which have become obsolete.
4.   The Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009 seeking to amend section 20 and
empowering the Government to notify a class of securities for the purposes of investing
trust money and doing away with the requirement of case to case approval by the
Government of “any security”  was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 3 August, 2009 and
referred to the Standing Committee on Finance by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 9
September, 2009 for examination and report thereon.
5.  As per the statement of Object and Reasons appended to the Bill, the
amendment proposals would provide the trustees greater autonomy and flexibility to
take decisions on investment of trust money based on their assessment of the risk
return tradeoff and the relevant provisions of the trust deed. This is also said to be
consistent with the current economic environment and the present shift from a merit
based regulatory regime to a disclosure based regulatory regime.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6.  As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) the application of the proposed Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009
would be restricted to private trusts registered under the Act for any lawful purpose and
shall not cover public trusts, public or private religious or charitable endowments, waqfs,
etc.
Public and Private Trusts
7.  The Committee, in the course of taking evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  inter-alia questioned on the legal
framework governing various types of trusts. i.e. private and public religious and
charitable trusts etc.  In response thereto, the Finance Secretary, stated as follows:
“Firstly, the Act as it stands today does not really say what is private, what
is non-private or public-trust.  The legal framework itself is in the domain of
the Law Ministry.  We are not very clear as to what is private trust or what
is non-private trust.”
 8.  In this regard, a representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice added as
under:
“… there are two categories of trusts - private and public. If a person is
specified and determined, then that is known as a private trust. If a person
is not determined and the trust is meant for general public, then it is known
as a public trust. That is the simple distinction between a private and a
public trust. These charitable and religious trusts also, if they are private in
nature this Trust Act will be applicable to them.”
9.   The subject matter, ‘Trusts and Trustees’ falls under entry 10 of the Concurrent
list in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and has been allotted to the Legislative
Department under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.
10.  The existing Central and State laws relating to Charitable and Religious
Trusts, societies etc., as furnished by the Ministry of Law and Justice are delineated in
brief as under:
The Charitable and Religious Trusts Act, 1920 [14 Of 1920] :   The
Charitable and Religious Trusts Act, 1920 is enacted to provide more
effectual control over the administration of Charitable and Religious Trusts
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

and to provide facilities for the obtaining of information regarding trusts
created for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature, and to enable
the trustees of such trusts to obtain the directions of a Court on certain
matters, and to make special provision for the payment of the expenditure
incurred in certain suits against the trustees of such trusts.
The Religious Endowments Act, 1863 (Act XX of 1863) :   The Religious
Endowments Act, 1863 is enacted to enable the Government to divest itself
of the management of Religious Endowments and to relieve the Boards of
Revenue and the local Agents, in the presidency of Fort William in Bengal,
and the Presidency of Fort Saint George, from the duties imposed on them
by Regulation XIX, 1810, of the Bengal Code (for the due appropriation of
the rents and produce of lands granted for the support of Mosques, Hindu
temples, Colleges and other purposes; for the maintenance and repair of
Bridges, Salaries, Kattras and other public buildings; and for the custody
and disposal of Nazul Property of Escheats) and Regulation VII, 1817, of
the Madras Code (for the due appropriation of the rents and produce of
lands granted for the support of Mosques, Hindu Temples and Colleges or
other public purposes; for the maintenance and repair of Bridges,
Choultries, or Chattrams, and other public buildings, and for the custody and
disposal of Escheats), so far as those duties embrace the superintendence
of lands granted for the support for mosque or Hindu temples and for other
religious uses; the appropriation of endowments made for the maintenance
of such religious establishments; the repair and prevention of endowments
made for the maintenance of such religious establishment; the repair and
preservation of buildings connected therewith and the appointment of
trustees of managers thereof; or involve any connection with the
management of such religious establishment.
State Laws :  The State Governments of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh
and Rajasthan have enacted state laws relating to public trusts. The
Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950  is applicable only in the States of
Maharashtra and Gujarat and all organizations that are registered as
‘Society’ thereunder are by default also registered as Public Trust.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956:   A public charitable or religious
institution can be formed either as a Trust or as a Society or as a non-profit
company and registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956
(without addition of the word “Limited” or “Private Limited” to their name).”
 11.  Responding to a query posed on the tax exemptions available to different
types of trusts, the Finance Secretary while deposing before the Committee inter-alia
cited the submission made to the Committee by the Department of Revenue, which
reads as under:
“Under the Indian Income Tax Act, the taxation of private trust is different from
that of public, religious and charitable endowments.  In the case of public,
religious or charitable endowments the taxation has a linkage with the mode of
investments of the trust property.  The manner of investment being specified in
sub-section 5 of section 11 of the Indian Income Tax Act.  Whereas, in the case
of private trust there is no restriction as to how the property of a private trust is
invested.  The taxation of private trust is not linked to manner/mode of
investment of trust property.  The Indian Trust Act applies to private trusts only
and has no application to public, religious and charitable endowments.  The
proposed amendment to the Indian Trust Act would, therefore, have no impact on
the taxability of such trusts under the Income Tax Act 1961.”
12.  The Committee, inter-alia sought to know from the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance, whether the recommendations of the 17 th Law Commission report
were confined to Section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 relating to investment of trust
money, or extended to the provisions of the Act in its entirety.   The Committee also
expressed the desirability of formulating a model legislation covering trusts and
societies in lieu of the existing laws on societies, trusts, endowments, charitable
institutions etc.
13.   In this regard, the Ministry of Law and Justice in their reply, as furnished by
the Ministry of Finance informed the Committee as under:
” The Law Commission of India, in its Seventeenth Report, had
recommended amendment of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 in its entirety.
However, while the State Governments were being consulted in this regard,
the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, in its ninth report on
‘Social Capital- A Shared Destiny’, has made certain recommendations in
respect of laws relating to Societies, Trusts, Waqfs, Religious and
Charitable Endowments in India and suggested a comprehensive model
legislation covering both Trusts and Societies in lieu of existing laws on
Societies, Trusts, Endowments, Charitable Institutions, etc. In view of this, it
had become necessary to look into the recommendations of the Law
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Commission of India afresh. But, since existing Acts namely, the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, the Religious Endowments Act, 1863, The Indian
Trusts Act, 1882, the Charitable and Religious Trusts Act, 1920, the Waqfs
Act, 1995, etc. on the above said subjects are being administered by
different Ministries and Departments such as Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
Ministry of Minority Affairs, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department), a
reference was made by the Hon’ble Law Minister vide D.O.No.15(3)/2009-
Leg-III, dated the 20th January, 2009 to the Law Commission of India to look
into the matter afresh after taking into consideration the recommendations
made by the Second Administrative Reforms Commission and to give  its
considered report on the feasibility of making a model legislation covering
both Trusts and Societies in lieu of existing laws on Societies, Trusts,
Endowments, Charitable Institutions, etc. The Report of the Law
Commission in this regard is still awaited.”
14.   On a specific issue raised by the Committee on whether it would not be
appropriate to bring in comprehensive amendments in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 as
recommended by the Law Commission instead of confining the amendment proposals
to Section 20 as proposed in the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009, the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in a written reply proposed as under:
“As regards Section 20, the proposed amendments will be finalized on the
basis of the recommendations of the Standing Committee and can be sent
to Ministry of Law for incorporating in the comprehensive amendments to
the Act as and when prepared and finalized by Ministry of Law.”
 15. Apart from taking evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and Ministry of Law and Justice in
connection with the examination of the Bill, the Committee also heard the views of the
representatives of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and the Institute
of Company Secretary of India (ICSI) on the provisions of the Indian Trusts
(Amendment) Bill, 2009.  The institutes also furnished written views/suggestions on the
provisions of the Bill for the consideration of the Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16.    The intended purpose of the amendment proposals of the Indian
Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009 is to do away with the obsolete provisions relating
to investment of funds of private trusts which are a relic of colonial rule and
provide greater flexibility to the trusts in deciding their investment pattern by
enabling investments in ‘any security or class of securities expressly authorised
by the instrument of trust or by the Central Government by a notification’. While
the amendment proposals are based on the recommendations made in the 17 th
Report of the Law Commission presented way back in 1961, the thrust of the
recommendations of the Law Commission has been on revising the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882 in its entirety and are not merely confined to section 20 of the Act as
covered in the Bill.  Section 20 relating to the manner of investment of funds of
trusts is administered by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) while the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 as a whole is in the administrative
domain of the Ministry of Law.
17.   As recommended by the Law Commission, bringing the Principal Act
regulating the functioning of private trusts and trustees in its entirety in
conformity with the requirements of the current times inter-alia by doing away
with obsolete and redundant provisions would, in the opinion of the Committee
be more beneficial and appropriate.  The Committee expect the Ministry of Law to
expeditiously complete the exercise of comprehensively  revising  the laws
regulating the functioning of trusts as recommended by the  Law Commission.
As proposed by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
following the deliberations on the Bill, the Committee desire that the proposals of
the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009 are finalised on the basis of the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

recommendations made in this Report and incorporated in the comprehensive
amendments to the laws relating to the functioning of trusts to be prepared by the
Ministry of Law.
18.   The Committee’s examination of the amendment proposals of the Bill
also brought to the fore a volley of issues relating to the laws relating to various
types of trusts including public, religious and charitable trusts.  These  include,
the necessity of doing away with the provisions in the laws that may have
become obsolete and redundant, tax exemptions currently available to the trusts
which are believed to be weighed in favour of charitable trusts vis-a-vis religious
trusts, flow of tainted money into public trusts etc.    Though these issues which
were deliberated upon have not been delved into detail in this report, the
Committee, however, feel the need to express the necessity for having a relook
at the tax exemptions available to various types of trusts and the regulatory
mechanism in place with a view to streamlining the exemptions available with
objectivity and strengthening the regulatory framework.
19.  The Committee also note in this regard that following the presentation
of the 17 th report of Law Commission in 1961,  the Second Administrative
Reforms Commission had, in their Ninth Report on ‘Social Capital – A Shared
Destiny’ inter-alia recommended formulating a model legislation covering both
trusts and societies in lieu of the existing myriad central and state laws on
Societies, Trusts, Endowments, Charitable Institutions etc. i.e. the Charitable and
Religious Trusts Act, 1920, the Religious Endowments Act, 1863,  the Bombay
Public Trusts Act, 1950, Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 etc.  The
Committee expect the Government to ensure that the process of formulating the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

model legislation regulating the functioning of various types of trusts which is
presently under consideration by the Law Commission is expedited.
20.   Specific issues that emerged in the course of the Committee’s
examination of the amendments proposed to section 20 in the Indian Trusts
(Amendment) Bill, 2009, include inter-alia, the necessity of defining the term,
‘securities’ in the section, risk mitigation mechanisms required for protecting
the interest of the beneficiaries of Trusts following the proposal to ease the
investment norms  etc. These issues are dealt with in the subsequent sections
of this report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Clause 2 : Investment of trust money
(Substitution of new Section for Section 20)
 21.   Clause 2 of the Bill which seeks to substitute a new section for the existing
section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 relating to investment of trust money reads as
under :
“20 Where the trust-property consists of money and cannot be applied
immediately or at an early date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee is bound
(subject to any direction contained in the instrument of trust) to invest the money
on any security or class of securities expressly authorised by the instrument of
trust, or by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette:
Provided that, where there is a person competent to contract and entitled in
possession to receive the income of the trust-property for his life, or for any
greater estate, no investment on any security or class of securities mentioned
above shall be made without his consent in writing:
Provided further that no such consent shall be required where such investment is
made in the securities of the Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the securities, both the principal
whereof and the interest whereon shall have been fully and unconditionally
guaranteed by the Central Government or the State Government, shall be
deemed to be securities of such Government.”
 22.  By way of explaining the rationale behind the proposed substitution of the
existing section 20 with the new Section, the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic
Affairs) in a written reply, stated as follows:
“The basic idea behind the move is that Government should not be taking the
Advisory role of risk analysis for investment by Trusts or of certifying any
instruments as safe for investment by Trusts.  Besides, with the enactment of
SEBI Act, the Regulation of Exchanges, Rating Agencies and issuance and
trading of securities is regulated by SEBI at present and not directly by the
Government.  After due examination and consultation, a considered view was
taken to move an amendment which will enable trusts to make their own
investment decisions without any explicit or implicit Government guarantee
regarding the credit worthiness of the securities/debt instruments. The rationale
for the proposed amendment is to obtain the following advantages.
(i) Removal of obsolete clauses.
(ii) Doing away with case to case approval
(iii) Afford greater flexibility and autonomy to trustees in making their
investment decisions.
(iv) Shift from a merit based to a criteria based investment regime.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The amendment will enable the Government to prescribe a class of securities
rather than individual securities.”
23.  Elaborating on the rationale and necessity of the amendment proposals of
the Bill, the Finance Secretary, while deposing before the Committee inter-alia stated:
“…..we had earlier in December, 2007 approached the Union Cabinet with a
proposal to amend Section 20 (f) of the Act at that stage, which was
basically the Act. Section 20(f) concerned notifying a class of securities as
eligible for investment by Trusts and the philosophy behind that proposed
amendment at that stage was that the Central Government need not get into
this administrative procedure of defining or identifying the class of securities.
So, we can delete that and that amendment was finalized in consultation
with the Ministry of Law.
When it went to the Cabinet in October, 2008, the hon. Members of the
Union Cabinet looked at that and suggested that we should look at the other
provisions also of Section 20 and therefore move a more comprehensive
amendment, and that is the proposal which is currently before you for your
consideration. The basic philosophy in this amendment I have mentioned is
that the idea is to delete the obsolete clauses, to do away with the case by
case approval in relation to securities and in the process, it gives the
Trustees somewhat greater autonomy and flexibility in making their
investment decisions. That is the framework with which the amendment has
been proposed.”
24.   In terms of Section 20 (f) cited by the Finance Secretary in his deposition,
apart from the securities mentioned in Clauses (a) to (e) of the section, if the trust
property consists of money that cannot be applied immediately or at an early date to the
purposes of the trust, the trustee may (subject to any direction contained in the
instrument of trust) invest the money:
“On any other security expressly authorized by the instrument of
trust, [or by the Central Government by the notification in the Official
Gazette] or by any rule which the High Court may from time to time
prescribe in this behalf:
   Provided that, where there is a person competent to contract and
entitled in possession to receive the income of the trust property for
his life, or for any greater estate, no investment on any security
mentioned or referred to in clauses (d), (e) and (f) shall be made
without his consent in writing.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

a)  Definition of the term ‘Securities’
 25.   The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI), in their written
memorandum and in the course of personal hearing on the provisions of the Bill
expressed the need for defining the term ‘securities’ as occurring in the proposed
Section 20 in line with the definition of the term under the securities laws.  The
suggestion made  to the Committee by the institute reads as under:
“The term ‘Securities’ as mentioned in the proposed Section 20 may be
defined. Securities (Contracts) Regulation Act, 1956 being the principal
legislation dealing with securities defines the term ‘securities’.  The usage of
the term securities under Indian Trust Act, 1882, in line with Securities
(Contracts) Regulation Act, 1956 would bring uniformity.”
26.  Section 2(h) of Securities (Contracts) Regulation Act,1956, defines the term
‘securities’ as under: -
“securities” include—
(i)   shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stock or other
marketable securities of a like nature in or of any incorporated company or
other body corporate;
(ia)  derivative;
(ib)      units or any other instrument issued by any collective investment scheme
  to the investors in such schemes;
(ic)     security receipt as defined in clause ( zg) of section 2 of the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002;
(id)    units or any other such instrument issued to the investors under any mutual
fund scheme;
(ie)   any certificate or instrument (by whatever name called), issued to an
investor by any issuer being a special purpose distinct entity which
possesses any debt or receivable, including mortgage debt, assigned to
such entity, and acknowledging beneficial interest of such investor in such
debt or receivable, including mortgage debt, as the case maybe;".
(ii)  Government securities;
(iia)  such other instruments as may be declared by the Central Government to
be securities; and
(iii) rights or interest in securities;
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

27.  Questioned whether it would not be appropriate to define the term
‘securities’, as suggested by the  ICSI, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) in a written reply furnished at first, stated inter-alia:
“The act as it stands does not define securities, because specific securities
are listed in the present Act.  As the proposed amendment also aims to
specify a class of securities by notification, there may not be a need to
define securities.”
28.  The Ministry, however, in a subsequent reply furnished to the  Committee
informed as under in this regard:
“The term ‘securities’ is defined in Section 2(h) of the Securities Contract
(Regulation) Act, 1956.  The Department of Economic Affairs has no
objection to adopt the said definition in the Indian Trusts Act also.  The
exact mode of carrying this out will be done on the advice of the Ministry of
Law and the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance.”
29.  In regard to the term ‘securities’ as occurring in Section 20 of the Act, the
17th Law Commission had recommended giving a general definition of all  categories of
securities, which are in vogue in the market.  The relevant extract from the report of the
Law Commission reads as follows :
“The securities mentioned in the existing section have become outmoded.  We,
therefore, suggest that the existing Government securities and public securities
may be included in the section.  In this connection section 35 of the Bombay
Public Trust Act, 1950 may be generally kept in view.  It is better not to
enumerate particular securities but to give a general definition of all categories of
securities which are in vogue in the market.  The securities, which have become
obsolete may be omitted.”
b) Norms of investment
30.  The newly proposed Section 20 seeks to enable the Government to
prescribe a ‘class of securities’ rather than ‘individual securities where the trust property
which consists of money that ‘cannot be applied immediately or at an early date’ can be
invested.  Questioned inter-alia on how prescribing a ‘class of securities’ would be
different from ‘individual securities’  presently prescribed by the Government for
investing trust money, the Finance Secretary, while tendering evidence before the
Committee stated:
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

“…….The intention is, it will not be individual security, it will be class of
securities. For instance, one is already specified in the Act itself like
the securities which are guaranteed by the State or Central
Governments.  So, that will automatically come into the notification
which will be issued presuming that it will be a law.  The other is the
mutual funds, let us say, or this kind of securities.  It will not specify ‘X’
mutual fund or ‘X’ company or something like that.  But it will be a
class of securities as has been done in the case of investments by
non-Government provident fund and superannuation funds.”
31.  On the parameters for prescribing a ‘class of securities’ where trust money
could be invested, the Finance Secretary stated:
“The general parameter which is followed is to balance the need for safety
and adequate return.  That is the broad criteria.”
32.   In reply to a question on what would constitute the ‘class of securities’ to be
prescribed for investment of trust money, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) inter-alia stated:
‘Class of Securities’ would signify a sub-set of ‘securities’.  Though, so far,
no firm view has been taken on what ‘class of securities’ can be authorized
by the Central Government for investment by trusts, it may be similar to/in
line with those specified under the investment guidelines applicable for non-
governmental superannuation funds which provides a range of instruments
in which investment can be made.
33.  The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI), in their Memorandum
furnished to the Committee and in the course of personal hearing before the Committee,
also emphasized on building adequate risk management measures in regard to
investment of trust money.   By citing the capping on investment by mutual funds in
different classes of securities  prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI) and the Investment pattern to be followed by Non government provident funds
as notified by the Ministry of Finance,  the ICSI suggested that a cap on investment of
trust money in different classes of securities or a single security/scheme may be
specified for better risk management/risk mitigation in the following pattern:
Debt Instruments by a single issuer - Up to 20%
Companies under the same group - Up to 15%
Money market instruments - Up to 25%
Companies forming part of BSE sensex, NSE Nifty - Up to 40%
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

34.   As per the ICSI, the capping  on investment by trusts could be prescribed
either by inclusion in the instrument of trust/trust deed; or Rules; or Notification by the
Central Government.
35. Questioned on the risk mitigation measures that may be required to be put
in place for protecting the interest of the beneficiaries inter-alia by prescribing a capping
on various kinds of Securities where trust money could be invested, the Finance
Secretary, while tendering evidence stated:
“ That is not envisaged in the provision as it is proposed to be amended.  It
did not form part of the original Act also.
…..it may be useful and a valuable idea to bring it if not in the Act may be in
the guidelines or the rules there under.  It has some merit and I
acknowledge that.”
36. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in
their post evidence reply informed the Committee that the ‘Class of Securities’ that can
be authorized by the Government for investment by trusts may be similar to/in line with
those specified under the investment guidelines applicable to non-governmental
superannuation funds.  As per the notification, the capping on the pattern of investment
to be followed by non-governmental superannuation funds in different types of
Securities is as under:
Ø Government Securities – upto 55%
Ø Debt Securities – upto 40%
Ø Money market instruments – upto 5%
Ø Shares of companies on which derivatives are available – 15%
c)   Other issues
37. The Institute of Chartered Accounts of India (ICAI) in their memorandum
submitted to the Committee, and in the course of personal hearing, inter-alia, made the
following points in regard to the new Section 20 as proposed:
i) stipulating a timeframe of about 90 days in the proposed Section 20
for obtaining the consent of the beneficiary for investing trust money;
ii) necessity of obtaining  the permission of beneficiaries for investments
made in securities of the Government.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

38.   On the issue of stipulating a timeframe for obtaining the consent of the
beneficiary for investment of Trust money, as suggested by the ICSI, the Finance
Secretary, while deposing before the Committee stated:
“We have no objection to this very pertinent suggestion and
contribution.  May I, nevertheless, mention that this is in relation
to the private trust and where it is presumed that the trustees
would act in the best interest.  The Act does not apply, as you
yourself have in the beginning mentioned, to public trust.  These
are private trusts where one can presume that the trustees
would act in the best interests of the trust or the beneficiaries
but a time limit can be prescribed.  We have no contrary views
on that.”
39.  In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in a
subsequent reply informed as under:
“The Department of Economic Affairs, in principle, have no
objection to specifying ‘a period’ for obtaining the written
consent of the trustee for investment of trust money.”
40.   On the issue raised on the inappropriateness of providing blanket exemption
from obtaining the consent of the beneficiary for investment in Government securities,
the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) in reply, stated:
“The proviso as it exists, does not apply to investment in Government
Securities.  The same status has been retained and is being proposed to
continue.”
41.  The ICSI also suggested certain changes in the text of the proposed section
20 so as to bring out the intent more clearly in a manner consistent with present-day
drafting.  The text as proposed with the substitution of words suggested by ICSI reads
as follows:
“Where the trust-property consists of money and the same  cannot be
applied ……”
“…… the trustee is bound (subject to any direction contained in the
instrument of trust) to invest the money on any security or class of
securities …….”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

42.   Asked to give their opinion on the modification in the proposed section as
suggested by ICSI, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in a written
reply informed:
“The Department of Economic Affairs also has no objection to effecting the
changes that have been suggested in the text of the proposed section 20
(clause 2).  However, the final language of the proposed changes in the
Law will be carried out on the advice of the Legislative Department.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

43.  Enabling the Government to notify a class of securities for investment
of trust money in lieu of existing system of notifying specific securities where
trust money could be invested on case-by-case basis is intended to provide the
trusts a greater flexibility in deciding their investment pattern.  The Committee
are, however, constrained to note the lack of clarity and ambiguity on the part
of the Government on various aspects of the proposal seeking to incorporate
the new section 20 in lieu of the existing section.  For instance, the
Government has been unclear on the necessity of defining the term ‘Securities’
in the proposed section in line with the provisions of the securities laws; and a
firm view remains to be taken on what would constitute the ‘class of securities’
where the funds of trusts could be invested.  On an even more serious note,
the risk mitigation measures required to be put in place for protecting the
interests of the beneficiaries under the trusts remain to be worked out.
44.   Though the Government had, at first, informed that it may not be
necessary to define the term ‘securities’ in the proposed section 20 as also
suggested by the ICSI and ICAI, this has been expressed to be appropriate at a
later stage.  The Committee note in this regard that the Law Commission too
had, way back in 1961, recommended that it would be better to give a general
definition of all categories of securities which are in vogue in the market in
section 20 of the Act.  As agreed to by the Government, the Committee expect
that the term ‘securities’ is defined in the proposed section 20 so as to be in
alignment with the definition of the term under the securities laws, i.e. the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.
45.   Protecting the interests of the beneficiaries under the trust,
particularly the minors, the old and the destitute acquires added importance
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

with the amendment proposal seeking to incorporate the new section 20.  This
is mainly so because by proposing to do away with the existing system of
notifying specific securities as an investment option by trusts, the explicit or
implicit government guarantee on the credit worthiness of the investible
securities is also being done away with.  While a proposal has been made for
fixing a cap on investment of the trust funds in different classes of securities
as a risk mitigation measure in the interest of the beneficiaries, as per the
submission of the Government, the guidelines for investment of trust funds are
likely to be modeled on the pattern of the investment guidelines applicable to
non-governmental superannuation funds which inter-alia prescribe a cap on
the investment pattern to be followed in different securities.   As agreed to by
the Finance Secretary in his deposition, the Committee emphasise on ensuring
that simultaneous with the bringing in to effect of the amendment proposals of
the Bill, the guidelines for investment of the funds of trusts, the disclosure
norms relating thereto etc. which are essential for protecting the interests of
the beneficiaries are also formulated and notified.
46.   The new section 20 proposed replicates the stipulation or wording of
the existing section whereby Trust property that consists of money that cannot
be applied ‘immediately or at an early date’ is to be invested by the trustee.
This, as also pointed out in the submissions made to the Committee can be
ambiguous and potentially litigious.  Stipulating a time frame for investment of
trust money in lieu of the words ‘immediately or at an early date’ has been felt
to be more appropriate.  As agreed to by the Government, the Committee
expect that the newly proposed section 20 is suitably modified to specify a time
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

frame for obtaining the consent of the beneficiary of the trust and investing the
funds.
47.  The new section 20 proposed also retains the existing proviso to the
section whereby the written consent of the beneficiaries would not be required
when investments are made in Government securities.  While investments in
Government securities may be risk free, the returns thereon may not be
advantageous to the beneficiaries.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the provision be suitably amended so as to provide for obtaining the consent of
the beneficiary for investment in Government securities also.
48.  The Committee also expect that as agreed to by the Government, the
text of the proposed Section 20 is attuned to present day legal drafting in
consultation with the Ministry of Law so as to bring out the intent in clearer
terms.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C. Clause 3 : Section 20 A : Power to purchase redeemable Stock at premium
(Amendment of Section 20 A)
49.  Section 20 (A) of the Act as it stands now enables the trustee to invest in
securities mentioned in Section 20 notwithstanding the fact that the security may be
redeemable and that the price of the security exceeds its redemption value.  However,
the existing proviso to Section 20 A places some restrictions on the power of the
trustees, which are applicable only to the instruments referred to in clause (c) and (d) of
Section 20.  The proviso to Section 20(A) requires that a premium (price above par or
face value) cannot exceed 15% of par or face value in respect of instruments referred to
in Section 20 (c) {stock or debentures of, or shares in companies wherein the interest is
guaranteed by government} or Section 20(d) {debentures or other securities for money
issued under the authority of an Act or by municipal body, port trust or city improvement
trust etc.,}.  The intent behind the restrictions placed under the proviso, as informed by
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) is to ‘avoid the possibility of
mispricing in the purchase of certain securities issued by bodies corporate (other than
the government per-se).’
50.   Clause 3 of the Bill which seeks to amend the existing proviso to Section 20
which enables purchase of redeemable stock at premium reads as under :
“(i) the words, bracket and letters “clauses (c) and (d) of” shall be omitted;
(ii)       for the words “said clauses,” the words ‘said section” shall be substituted.
 51.   In regard to the proposed amendments under Clause 3, the Ministry of
Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs), however, submitted to the Committee as follows:
“While examining the Amendment Bill in detail for preparation of Lok Sabha
discussion, it has been noticed that Ministry of Law & Justice have, while
revising the draft Bill dropped the words “clause (c) and (d) of” in the proviso
of Section 20(A).
As a consequence, the proviso to section 20(A) now applies to the entire
Section 20 instead of only to sub clauses (c) and (d), as originally provided.
On a detailed examination it is found that this will have serious implications
for sale and purchase of government securities by trusts.  The specific
implication is that trusts cannot purchase Government Securities of upto 15
years maturity with any premium.  It will also prohibit them from paying
beyond 15% premium for Government Securities of more than 15 years
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

maturity. Since the prices of these securities and the premium, if any, are
decided in the Government Securities market, this stipulation will be very
difficult to implement as well as have a negative consequence for the
Government Securities market.  This consequence was not intended.
Hence, it has been decided to insert an appropriate correction to the
amendment bill to undo this.”
52.  The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) accordingly inter-alia
proposed to omit section 20(A)(1) as its relevance has gone by moving an official
amendment to the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009 on the following lines:
Page 2, for line 7 to 9, substitute
“3.   In Section 20(A) of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), the proviso
shall be omitted.”
53.   Asked as to why the implications of the amendment proposals of the Bill on
the Government securities market was not taken note of at the stage of drafting the Bill
and before its introduction in Parliament,  the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs, in a written reply inter alia submitted as follows :
“Only subsequent to the drafting of the amendment was it realized that since
the prices of these securities & the premium, if any, are determined in the
Government Securities market, this stipulation will restrict the availability of
securities for investment by trusts, which, in turn, will have a negative
consequence for the Government Securities market. This consequence was
not intended and a result of the proposed amendment to Section 20 (A).
Hence, it is proposed, with the approval of the SCOF, to insert an
appropriate correction to the amendment bill to undo this.  Hon’ble Finance
Minister has approved this proposal.”
54.   In this regard, the Finance Secretary while tendering evidence before the
Committee stated :
“……. Section 20 (A) enables a Trustee to invest in securities mentioned in
Section 20 notwithstanding the fact that the security may be redeemable
and that the price of the security exceeds the redemption value. However,
the proviso to Section 20 (A) as it stands now places restriction on this
power of the Trustees but is applicable only to the instruments referred to in
Clause (c) and (d) of Section 20.
Now, since Section 20 itself is proposed to be amended, we were facing a
difficulty which we have mentioned in the replies to the Standing
Committee.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

55.  When pointed out whether this did not amount to carelessness in formulating
the proposals of the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009.  the Finance Secretary
stated:
“I would accept that.  So, that is the basic amendment which is proposed in
the Bill, which is for your consideration.”
56.   In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) also
informed the Committee as under :
“The official amendment has been proposed in the form of a draft cabinet
note which Ministry of Law has seen and vetted.  Department of Economic
Affairs are yet to send the revised cabinet note for final clearance from
Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice to the amendment Bill. Subsequent to
information that the matter stands referred to the Standing Committee, it has
been decided that once the Standing Committee considers the proposal
including the official amendment, a fresh cabinet note will be prepared and
will be referred to Ministry of Law after which Cabinet approval will be
obtained.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

57.   The fact that the proposal to omit the words, ‘clauses (c) and
(d) of’ of the proviso to section 20A with the amendments envisaged
under the clause 3 of the Bill would have serious negative implications
on the Government securities market came to the know of the
Government only following the detailed examination of the Bill when it
became slated for discussion in Parliament.  It is a matter of surprise
and serious concern to the Committee that the amendment proposals
of the Bill were examined in detail only after its introduction in
Parliament.  The proviso to section 20 A of the Principal Act as it
presently stands prohibits investments in certain securities referred to
in Section 20C and 20D (issued by railways or companies in which
interest is guaranteed by Central Government, or by municipalities
under the authority of any Act) if the purchase price is higher than the
redemption value.  With the amendments proposed under Clause 3, this
prohibition would be extended to all securities including those issued
by the Government whose market price could be well above the
redemption value.  The negative implications that the amendment
proposal would have on the Government securities market by
prohibiting the purchase of the securities at a premium having come to
light, the Government have now proposed moving an official
amendment for omitting the proviso to section 20A.  The lapse, as
admitted by the Finance Secretary has been owing to carelessness,
which could have been avoided by exercising adequate care and
caution at the time of formulating the amendment proposals of the Bill
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

for introduction in Parliament.   The Committee expect that, as
proposed an official amendment is moved for omitting the proviso
when the Bill is taken up for consideration and passing in the
Parliament.
New Delhi:        Dr. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
10 March, 2010                    Chairman
19 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11th January, 2010 from 1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram
3.     Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4.     Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5.     Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
6.     Shri Nishikant Dubey
7.     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
10.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
11. Shri Manicka Tagore
12. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
13.   Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
15.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
17. Shri Mahendra Mohan
18.   Shri S. Anbalagan
19. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
   SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary
2.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Director
4.     Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan - Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. B. Visala  - Deputy Secretary
Part  I
(1100 to 1300 hours)
                       WITNESSES
       Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla, Finance Secretary
2. Shri Shaktikanta Das, Joint Secretary (Budget)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3. Dr. K.P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary (Capital Market)
Ministry of Law & Justice
 Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary
2. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Finance,
(Department of Economic Affairs) and Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
on the provisions of the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009.   The major points discussed
with the representatives of the Ministries include, the laws governing the functioning of
private and public trusts including religious and charitable trusts, tax exemptions available to
different types of trusts, necessity of defining the term ‘securities’ in generic terms or in
consonance with the definition of the term under the Securities laws, safeguard mechanisms
for protecting the interest of the beneficiaries, necessity of evolving a model legislation
governing the functioning of religious and charitable trusts etc. The Chairman directed the
representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by Members at an early date.
 The witnesses then withdrew.
Part  II
(1300 to 1400 hours)
                       WITNESSES
       The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
1. Shri Uttam Prakash Aggarwal, President
2. Shri J. Venkateswarlu, Central Council Member
3. Shri G. Ramaswamy, Central Council Member
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India
1. Shri Vinayak S. Khanvalkar, Vice President
2. Shri N.K. Jain, Secretary & CEO
3. Shri Sutanu Sinha, Director (Academics)
4. Dr. S.K. Dixit, Joint Director (Academics)
3. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India and the Institute of Company Secretaries of India.  The major
issues discussed with the representatives include, necessity of defining the term ‘securities’,
safeguard mechanism for protecting the interest of the beneficiaries, stipulating a time frame
for obtaining the consent of the beneficiaries for investment of trust money, necessity of
obtaining the prior permission of the beneficiaries for investment of trust money in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Government securities etc.  The Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written
replies to the points raised by Members at an early date.
                  The witnesses then withdrew.
Part  III
(1400 to 1430 hours)
                       WITNESSES
       Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
    Shri P.V. Bhide, Secretary
Central Board of Direct Taxes
1. Shri S.S.N. Moorthy, Chairman
2. Shri Dinesh Verma, Commissioner
4. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) and Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT).  The major issues
discussed with the representatives related to tax exemptions available to public and private
trusts, definition of the term ‘securities’ under the Income Tax Act and the Securities laws,
necessity of having a re-look at the tax exemption provisions for different types of trusts,
necessity of formulating a model legislation governing the functioning of public trusts etc. The
Chairman directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by
Members at an early date.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th March, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.   Shri C.M. Chang
3.   Shri Harischandra Chavan
4.   Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5.   Shri Khagen Das
6.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7.  Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
8.   Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
9.   Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
10.  Shri N. Dharam Singh
RAJYA SABHA
10.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
11.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
12.  Shri Moinul Hassan
13.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad
1.  Shri Y.P. Trivedi
2.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary
 2.   Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar   - Additional Director
 3.   Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary
 4.   Smt. B. Visala    - Deputy Secretary
    2.  The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration:-
(i) Draft Report on the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2009;
(ii)  Draft Report on the Indian Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2009;
(iii)  Draft Report on the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2009;
(iv)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 78 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on “Flow of
Credit to Agriculture Sector”; and
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(v)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 79 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on
“Counterfeit Currency Notes in Circulation”
3.    The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i), (ii) and (iv) above without any
amendment and authorized the Chairman to present the reports to Parliament.
4.   XX    XX   XX   XX
X X    X X   X X   X X
      The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages