 
1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
THE MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS  
(DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) BILL, 2012 
 
EIGHTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
84 


 
2 
 
EIGHTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
THE MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS  
(DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) BILL, 2012 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 February, 2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS  
                                                                                                              Page Nos. 
 
Composition of the Committee………………………………….   (iii) 
Introduction……………………………………………………….   (v) 
 
PART-I 
A. Introductory         1 
B. Approach to Financial Inclusion      4 
C. Approach to Micro Finance       10 
D. Micro Finance Services and Affordability     13 
E. Regulation of Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs)    24 
 
PART-II 
Observations / Recommendations             41 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. List of Institutions / Associations / Experts submitted Memoranda 
on the Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) 
Bill, 2012. 
 
53 
II. Minutes of sittings of the Committee held on 28 December, 2012,    
4 and 25 October, 29 November, 2013, 31 January and 11 
February, 2014. 
 
55 
III.   The Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012 69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14) 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -   Joint Secretary 
                                                
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

 
5 
 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -   Additional Director 
3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Eighty -fourth Report on the  Micro Fin ance Institutions 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012. 
2. The Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2012, was referred to the Committee on  28 May, 
2012 for examination and report thereon,  by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E 
of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.    
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions of the Bill from 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services).  
4. Written views/memoranda were also received from various institutions/ 
associations / experts.    
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
briefed the Committee at their sitting held on 28 December, 2012.  
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 4 October, 2013 heard the views of 
representatives of Sa -Dhan Foundation, SKS Micro Finance Ltd., Micro Finance 
Institutions Network (MFIN), International Network of Alternative Financial Institutions 
(INAFI), Micro -Credit Ratings International Limited (M -CRIL), Access Development 
Services, All India Democratic Women‘s Association (AIDWA), and Dr. R. Ramakumar, 
Associate Professor, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai.   
7. At their sitting held on 25 October, 201 3, the Committee heard the views of 
representatives of Reserve Bank of India (RBI), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD) and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI). 
Subsequently, at their sitting held on 29 November, 201 3, the Committee heard the 
views of representatives of State Government of Andhra Pradesh and took oral 
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). 

 
6 
 
8. The Committee discussed the draft Report at their sitting( s) held on 31 January, 
2014 and 11 February, 2014 and adopted the same at their sitting held on 11 February, 
2014. 
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) for appearing be fore the Committee and 
furnishing the requisite material and information which were desired in connection with 
the examination of the Bill.      
10. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the representatives of State 
Government of Andhra Prades h, RBI, NABARD, SIDBI, MFIs , AIDWA  and  Dr. R. 
Ramakumar, Expert for appearing before the Committee and placing before them their 
considered views on the provisions of the Bill. 
11. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to various other instituti ons / 
associations / experts for placing before them their considered views on the provisions 
of the Bill in the form of memoranda. 
12. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                    YASHWANT SINHA, 
11   February, 2014                                                                    Chairman, 
22   Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Finance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
A. Introductory 
 According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Micro Finance 
Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012, t he Indian banking system has 
achieved significant growth in terms of average population covered per bank and has 
also been able to  reduce the levels of credit gaps in the economy. In spite of such 
growth, many of the poor households still do not have access to basic financial services 
such as savings, credit and remittances and such financial exclusion faced by such 
people results in  discrimination and denial of equal opportunities to them. Financial 
inclusion is an important priority of the Central Government. 
2. There are many societies, companies, trusts and bodies corporate and such 
other institutions which are engaged in providin g micro finance services to the poor 
households as a complementary to the banking system. The Central Government have 
felt that s ince these institutions lack a formal statutory framework for providing such 
micro finance services, it is expedient to provide  a statutory framework for the 
promotion, development, regulation and orderly growth of such Micro Finance 
Institutions (MFIs) and thereby facilitate financial inclusion. The Central Government 
have, therefore, considered that it is necessary to enact a law for the said purpose. 
3.  In pursuance of the Budget speech for the year 2006 -07, the Central 
Government introduced the Micro Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 
2007 in the Lok Sabha on 20 th March, 2007. The Bill was referred to the Parl iamentary 
Standing Committee on Finance. However, on account of the dissolution of the Lok 
Sabha, the Bill lapsed. 
4.  The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services ) vide its order dated 
10th March, 2011 constituted a Committee to recommend the draft of a new Micro 
Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill.  This Committee had members 
from the Department of Financial Services, Reserve Bank of India ( RBI), Indian Banks 
Association ( IBA), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development ( NABARD), 
Small Industries Development Bank of India ( SIDBI), the State Governments (Bihar and 

 
8 
 
Tamil Nadu) and State Level Bankers‘ Committee, Andhra Pradesh.   The MFIs were 
represented by Micro Finance Institutions Netwo rk (MFIN) and Sa-Dhan.  The draft Bill 
formulated by the Committee was put on the web-site of the Ministry of Finance to invite 
comments from stakeholders. The Department organized a round table on the draft Bill 
on 28th July 2011 wherein the representativ es of Government of Andhra Pradesh were 
also invited to ex press their views .  After considering the comments received from 
various stakeholders including concerned Departments  / Ministrie s of the Central 
Government, the Department framed the Micro Finance Institutions (Development and 
Regulation) Bill, 2012 which was introduced in Lok Sabha  on 22 nd May, 2012  and 
referred to the Departmentally Related Standing Committee on Finance on 25 th May, 
2012.  The Bill, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 
 (a) regulation of the MFIs providing micro finance services, such as micro credit 
 facilities, thrift, pension or insurance services and remittance of funds; 
 
(b) constitution of the Micro Finance Development Council ; State Micro Finance 
Council in each State or for two or more States;  and a District Micro Finance 
Committee in each District for the promotion and development of MFIs; 
 
(c) confer power upon the RBI to:- (i) specify the maximum limit of the margin 
and annual percentage rate which can be char ged by any MFI , sector -related 
benchmarks and performance standards pertaining to methods of operation, fair 
and reasonable methods of recovery of loan advanced by the MFIs; and (ii) 
cause inspection of the accounts of the MFIs and take necessary action;  
 
(d) prohibit MFIs from carrying on the activities of micro finance services without 
registration with the RBI but allows the existing Non-Banking Finance 
Companies(NBFCs) registered under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 to 
continue such services without registration; and   
(e) prohibit MFIs to close or restructure their activities without the approval of the 
RBI. 
 
The Micro Finance Bills 2007 Vs 2012 
5. A comparative table indicating key differences between the Micro Financial 
Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2007 and the Micro Finance Institutions 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012 is given below:-  
Aspects Micro Financial Sector (Development 
and Regulation) Bill 2007 
Micro Finance Institutions 
(Development and 
Regulation) Bill 2012 
Scope and application Only NGO-MFIs registered as societies, 
trust and cooperatives (i.e. excluding 
NBFCs and Section 25 companies) 
All MFIs in all forms 

 
9 
 
Structure of the sector One tier, MFOs only, (apart from 
NBFCs and S ection 25 companies, but 
no provisions applicable to them)  
The sector is now covered 
under the provisions of the Bill 
in its entirety. 
Savings mobilization Only ‗thrift‘ for MFO from members  Thrift mobilization from public 
also permitted 
Supervisor NABARD RBI – with powers to delegate 
to NABARD and to other 
agencies as may be deemed fit.  
Advisory council Advisory, with majority consisting of 
officials representing specified agencies 
ex-officio.  
In addition to a national level 
council, provisions have bee n 
made for state level councils as 
well as district level committees 
for monitoring of functioning of 
MFIs.  
Grievances handling and 
appellate authority 
MFDC ‗may‘ set up ombudsman Ombudsman provided for. 
Capital norms NOF of at least Rs.5 lakh and a cap ital 
adequacy ratio of 15%  
Rs.5 lakh as minimum entry 
capital – RBI to stipulate 
prudential norms 
Instruments Registration for thrift taking MFOs and 
information reporting for all 
Registration for all, information 
reporting and interest rate caps 
Customer protection Through Ombudsman Norms for customer selection, 
size of loans, interest 
disclosure, process controls 
and interest / margin ceilings. 
Also through District Micro 
Finance Committees 
Powers of regulator Minimal Power to cancel registratio n, 
order for winding up, merger 
and acquisition, imposition of 
penalties, delegation of powers, 
issuance of directions  
   
6. The All India Democratic Women‘s Association (AIDWA) in their memoranda 
submitted to the Committee stated, among other things, that one of the objectives 
envisaged in the draft Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulat ion) Bill, 
2011 was promoting the growth and development of MFIs as ―extended arms of the 
banks‖ and financial institutions, is found missing in the MFIDR Bill, 2012. 
7. The Department of Financial Services in a written reply, among other things, 
stated that:- 

 
10 
 
 ―…considering the systemic risks that the micro finance sector poses to the 
 banks, the Bill provides for a  regulatory framework for the MFI sector as a 
 whole…‖   
8. One of the representatives of AIDWA stated during oral evidence, among other 
things, as follows:- 
 ―…the objective of the Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) 
 Bill, 2012 should not be promotion but to regulate the  MFIs….the development 
 aspect is more emphasized ….at the different clauses rather than the 
 regulatory aspect‖. 
 
9. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) while not accepting 
the suggestion in a written reply stated that:- 
 ―The Bill is envisaged to strengthen micro finance sector, inter-alia, by regulating 
 MFIs.  The prime objective of the Bill is to protect the interest of poor borrowers 
 of MFIs by subjecting them to regulation by RBI.  Micro F inance lending under 
 both SHG Bank linkage and MFI route are treated as priority sector lending by 
 banks under certain conditions outlined by RBI to further financial inclusion 
 initiative.  Over all supervision and regulation of the MFI sector by RBI will ensure 
 rights of poor are protected and they are not exploited‖. 
  
B. Approach to Financial Inclusion 
10. Some definitions of Financial Inclusion are given below:-  
 ―Dr. C. Rangarajan Committee (2008):  Financial inclusion is the process of 
 ensuring access to financial services and timely and adequate credit where 
 needed by vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low -income groups at 
 an affordable cost.    
 UN Advisors Group on Inclusive Financial Sectors Report (June 2008):  
 Inclusive finance  recognizes that poor and low -income households and micro 
 and small -scale entrepreneurs seek a broad range of financial opportunities; 
 these include better ways to borrow, save, insure, and transfer money.   
 RBI: The process of ensuring access to  appropriate financial products and 
 services needed by all sections of the society in  general and vulnerable groups 
 such as weaker sections and low income groups in  particular at an affordable 
 cost in a fair and transparent manner by  mainstream institutional players. 
 Kudumbashree Scheme:  "Poor families" means those families identified by 
 community by utilising the objective criteria included in the Poverty Index.‖ 
11. France was in the forefront in promotion of financial inclusion. The Banking Act o 
1984 made access to a bank account a legal right. Accordingly, any person of French 
nationality has the right to open an account with any bank in France.   The Percentage 
of unbanked population is given below:- 

 
11 
 
Country Percentage of unbanked population 
India 43 
UK 3 
Sweden Less than 2 
Germany 3 
Canada Less than 4 
Belgium 5 
 
12. RBI in a post -evidence reply submitted the progress made in achieving financial 
inclusion as under:-  
―RBI has adopted a bank -led model for financial inclusion, which seeks to 
leverage on technology. Our experience has shown that the goal of financial 
inclusion is better served through mainstream banking institutions as only they 
have the ability to offer t he suite of products required to bring in 
effective/meaningful financial inclusion.  Other players such as mobile companies 
have been allowed to partner with banks in offering services collaboratively. 
 
 RBI has followed a planned and structured approach to ensure financial inclusion 
 by following a combination of strategies ranging from relaxation of regulatory 
 guidelines, provision of new products and supportive measures to achieve 
 sustainable and scalable Financial Inclusion…..   
 RBI has advised that the Financial Inclusion PIans (FIPs) must have commitment 
 at the  highest levels, through preparation of Board a pproved Plans. The first 
 phase of FIPs was implemented over the period 2010-2013…. 
 
After completion of the first FI plan period, banks have now drawn up fresh 3 
year Financial Inclusion Plans for the period 2013 -16. In order to ensure 
involvement of all the stakeholders in the FI efforts banks have disaggregated the 
FI plans up to the  branch level. The focus under the new plan is to ensure tha t 
the large banking network  created is utilized for extending credit and other 
products, which will help make the  business more viable for banks and will 
ensure that large number of accounts opened  see large volume of transactions 
happening and people reap  the benefits of getting  linked to the formal financial 
institutions‖. 
 
 
13. Asked to clarify the role of Co -operative banks I Co-operative sector in financial 
inclusion, the RBI submitted a post-evidence reply as follows:- 
 ―As far as the Bank is concerne d there is no bar on Co -operative banks in 
 conducting lending activities. RBI has also permitted among others, PACS to act 
 as BCs of banks for extending banking services at the last mile‖. 
 
14. In this regard, t he Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) stated 
in a detailed note, among other things, as under:- 

 
12 
 
―Inclusive growth has been a priority of the Government of India (GoI) over the 
past decade. The policymaking and regulating institutions (Government of India, 
RBI, IRDA, PFRDA (for micro pensions) have developed regulations and 
guidelines for strengthening  financial inclusion but these are yet to have a 
substantial impact on outreach to the excluded population.  
 From the perspective of small, rural borrowers (the users), rural banks are 
unattractive for the following reasons. First, rural banks do not provi de 
flexible products and services to meet the income and expenditure 
patterns of small rural borrowers. Small rural borrowers have 
irregular/volatile income streams and expenditure needs, and therefore, 
prefer to borrow frequently, and repay in small insta llments, but most 
banks do not offer such products. Also, while small rural borrowers seek 
savings and lending products, they also seek insurance (life, health, crop), 
which banks do not generally offer. Second, the transaction costs of 
dealing with formal  banks are high. In part, high transaction costs stem 
from distance to the nearest financial institutions. A third factor that makes 
formal banks unattractive for rural borrowers is that banks demand 
collateral, which poor rural borrowers lack. 
 Availability of bank finance to small borrowers in urban areas are 
comparatively better than the rural borrowers.  However, banks offer 
traditional products whereas borrowers need customized products based 
on their income stream, etc.  Moreover, due to predominance o f service 
activities in urban areas, demand for small loans tend be much higher, 
which is not fully met by the banks. Urban MFIs play a very important and 
complementary role in meeting such needs. 
 The timely availability of the loans, especially during eme rgency, is lacking 
in the formal banking system. MFIs have special customized loan products 
like top -up loans and emergency loans, which can be availed by the 
borrowers as and when required….. 
 MFIs have been covering up the demands unmet by the formal bank ing 
system…. 
…..wide penetration of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies(PACS) across 
villages as well as across small depositors / borrowers can be a catalyst in the 
financial inclusion campaign. 
[[   
The Hon‘ble Prime Minister in his independence day speech of 2012 has 
announced that ― it will be our endeavour to ensure that all households benefit 
from bank accounts in the next 2 ye ars”….. Keeping in view the banking facilities 
being extended under ―Swabhimaan‖ and the campaign launched that every 
household has at least one bank account, it is expected to achieve the target by 
August, 2014…..‖ 
15.  In this regard, Chief Executive Officer, Access Development Services (NGO)  
MFIs during his deposition before the Committee as follows:- 
 ―….We have a fairly widespread cooperative system but mostly these systems 
 are either moribund or non -functional or the mandate has completely been 
 transformed.  They are not any longer looking at the poor as their primary 
 clients….The commercial banks,  despite all the pressures of the RBI, are not 
 actually able to service the poor according to their requirements….If we look at 
 the Government‘s financial inclusion drive and the kind of accounts which have 

 
13 
 
 been opened, about 80 per cent of them are dor mant.  They are not 
 operationalised.  We may actually see a lot of numbers but in terms of those 
 numbers actually having an impact on the poor is not there…..the fact the banks 
 are a little skeptical when they deal with the poor clients, the fact that t he MFIs 
 expand their outreach significantly across the country, this Bill will actually help a 
 lot in terms of giving focus…..‖.   
16. Further asked to clarify the role left for the MFIs  when the RBI  is focused on 
bank-led financial inclusion and the Government mandates opening of bank accounts to 
avail Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) , RBI, NABARD, MFIN, INAFI and Dr. R. 
Ramakumar, Expert responded in  their post-evidence replies as follows:-  
 ―RBI: 
 …..Though, RBI is of the belief that sustainable financial inclusion is achievable 
 through mainstream financial institutions i.e. banks, however, as banks are yet to 
 fully penetrate to a large number of villages in the country, other intermediaries 
 like MFIs, to that extent, will continue to playa critical role in financial inclusion.    
 NABARD: 
 …. it would be desirable to draw complementarity between SHGs and the 
 presently pursued financial inclusion measures like BC/USB to bring more 
 effectiveness to such inclusive approaches.   
 MFIN:- 
 ….The greatest impediment in the success of DBT has been the slow pace of 
 opening up of bank accounts.  MFIs with their large and remote branch outreach 
 can be used as effective channels of distribution of DBT with proper supervision 
 and oversight from the regulator. 
  
 INAFI:- 
 ―…we need to think about the alternatives of how to make the banks responsive 
 to the public rather than having a system which is highly dangerous fo r the 
 savings of the public…… we do need an alternative system. That is only for the 
 credit and not for other services because there are 9 types of NBFCs which the 
 RBI has nicely allowed…   
 
 Dr.R. Ramakumar, Expert 
  
 At best, MFIs can play only a marginal role in deepening financial inclusion. The 
 most important role has to be played by opening new rural branches of 
 scheduled commercial banks, cooperative societies and grameen banks. This 
 was the position taken by the Reserve Bank of  India representative, as a  
 member of the Rangarajan Committee on financial inclusion‖.   
 17. Further, Special Chief Secretary to State Government of Andhra Pradesh in his 
deposition before the Standing Committee on Finance submitted, among other things, 
stated:- 

 
14 
 
  ―We are trying to create financial intermediation when in the Eleventh and 
 Twelfth Plan our inclusiveness is almost 80 percent and in the next 3 -4 years, 
 we are almost becoming 100 per cent. Rs.15,000 crore is coming from the 
 banking sector every year to women in Andhra Pradesh.  Already recovery is 
 there and performance is going on.  We have a very strong social capital, thrift 
 management and livelihood strategy with us. …… 
  In this kind of a situation, can be there be a choice as already we have Stree 
 Nidhi, we have a women bank coming up and we have a whole lot of 
 support from the banking sector.  Option one, do we need it? Option two, if we 
 need it, we will have to look into the draft Bill.  We will have to look into proper 
 rules which have to be framed so that th e kind of problem which has 
 happened in Andhra Pradesh is addressed.  When they are playing indirectly the 
 role of moneylenders, it might not be a right way of going about it…. 
  ….All these people who were NBFCs were so -called NGOs and over a period, 
 they got corporatized.  Still at some stage, empowerment was an agenda, an d 
 community was coming together and thrift and credit happening, but now that 
 agenda is not there.  Now, the agenda is of only giving loan as a MFI… 
If this Bill were to go through, then the MFIs will come up only in those areas 
where there is a very str ong SHG movement; where savings are there; and 
where capacity is there. So, they will try to recover this money in whatever way it 
is possible…‖. 
18. In this regard, the Special Chief Secretary to State Government of Andhra 
Pradesh during deposition before  the Committee, however, submitted that given the 
own experience of the State Government of Andhra Prade sh that it is better to have a 
livelihood movement supplemented by the Government agencies as it would give better 
results than allowing the private banking in the name of micro financing to develop.  
19. The Committee on Financial Sector Reforms under the chairmanship of 
Dr.Raghuram G. Rajan stated , among other things, about the direct loan exposure by 
banks to NBFCs as under:- 
 ―…that the banking system …..is thus not insulated from risk because of its direct 
loan exposure to NBFCs.  The typical regulatory response is to tighten bank 
exposure norms.  But if the NBFCs are to maintain lending and sustain eco nomic 
growth, they have to find funding somewhere.  NBFCs would be far more stable if 
they funded themselves with long -term debt from the corporate debt market.  
Moreover, the market and passive investors would absorb any risk associated 
with the NBFCs‘ le nding, instead of that risk being passed on to financial 
institutions like banks‖.   
20. Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, while addressing   
at  BANCON on 4 November 2011 stated , among other things, as under:-   

 
15 
 
―……Risks would also arise out of the business model of specialised non -bank 
institutions {e.g. Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs)} which cater exclusively to the 
needs of the low income group. These institutions face concentration and funding 
risks which can contribute to  overall systemic risks as has been amply 
demonstrated by the recent experiences in Andhra Pradesh. The greater 
involvement of commercial banks in the provision of services to the low income 
group and with institutions catering to the low income segment can go a long way 
towards mitigating the risks‖ 
 ―…..greater financial inclusion can facilitate monitoring of a larger share of 
 suspicious transactions……may also provide opportunities for illegal 
 activities. Conversely, there are challenges posed by Anti-Money Laundering and 
 Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML -CFT) requirements to the goal  of 
 achieving financial inclusion…. 
 
 …… pursuit of financial inclusion has often been attempted through low cost 
 delivery channels, innovative products and outso urcing agencies. These 
 developments come with their own set of risks which could  jeopardize financial 
 stability……it may be difficult to predict the consequences of financial innovations 
 thereby adding an additional element of  uncertainty to an already  uncertain 
 environment. ….the answer arguably lies in a facilitative  regulatory and 
 supervisory structure…‖. 
 
 
21. CRISIL in its first Report on Financial Inclusion (2013) highlighted, among other 
things, the following:-  
―The big positive to have come out of the CRISIL Inclusix data is that the level of 
financial inclusion has consistently been on the rise since 2009. The driving 
reason for this growth has been primarily due to an improvement in deposit 
penetration. The authorities now need to focus on the other two parameters 
(branch and credit penetration) to ensure a balanced and all -round improvement 
in CRISIL Inclusix score.  It clearly spells out the need for opening of brick and 
mortar branches in unbanked areas on a mission mode‖. 
 
C. Approach to Micro Finance 
22. Malegam Committee (2011) defined ―Micro Finance‖ as follows:- 
 ―Micro Finance is an economic development tool whose objective is to assist the 
 poor to work with their way out of poverty.  It covers a range of services which 
 include, in addition to the provision of credit, many other services such as 
 savings, insurance, money transfers, counseling, etc….. 
 The players in the Micro  Finance sector can be classified as falling into three 
 main Groups:-  

 
16 
 
a) The SHG -Bank linkage Mode l accounting for about 58% of the outstanding 
loan portfolio 
b) NBFCs accounting for about 34% of the outstanding loan portfolio  
c) Others including trusts, societies, etc, accounting for the balance 8% of the  
outstanding loan portfolio. Primary Agricultural Co-operative Societies(PACS) 
numbering 95,663, covering every village in the country, with a combined 
membership of over 13 crores and loans outstanding of over Rs. 64, 044 
Crores as on 31.03. 2009 have a much longer history and are under a 
different regula tory framework. Thrift and credit co -operatives are scattered 
across the country and there is no centralized information available about 
them…‖. 
 
23. The Governor, RBI suggested the following , among other things, during oral 
evidence before the Committee:- 
―....the definition of ―micro finance‖ is concerned, it would be better to align 
 it with the recommendations of the Malegam Committee. Micro credit is 
 typically unsecured. That differs from gold loans which are secured. So, we 
 think, we should make tha t distinction. So, unsecured lending would be  micro 
 finance and secured would come under a different structure‖  
24. The Steering Committee of the Planning Commission [11 th Five Year Plan (2007-
12)] on Micro Finance and Poverty Alleviation recommended, inter -alia, that t here 
should be a National Policy on Micro Finance.  Action taken on this recommendation as 
intimated by the Department of Financial Services in a written sub mission is given 
below:- 
―RBI has come out with a comprehensive set of guidelines, which seek to 
address the various issues in the microfinance sector. Though these guidelines 
are applicable to NBFC -MFIs (covering 90% of the total portfolio), these 
guidelines are generally followed by the sector.  A National Policy on Micro 
Finance will evolve under the overall umbrella of the MFIDR, Bill 2012‖. 
25. The Department of Financial Services stated  among other things  in a written 
reply that the p rimary agriculture societies are excluded as they are not primarily into 
micro finance activity [clause 2i(ii) ].  The number of MFIs is not that large for RBI to  
regulate. 
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) 
26. The 2 nd Administrative Reforms Commission (A RC) in its 6 th Report on Local 
Governance submitted in October, 2007  recommended, inter-alia, that in order to 
maximize the benefits of micro -finance, formation of SHGs needs to be encouraged.  

 
17 
 
Institutions and NGOs with good track record should be encouraged to promote  SHGs 
for availing micro finance. 
27. The Malegam Committee (2011) stated about the SHG -Bank Linkage 
Programme (SBLP), among other things, as under:- 
 ―The Share of the SHG -Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP) in terms customers 
 has dropped from 78.27 in 2008 to  70.72% in 2010.  Even  more significantly its 
 share of outstanding loans has dropped from 73.71%  to 59.78%. The share of 
 SBLP in incremental loans has dropped from 64.96% to 40.96% and in actual 
 terms is lower in 2010 than in 2008.  The reasons for the  increasing dominance 
 of the MFI group vis-à-vis SBLP are, among other things:- (i) MFIs are said to be 
 more aggressive; (ii) SHGs have longer repayment period and during that period  
 if SHG members need loans, they approach MFIs; (iii) Banks use MFIs to  meet 
 priority sector targets…..  
 It is believed that banks find it easier to use MFIs to meet their priority sector 
 targets. This is particularly true near the year end where banks invest in 
 securitized paper issued by MFIs to meet targets‖.  
 
28. Asked about the possible impacts and consequences of proposed statutory 
status f or MFIs over the existing institutions such as Self -Help Groups (SHGs), 
cooperative banks, cooperative societies, RRBs etc , the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Ser vices), NABARD, Sa-Dhan and INAFI in their written 
submissions stated that:- 
―Department of Financial Services:- 
The impacts and consequences would not have adverse implications if a client 
 centric approach is adopted. The MFI route is another conduit for the clients to 
 access finance. It has to be seen that there should not be any regulatory 
 arbitrage present in the proposed Bill which allows unfair advantage to MFIs over 
 the existent set  up of SHGs, Cooperative banks, Cooperative Societies, RRBs 
 etc. 
In fact, each constitution has its own advantages and disadvantages and it is 
 best left to the clients to choose among the various alternatives of financing. It 
 would be prudent to facilit ate fair and healthy competition among these conduits 
 to supply finance to the clients by harnessing their core business competency. 
NABARD:- 
  …..Even though there is no direct threat to SHGs with growth of MFIs, but when 
 these institutions resort to ac celerated financing by operating in such areas 
 where large number of SHGs is operating, it might lead to vitiating the basic 

 
18 
 
 tenets of SHG functioning and group dynamics, as some members of SHGs 
 could be enticed by MFIs to avail /seek credit more quickly….. 
Sa-Dhan:- 
….Through financial services, MFIs are complimenting and supplementing the 
economic empowerment of the borrowers. 
 
INAFI:- 
….The SHG movement will really be hit much more‖. 
 
29. In this regard, t he State Government of Andhra Pradesh in  a written 
memorandum stated, among other things, that:- 
 ―The draft works under a presumption that the interests of the MFIs and the poor 
 are perfectly aligned.  This runs contrary to the evidence obtaining on ground 
 which proves that the MFI lending ha s in fact, led to impoverishment of the 
 borrowers. The spate of suicides in AP is only a pointer in this direction‖.    
 30. The Chief Executive Officer, Society of Elimination of Rural Poverty, State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh added the following in hi s deposition before the 
Committee:- 
 ―The entire MFIs basically comprised of three NBFCs, as has been mentioned - 
 SKS, Spandana and Share Microfin.  They account for 80 per cent of the loans of 
 MFIs.  What they have done is that they have not gone through any process of 
 empowerment.  They simply cashed on the hard work done by the 
 Government…. What these MFIs have done, they have just come to the villages, 
 picked up women from these SHGs.  The y have not formed any Joint Liability 
 Groups.  They just picked up these women from SHGs and started giving 
 money‖.  
 
 D. Micro Finance Services and Affordability  
  (i) Micro-Credit:- 
 31. Clause 2(1)(h) of the Bill defines ‗micro credit facilities‘ means any loan, advance, 
grant or any guarantee given or any other credit extended in cash or kind with or without 
security or guarantee. 
32. Clause 2(1)(j) of the Bill defines ‗micro finance services‘ as any one or more of 
the following financial services provided by any MFI, namely:- 
(A) Micro credit facilities involving such amount, not exceeding in aggregate five 
lakh rupees for each individual and for such special purposes, as may be 
specified by the Reserve Bank from time to time, such higher amount, not 
exceeding ten lakh rupees, as may be prescribed; 
(B) Collection of thrift; 

 
19 
 
(C) pension or insurance services; 
(D) remittance of funds to individuals within India subject to prior approval of the 
Reserve Bank and such other terms and conditions, as may be prescribed by 
regulations; 
(E) any other such services, as may be specified. 
 
33. Clause 25 of the Bill empowers RBI in providing directions in the matters of 
ceiling on amount of micro credit facilities and the number of individual clients to whom 
such micro credit facilities may be provided by any MFI; and levy of processing fees, 
interest, life insurance premium and other terms relating to micro credit facilities 
including the ceiling on the percentage of margin to be maintained by a MFI. 
34. M-CRIL in a written memorandum suggested that a limit on the loan amount is 
needed to define micro finance but it should reflect the income range in rural and urban 
areas and, if possible, also be nuanced to take account of regional differences. 
35. The Department of Financial Services accepted the above mentioned suggestion 
for incorporating a suitable rule making provision relating to annual family income of the 
beneficiary.  
36. Governor, RBI informed the Committee on the ceiling of micro credit proposed in 
the Bill as follows:- 
―…the proposed limits of Rs. 5 lakh and Rs. 10 lakh are fairly high amounts 
and much higher than the typical micro finance borrower. I think, the 
Malegam Report says Rs. 25,000. The limit of Rs. 25,000 to Rs. 50,000 
seems more like the size that we should be focussed on.  Of course, you 
do not want to write that in the Bill. You want something which moves with 
inflation. Unfortunately, inflation is high. So , we would suggest some 
measure of  level, that is indexed‖. 
 
37. In this regard, Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), NABARD 
in their written replies stated as under:- 
 ―Department of Financial Services:- 
 The present limits were define d on the suggestions of the Ministry of Law (MoL).  
 It was the contention of MoL that while the regulator would have powers to define 
 the amount of ―micro credit‖, there has to be an upper limit upto which no 
 amendment may be required in the Act.  Thus,  under the present scheme of the 
 MFIDR Bill, 2012 an enabling provision has been given to RBI/Government.  The 
 limit of micro credit which qualifies as micro finance can be specified by RBI (let 
 us say at Rs.50,000).  In future, the RBI can increases th is limit (upto Rs.5 lakhs 
 for individuals and upto Rs.10 lakhs for such special purposes as may be 
 specified by it as per the rules to be notified by Government of India) without 
 needing any amendment in the Act. 

 
20 
 
 The details mentioned by the Malegam Co mmittee would be taken into 
 consideration by RBI at the time of framing of regulations.  The suggestion of 
 rewriting micro credit is accepted for incorporation at the stage of official 
 amendments. 
 NABARD:- 
 A high ceiling may result in coverage of activities which were hitherto not covered 
 under micro finance viz; consumer loans, vehicle loans etc‖.  
 38. Also, the representatives of INAFI and AIDWA submitted, among other things, 
during oral evidence before the Committee as under:- 
INAFI:- 
―….If we open the floodgates of this amount,…..it will be a nightmare.  There are 
so many institutions.  Already, there is lending excesses……We will have a debt -
trap like a situation emerging….. 
AIDWA:- 
―….the definition of micro finance services……should be restricted to micro credit 
 and not other services.  We found that in the course of their functioning, MFIs   
 have backdoor entry to say, insurance schemes.  They have been deducting the 
 insurance premium as part of the EMI and actually in some cases we have found 
 that the insurance is not really for the person who is being covered, but to ensure 
 that their liability is insured.  So, after the death of the individual, they actually 
 recover from insurance amount, their  loan and then give the rest.  Many women 
 are not even aware that this kind of activity is going on because they are not able 
 to read the terms and conditions, etc.  …..if any thing, it should be only credit for 
 the MFIs.  When it comes to thrift, after  this whole Saradha Scam and these 
 ponzi schemes, we feel that, that is even more dangerous to allow them to do 
 this. 
….about the quantum of credit…..our own experience is that women in particular 
 want small loans.  They want loans which they can also r epay….upper limit of 
 Rs.5 lakh …proposed in the present Bill,…..will actually allow the entry of other 
 people who would want to take advantage of these kinds of loans.  We strongly 
 feel that the upper limit for the loans should be restricted to say, Rs. 50,000 and 
 not more than that. 
…there has to be a cap and believe that the cap cannot be put by the RBI.  It 
 should be in the Act.  The Act itself should make the provision to cap the rates of 
 interest….for instance, if there are already base lending rates of the banks 
 lending to SHGs, that can become the basis and at the most we feel that four per 
 cent margin maximum….even there the Government should give an interest 
 subsidy….‖ 

 
21 
 
39. In this r egard, MFIN, Sa -Dhan, and SKS Micro Finance Co. in their post -
evidence replies stated the following:- 
―MFIN: 
MFI borrowers are typically engaged in activities requiring small amounts of 
capital.  A loan of Rs.500 - Rs.10,000 usually serve as working capital  which 
allows the borrower to build their business activity. 
Sa-Dhan: 
―Presently the loans are given to support the existing livelihood 
activities/enterprises as working capital or partial investment capital to the 
borrowers.  The borrowers clubbing this l oan with other sources like SHGs, 
friends, moneylenders etc. to meet the resource gap. 
These small amounts are certainly not enough to take up livelihood activities and 
enterprises and the sector is equally concerned about this.  But the borrowers in 
subsequent loan cycles are given with larger size loan enabling them to take up 
livelihood activities. 
….inadequate loan size to the borrowers is primarily due to the constraint in flow 
of funds from the banks to the MFIs post the AP crisis.  The sector is perc eived 
to be risky in the absence of comprehensive legal and regulatory framework.  
Enactment of the Bill is certainly going to provide the desired confidence to the 
lenders to lend funds to the MFIs that would in turn flow to the borrowers at a 
larger volume. 
MFIs do not take any collateral in any form as per the RBI guidelines.  Micro 
Finance as such is based on the concept of providing credit without collateral.  
This model is purely built on the concept of social collateral that ensures 
repayment. 
SKS Micro Finance Co.: 
The processes followed by MF companies are geared to take into account the 
risk associated with collateral -free loans.  A combination of the Joint Liability 
Group(JLG) model along with, processes such as compulsory training, loan 
utilization checks, neighborhood delivery, weekly meetings and installments have 
helped MFIs maintain a 99% collection efficiency rate in many states across the 
country….‖ 
40. Special Chief Secretary to State Government of Andhra Pradesh in his 
deposition before the Committee stated, inter-alia, that:- 
 ―what was realized through the case studies was that thought the recovery at 
 some stage was happening, it was their own saving s which were getting 
 converted into repayment. There was no due diligence as to whether they were 
 at consumption stage or asset building stage.  Money was being given because it 

 
22 
 
 was available and high rate of interest was being charged.  It was virtuall y a pure 
 money lending exercise.  It did not have the empowerment process of SHGs 
 social capital in mind‖.   
 
41. The Chief Executive Officer, Society of Elimination of Rural Poverty, State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh added the following in his depositi on before the 
Committee:- 
 ―…all the MFIs have shown 99 per cent repayment.  The issue is that the 
 repayment is happening because of its ever -greening of loans.  You take loan 
 from one MFI and to repay it, you take another MFI loan.  So, all the MFIs sho w 
 99 percent repayment. But, the issue is, how does that loan gets converted into 
 an investment, and then, where are the returns?...‖   
(ii) Interest Rate 
 
42. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in a detailed note 
stated on the rate of interest of loans by MFIs as under:- 
 ―MFIs typically charge a higher rate of interest to their clients than traditional 
commercial banks as the administrative costs of servicing smaller loans is far 
higher in percentage terms than the cost of serv icing larger loans. Additionally,  
MFIs provide doorstep services to their customers, a strategy that has a high 
cost associated with it, especially in rural areas where population densities tend 
to be low. Because of this model, MFIs generally face an Operating Expense 
Ratio (OER) between 6% and 15%, depending on the scale and efficiency level 
of the particular MFI as well its area of operations. Additionally, today, MFIs face 
borrowing costs in the range of 12% to 16% per annum, depending on the size 
and track-record of the individual MFI. The portfolio quality for MFIs is typically 
superior to commercial banks with total non -performing assets (assets 180 days 
past due) of 0.2% to 3% as opposed to 3% to 10% for commercial banks. MFIs 
typically enjoy ext remely low delinquency rates despite the non -existence of 
security. This portfolio quality is driven by the discipline embedded in the JLG 
model through the self -selection of the group members as well as the mutual 
support informally embedded in the groups  in relation to members‘ loans …. 
However, in the wake of AP crisis, the sector is facing considerable slow down‖.  
43. Recommendations made by various Committees on interest rate of loans by 
MFIs: 
 Malegam Committee (2011): 
 ―…Low-income borrowers often do  not have assets which they can offer as 
 collateral, and it is important to ensure that in the even of default, the borrower 
 does not lose possession of assets which s/he may need for her/his continued 
 existence.  It is, therefore, suggested that all loans should be without collateral‖.  
 
 There should be a ―margin cap‖ of 10% in respect of MFIs which have an 
 outstanding loan portfolio at the beginning of the year of Rs.100 crores and a 
 ―margin cap‖ of 12% in respect of MFIs which have an outstanding loan portfolio 

 
23 
 
 at the beginning of the year of an amount not exceeding Rs.100 crores.  There 
 should be a cap of 24% on individual loans.   
 ….Given the lower cost of funds which banks enjoy , there is no reason why 
 banks  cannot a larger share of the market and thereby provide more effective 
 competition to the MFIs.  This could result in a general reduction in interest rate 
 for borrowers.   
 The MFIs should not be allowed to do the business of providing thrift services.  
 UN Advisors Group on Inclusive Financial Sectors Report (June 2008):  
 Imposing interest-rate ceilings risks hindering lenders‘ ability to cover the costs of 
 making small loans. Too often, the ceilings limit credit expans ion and hurt the 
 populations they are meant to help. 
 Raghuram G. Rajan Committee (2008):  
 Interest rate ceilings are much harder to  enforce.  Deregulation of interest rates 
 would stimulate credit provision‖. 
44. On being asked about the affordability to low -income borrowers and the present 
rate of interest of 26 per cent of loans of MFIs,  the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services), RBI and NABARD, SKS Micro Finance Co.Ltd.  and Sa -Dhan  in 
their post-evidence replies stated that:- 
 ―The Department of Financial Services:- 
 ….The high interest rates have been sought to be regulated  in the Bill through 
 the powers given to RBI in Clause 25 & 26. The coercive recovery practices 
 have been addressed in clause 8( 2)(5)(b) and 11( c). We are of the opinion 
 that although various Govt. agencies will continue to provide  cheap credit, 
 the MFIs are already operating in  the sector and hence need to be  regulated for 
 the betterment of final borrower. 
 
 RBI:- 
  ……The ceiling on interest rate is currently under review. Also processing 
 charges are not included in the margin cap or the interest cap. It must be noted 
 that the rate of interest may look high but the rate that  similar borrowers will have 
 to pay the money-lender would have been far higher.   
 NABARD: 
 …..the focus on client is not very evident; this is borne out of the fact that the 
 preamble and object of the bill doesn‘t highlight the issue of “..Promoting 
 affordable financial services” . Further, Sec tion 2 (h) of the Bill defines "micro 
 credit  facilities" as any loan, advance, grant or any guarantee given or any other 
 credit  extended in cash or kind with or without security or guarantee. It may be 
 mentioned that poor being primarily an asset less class and microcredit is 
 generally purveyed without any form of security. However, if the definition permits 
 collection of security (as in the instant case) this would give MFIs a leeway to 
 seek security for their advances as well. 

 
24 
 
 
 …..it is of paramount importance to ensure that the investment made by poor 
 generates adequate income to service the loan.  Hence MFIs must adopt a ‗cost -
 plus-reasonable-margin‘ approach in determining the rates of interest. What 
 costs could be factored in needs to be detailed by the regulator. However, in the 
 interest of the client, it may be advisable to introduce the concept of ―Base rates‖ 
 for MFIs which is applicable to banks at present‖.  
 SKS  Micro Finance Co.Ltd.:- 
NBFC-MFIs should be allowed to act as correspondents for banks.  A conducive 
‗mobile Banking‘ policy environment to ensure Bank and NBFC -MFIs 
collaboration is also the need of the hour.  Th ese two initiatives will help MFIs 
reduce operating cost and facilitate reduction in interest rates charged on micro 
loans. 
 
 Sa-Dhan: 
 ….This rate of interest of 26% constitutes two key components:-  
 1. Cost of borrowing fund from banks and financial institutions at 12-16.5%;  
 2. Operational cost is capped at 12% (This in addition to the interest rate cap; 
 RBI has also stipulated that the difference between the borrowing and lending 
 cost should not exceed 12%). The break -up of the operational cost of 1 2% is 
 given as follows:- 
o Expense towards doorstep delivery and collection – 5% 
o Expense towards operational cost and overheads – 4% 
o Loan loss provision – 1.5 to 2%. (This includes statutory provisioning 
requirement  of 1%) 
o Surplus / Margin – 1to1.5%. 
 
….the sector is willing to restrict the maximum interest rate below 26% as 
prescribed under the extant norms……If bank lending to MFIs comes at a 
lowered rate, the effective interest rate to ultimate borrower would also come 
down by that much basis point‖. 
 
45. On the question of differential rates of interest for productive and consumption 
purposes, the RBI in a post-evidence reply stated that :-  
 ―Interest rates have been deregulated by the Bank. However, given the clientele 
 of the  NBFCs-MFI, interest r ate ceilings have been placed. It would not be 
 appropriate to levy differential rates of interest under a scenario when the Bank 
 is in favour of leaving interest rates to market forces‖. 
 
46. The Managing Director, Stree Nidhi Credit Cooperative Federation Limited, 
Govt.of Andhra Pradesh, submitting the following, among other things, during oral 
evidence before the Committee:- 
 ―…After exit of MFIs from Andhra Pradesh as they did not find it convenient to 
 operate, we have created an institution called Stree Nidhi Credit Cooperative 
 Federation Limited. This is a federation of SHG federations in Andhra 
 Pradesh. The equity is contributed by the Government of Andhra Pradesh 

 
25 
 
 as also the federations of SHGs. We have an equity of almost Rs. 250 
 crore as of now. We have started lending at 14 per cent as against 26 per 
 cent interest rate stipulated by RBI. The RBI also provides for charging one 
 per cent service charge whereas our total interest rate, inclusive of 
 everything, is 14 per cent at ultimat e level. We are able to achieve this for 
 the simple reason that we are in a position to use the existing platform 
 created by the SERP over the last 13 years. ..........we are in a position to 
 deliver credit in 48 hours from the time it is requested. The re, the issue is 
 that our operational cost is just one per cent of the working funds 
 whereas MFIs‘ operational cost is 10 per cent of the working funds. So, 
 inclusive of what we borrow from banks, we are able to price our 
 products at 14 per cent‖.  
 
47. The Committee have been informed that Kudumbashree scheme of micro -credit 
in Kerala provides loan to the beneficiaries between 11-13 per cent per annum.   Asked 
whether the scheme has been studied and suggested anything on it, RBI and MFIN in 
their post-evidence replies stated that:- 
 ―RBI: 
 No, we have not. We will conduct a study through our Regional Office in 
 Thirvananthapuram and apprise the Committee of our findings in due course‖. 
 
 MFIN: 
 …the scheme is similar to activities being performed by MFIs in the private 
 sector.  While the former is based on government subsidies which burden the 
 exchequer the services, the financial services by MFIs come through private 
 sector, self-sustainable institutions.  Kudumbashrree and micro finance services 
 by MFIs can work in synergy to achieve the objectives of financial inclusion. 
 ….It is not true that MFIs do not teach any entrepreneurial skills to women.  MFIs 
 not only provide credit to their cli ents but also facilitate their overall social and 
 economic well being by providing a range of ―credit plus‖ services…‖. 
48. Asked to differentiate the role of MFIs and moneylenders, and also to examine 
capping of interest rates slab -wise, and dovetailing government programmes like mid -
day meal and girl education programmes with  MFIs, the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) submitted a post-evidence reply as follows:-  
―MFIs can not only provide money lending but also other services like collection 
of thrift, remittances, insurance and pensions as defined in Clause 2(j) of the Bill. 
We fully agree with the suggestion that the MFIs need to be subjected to strict 
regulations like the banks. It is with keeping this end in mind that we have 
proposed RBI as regulator. The suggestion to dovetail other Government 
programmes is welcome and care would be taken while framing rules in this 
regard under Clause 49 of the Bill. The slab wise rates can be considered at the 
stage of framing rules and regulations‖. 

 
26 
 
49. NABARD in a written memorandum to the Committee submitted that:-  
 ―The Bill is silent about following: 
 a) Multiple Financing:  The Bill is silent about the multiple financing of SHGs / 
 micro borrowers by MFIs. Whether it is permissible or no t? If it is permissible, 
 what would be the mechanism for monitoring of multiple financing/ over financing 
 etc not clear. 
 b).Coercive measures for recovery:   Effective steps for restraining MFIs for 
 adopting coercive measures for recovery of dues is not  mentioned. Bill does not 
 deal with field monitoring of operations / activities of MFIs.  
c).Multiple memberships: The Bill has also not dealt with restraining the members 
of SHGs being members of multiple SHGs. 
50. The Department of Financial Services in a written reply while accepting the 
above-mentioned suggestions stated that these are to be included at regulation making 
stage. 
Difference between Thrift and Deposit 
51. Asked to differentiate  the terms ― thrift‖ and ―deposit‖, the Governor, RBI in his 
deposition before the Committee stated that:- 
―Consistent with the policy stance that only banks should be allowed to accept 
deposits; we have not registered since 1997 any new NBFC with authorization to 
accept public deposits. I would mention that in the case of thrifts, it looks like a 
deposit taking entities and we would be averse to allowing such an activity.  The 
deposit accepting NBFCs are today those which were in operation prior to 1997.  
So we cannot close them down with retrospective effect and we just have to let 
them live but they are in limited number.... 
 
.....Entities should not be allowed to accept public deposits, whether  they are 
called thrift or anything else. I think micro finance entities should not be allowed 
to accept public deposits. There is a sense in this country that public deposits are 
safe, secure and mingling that with micro finance, I think, would be problem atic. 
Depositors would some how get the impression that these are even insured and 
when they are not, I think, they would be liable to be duped. So, we would 
caution against permitting thrift. Plus, an entity raising deposits is typically subject 
to more risks, including the risk of runs and that would be problematic also for the 
micro finance institutions. So, we would suggest that deposit taking should not be 
allowed, whatever the name it goes by. One way to think about it, is what would 
have happened if in Andhra Pradesh the entities had all been deposit -taking 
entities.  We would have had a severe financial crisis, more severe than what we 
have already seen in Andhra Pradesh.....‖ 
52. On the same issue, the Malegam Committee, the Ministry of Finance, RBI, State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh, SIDBI and INAFI submitted their written replies as 
under:- 

 
27 
 
 ―Malegam Committee:- 
 ….The Micro Finance Entities governed by the proposed Act should not be 
 allowed to do the business of providing thrift services. 
 
 Ministry of Finance: 
 Provision of thrift is an enabling provision.  Only those MFIs would get to collect 
 thrift which fulfill the regulations of RBI. 
  
 RBI:- 
 Acceptance of thrift is the same as acceptance of deposits. However,  "thrift" as a 
 word is more community focused than business focused and refers  essentially to 
 passbook savings accounts. It is used by financial institutions that are  small 
 community based institutions like MFls, credit societies etc. Feature wise,  
 deposits and thrift are essen tially the same. This is why the Reserve Bank is 
 opposed to allowing MFls to accept thrift. 
 
 State Government of Andhra Pradesh: 
 Thrift is the money of the members of the Self -Help Groups, used for internal 
 rotation to meet the emergency credit needs.  Any allowance to MFIs to collect 
 the thrift raises the vulnerability of the poor by locking up their savings with one 
 particular MFI, thereby taking away his market choices.  Considering that there is 
 an une qual relationship between the ‗giver‘ of credit and ‗seeker‘ of credit, this 
 relationship will work to the disadvantage of the poor with no adequate protection 
 for their thrift amounts.  In view of this, all provisions in the draft which refer to 
 allowing MFIs to collect thrift may be deleted. 
 SIDBI  
 ……Thrift means money collected in any form other than in the form of current 
account or demand deposits by an MFI from members of SHGs or any other 
group of individuals by whatever name called who are avai ling microfinance 
services provided by such MFIs in accordance with the regulation made by the 
RBI in this behalf…… 
 
INAFI: 
…shadow banking system would not be allowed to mobilize savings or thrift from 
the public, whatever language you use it.  So, this h as a very seri ous and 
dangerous consequence…. The last one is Saradha episode…..Savings should 
always be with the commercial banks for the simple reason that the commercial 
banks have diversity of busines s.  It can bear all the risks…  When we take a 
policy decision, slowly we will phase-off deposits from the NBFCs…‖.   
53. On the proposal of insurance and pension services by MFIs, PFRDA and IRDA 
suggested, among other things, the following in their written memorandum:- 
 ―PFRDA: 
 Clause 2(3) may be added as under:- 

 
28 
 
 Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act, PFRDA shall continue to regulate 
 all activities relating to National Pension System (NPS) of micro finance 
 institutions. 
 
 IRDA: 
 …the powers of RBI are sought to be delegated to the National Bank or any 
 agency under the control of the Central Government in respect of any micro 
 finance institution subject to such conditions as it deems fit.  Thus even powers 
 of Registration of MFI , amalgamation of MFI, etc., would be under the control of 
 the delegated agency.  This will disturb the regulatory environment involving MFI 
 offering insurance services. 
  
 Hence, if at all pension and insurance are defined as micro finance services 
 under the Bill , it should be expressly provided that in respect of those institutions, 
 ‗RBI‘ shall be substituted by ‗IRDA‘ and delegation if any, by IRDA shall to be an 
 ‗Indian Insurance Company‘‘.   
54. In this regard,  the Ministry of Finance (Department  of Fin ancial Services), RBI 
and Sa-Dhan in their written replies submitted that:- 
 ―Department of Financial Services:- 
 Pension and insurance activities form a part of financial inclusion.  They are 
 included in the Bill as enabling provisions.  Regulatio ns will provide all inbuilt 
 safeguards for such activities.   The collection of thrift, remittances, pension and 
 insurance would continue to be governed under the guidelines of RBI. 
  
 Respective legislations are already in place to provide regulation of these 
 services.  Hence, there appears to be no necessity to mention the same in the 
 present Bill. 
 
 Not all MFIs will be allowed all kinds of services.  There will be a graded 
 regulation of MFIs.  Only those MFIs which fulfill the regulatory criteria will get o 
 provide remittances, insurance and pensions. 
  
  
 
 RBI: 
 …both insurance and pension products are important for the clientele of  MFls. 
 However these should be at the choice of  the customer and the MFI should  
 refrain from mis -selling products. We are not in favour of the MFls providing 
 these services themselves but as agents of pension fund/insurance companies. 
 Given that these are long -term saving products, MFls should not b e allowed to 
 offer these products themselves as they would be very thinly capitalized. 
  
 Sa-Dhan: 
 ….We agree with the view of the Standing Committee that it is necessary to 
 clearly provide that MFIs can act as agents for sale of pension or insurance 
 policies strictly in accordance with directives and regulations of the respective 
 regulations viz. PFRDA or IRDA as the case may be‖.   

 
29 
 
E. REGULATION OF MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS (MFIs) 
55. The Government of Andhra Pradesh had promulgated an Ordinance viz., The 
Andhra Pradesh Micro Finance Institutions (Regulation of Money Lending) Ordinance, 
2010 (since converted to Act, 2011), on 15 October, 2010, to regulate all MFIs operating 
in the State to address the issues like perceived high interest rate, mult iple borrowings, 
perceived coercive recovery practices, etc.   
56. MFIN in a post-evidence reply stated, among other things, that:- 
 ―...the AP MFI Act, 2011 has been challenged though a petition pending with 
 the Supreme Court since the micro finance subject falls under the Central  list 
 and the State Government cannot pass such an Act.‖   
57. To a specific query as to why the activities of MFIs should not come under State 
Law, Sa-Dhan in a post-evidence reply submitted, among other things, that: 
 ―Assuming the scenario that MFIs are covered under State Money Lenders, it is 
 understood that MFIs with multistate operations would have to comply with 
 multiple State Acts and would not be able to streamline their processes and 
 systems uniformly.  Secondly, mu ltiplicity of regulation (RBI Act and State Acts) 
 would lead to regulatory arbitrage, confusion.  Bank funding would certainly drain 
 out even if there is slightest possibility of MFIs coming under State Money 
 Lending Act….:.‖   
 
 
 
 
58. NABARD and the Department of Financial Services in their written submissions 
stated about the Andhra Pradesh Micro Finance Crisis as under:- 
―NABARD:- 
Andhra Pradesh crisis was triggered by over and indiscriminate financing to 
members of SHGs and other individual without  taking cognizance of their 
repayment capacity. This had led to multiple loans and thus adversely impacting 
the repayment capacities of the clients. This was followed by coercive collection 
methods for recovery by MFIs. The high interest rates charged by f ew MFIs 
coupled with persuasive measures did have a telling effect on clients. The issue 
was also triggered by excessive geographic concentration of lending by MFIs 
rather oblivious of the associated risks of such over -exposure. Further, the 
inability of t he lenders to ensure ―lenders discipline‖ on MFIs as also the 
inadequacy of regulatory oversight by the regulator also compounded the issue. 
Department of Financial Services:- 

 
30 
 
Following the AP MFI Act, it was reported by the MFIs that the loan recovery in 
AP had fallen from 97 -98% to 10 -20%. It was construed that initial setback in 
recovery was largely due to the operational problems at the field level viz. - 
resources being utilized for registration of MFIs in all the districts and adhering to 
other compliances of the Act. …However, the loan recovery in AP continues to 
suffer significantly ….A number of MFIs faced the twin crisis of liquidity and 
solvency due to limited funding fr om lenders during FY 2012. MFIs….. The sector 
is yet to return to normalcy. Overall, the situation remains far from normal and the 
impasse in AP continues‖.  
59. The State Government of Andhra Pradesh in a written memorandum stated, 
among other things, that:- 
 ―It is not out of context to quote Dr.Y.V.Reddy, former RBI Governor who sta ted 
 that ―for-profit MFIs should be treated at par with money -lenders and should not 
 be subject to soft regulation as they are a bigger risk to the system than 
 individual lenders who extend loans out of their own net worth‖.  The Division 
 Bench  of High Court of Kerala in WA 540/2007 dated 18 th November, 2009 ruled 
 that the act of any person engaged in the business of advancing and realizing 
 loans or accepting deposits in the course of such business is a money lender. 
  
 Despite the expert opinion and judicial pronouncements in the matter, it is 
 surprising why and how the draft proposed to exclude the MFIs‘ activities from 
 the purview of the money lending regulations. 
 
 Considering that MFIs are primarily involved in len ding and recovering of money, 
 and respective State Government machinery has ground level information on the 
 lending and recovery practices of the MFIs, the draft should have mandated the 
 MFIs to operate within the ambit of the money lending regulations. 
 
 Constitutional validity: 
 Part IX of the Indian Constitution lays down the legislative competence of the 
 Union and States.  The List (item 30) mandates the State legislature to regulate 
 money lending and the money lenders as a part of protecting the p ublic order.  
 The manner  definition of money lending and the scope of regulation of money 
 activities therefore falls under the State jurisdiction. 
 
 The Section 42 of the draft which proposes that MFIs shall not be treated as 
 money lenders impinges on t he State legislative competence and therefore is 
 ultra vires”.    
60. Regarding issues involved in regulation of MFIs as proposed in the Bill, RBI 
Submitted the following in a written submission:- 
―The Bill envisages RBI as the regulator for all MFls even if they are not 
companies. Certain operational and legal issues as stated below, are involved in 
entrusting RBI with the responsibilities of regulating and supervising MFls which 
are not companies. 
 
 Operational Issues 

 
31 
 
2. MFls which are not companies usually carry -on the business on a small scale 
and operate in remote areas also. The organizational set up of RBI is not suitable 
for regulating and supervising the activities of such entities located in  remote 
areas. An effective regulation and supervision is possible with respect to the 
activities of such MFls only if they are regulated and supervised by authorities 
who have the necessary reach to such areas and are equipped with  the 
necessary wherewithal. Regulation of such entities by RBI or any other central 
authority which does not have local presence could prove to be both ineffective 
and expensive. 
 
3. At present, RBI has been vested with the power to regulate and supervise 
MFls which are companies . Since MFls which are companies are NBFCs and  
MFls which are companies. Since MFls which are companies are NBFCs and 
RBI has adequate powers under Chapter IIIB of RBI Act with respect to 
regulation and supervision of NBFCs, it is not necessary to confer o n RBI any 
further powers with respect to the regulation and supervision of MFls which are 
NBFCs under the Bill. Since RBI regulates activity and not entities, it would not 
be in order for it to prescribe disparate regulation for the same activity based on 
size and entity type. It is, therefore, the submission of RBI that while the 
regulation and supervision of MFls which are NBFCs should continue with RBI, 
the regulation and supervision of MFls which are not companies should be with 
State authorities who have local presence and reach as also the understanding 
of the local requirements.  
 
Legal Issues 
4. Parliament has legislative competence to enact laws dealing with regulation 
and winding up of trading corporations including banking, insurance and financial  
corporations under Entry 43 of List I of VII Schedule of the Constitution. Under 
Entry 32 of List II States have the legislative competence to make laws with 
respect to regulation and winding up of corporations other than those specified in 
List I. Furthe r, money lending is a State subject under Entry 30 of List II. Since, 
MFls are basically institutions meant for micro lending, the competence to make 
law relating to regulation of lending by entities which are not covered by List I is 
with the States. 
 
5. Andhra Pradesh has already enacted a State legislation with respect to MFls. 
As the said State legislation covers NBFCs also, RBI has taken a stand before 
the High Court in Writ Petitions filed by NBFCs that the State does not have the 
legislative competence. Similar stand has been taken by RBI before the Supreme 
Court and High Courts of Gujarat and Karnataka with respect to State laws 
relating to moneylenders. If MFls which are not companies are covered by a 
central legislation, the question of legislative competence of the Parliament would 
arise. In our submission, Parliament does not have legislative competence under 
Article 246 of the Constitution read with Entries 30 and 32 of List II to make the 
law for MFls which are not companies. 
 
6. If the intentio n is to have uniformity with respect to the law applicable to MFls 
operating in different states, the power of Parliament to enact the law for states 
under Article 252 will have to be invoked. For this purpose, the States will have to 

 
32 
 
give their consent or  adopt the law made by the Parliament with such 
modifications as they deem fit to address the local issues. In the circumstance, it 
would be appropriate for the Parliament to enact a model law on MFls and give  
the discretion to the States to adopt the same . It may be recalled that this 
mechanism has been adopted with respect to Chit Funds. 
 
…..In the event it is decided to entrust to RBI, the responsibility of regulating 
MFls  which are not companies, RBI requests that it be consulted further‖.   
61. The State Government of Andhra Pradesh in a written memorandum stated, 
among other things, that:- 
 ―…it is doubtful if RBI, which saddled with larger issues facing the monetary 
 system, will find time and attention to regulate this micro sector.  Even in the 
 recent past, authority which is already vested in RBI to regulate NBFCs has not 
 been used effectively, as a result of which crises like what happened in Andhra 
 Pradesh could not be prevented. 
 
 There has to be greater assurance that the RBI will put in p lace effective 
 measures to discharge the responsibilities cast on it by the draft Bill.  The 
 proposal to depend on the Self -Regulatory Organizations, which are already 
 discredited having been proved ineffectual (during the 2006 MFI crisis in Krishna 
 District, MFIN vowed to evolve and implement a code of conduct; which has not 
 been translated into action) will not do. 
  
 The system of ombudsman may not be effective since most of the MFI borrowers 
 are poor and illiterate and it is too much to expect tha t they will travel to make a 
 complaint with the Ombudsman.  As such, the systems available to RBI for 
 discharging the role envisaged in the draft are either non -existent or highly 
 ineffectual. 
 
 In this context, it is suggested that as far as inspecting  the 
 offices/records/accounts, RBI may take sole responsibility; but verifying the 
 implementation of the code of conduct in the field shall be in accordance with the 
 money lending regulation and left to the State Government. 
 
Finally, the draft seems to  have been prepared keeping only the interests of 
MFIs.  There is civil society, experts and millions of other stakeholders coming 
from vulnerable sections of the society who need to be systematically consulted 
and their concerns should be incorporated in the Bill.  The State Governments 
will certainly be willing to facilitate this interaction.  After completing such wide -
spread consultation, if necessary, the draft should be revised before introduction 
of the same in the Parliament‖.   
62. Prof. Ramesh S.A runachalam, Expert in his memorandum submitted to the  
Committee stated, inter-alia, the following:- 

 
33 
 
 ―The MFIDR Bill 2012 is very loosely structured and hence, it lacks the ability to 
 prevent events like the 2010 AP crisis, for which it was originally proposed… 
 ….Self-regulation has never worked in micro finance as the past experiences 
 have repeatedly shown -be it Krishna 2006 AP crisis, Kolar 2009 crisis, 2010 AP 
 crisis and thereafter..As the experience of many countries has shown, self -
 regulation in micro-finance cannot and will not work…. Going by past track 
 record, the RBI clearly does not have the capacity to regulate and supervise 
 micro finance and therefore should not be made the sole regulator and 
 supervisor under the MFIDR Bill, 2012 
 …prudential regulation / supervision for all types of MFIs should be under a 
 specially created body (called Micro Finance Regulatory and Development 
 Authority- MFRDA – like IRDA, PFRDA etc.)…. 
 …given the lack of a clear national micro finance policy guiding it s overall 
 strategy and implementation, the MFIDR Bill 2012 is indeed hugely incomplete..‖ 
63. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in a written reply 
stated that:- 
 ―Parliament has legislative competence under Entry 43 of List I of VII schedule to 
 enact laws dealing with regulation of banking or financial corporations.  For the 
 purpose of deciding validity of any law enacted by the Parliament, the doctrine of 
 pith and substance would apply.  In terms of this doctrine, the substance, 
 essential character, dominant feature or true meaning of the law has to be 
 ascertained to decide the legislative competence.   
 The substance and dominant feature of the MFIDR Bill, 20 12 introduced in the 
 Parliament relates to micro finance activity.  Extending applicability of the law to 
 non-corporate MFIs is necessarily incidental and ancillary effect of the law, but 
 since pit and substance of the law is relating to activity simila r to banking, it is 
 within the competence of the Parliament. 
 
 It excludes any person who is registered as Money Lender under any State Law.  
 The stand taken by RBI in various courts of law on regulating the NBFC -MFIs is 
 supported.  Hence the suggestion is not accepted‖. 
 
64. In another written reply, the Department of Financial Services accepted that 
further consultations with RBI would be carried out. It further stated as follows:- 
 ―The MFIDR Bill, 2012 envisages RBI as the Regulator for the micro finance 
 sector as a whole to provide for development and regulation of the MFIs for the 
 purpose of facilitating access to credit, thrift and other micro finance services to 
 the rural and  urban poor and disadvantaged sections of the people and 
 promoting financial inclusion.  Thus, the objective is to bring the entire micro 
 finance sector under the same Regulator so as to obviate multiple regulation / 
 regulatory gap and unfair arbitrage as all MFIs irrespective of their format 
 dispense micro finance.   Further, it may not be desirable to have different 
 regulation for different entities carrying out the same activity….. 
 

 
34 
 
Considering that it is Central Legislation and should provide unifo rm regulation 
 across the country adequate provisions are there in the Bill…….role of State and 
 District council is to monitor and provide feedback to Central Government / RBI‖. 
65. As there is a multiplicity of legal forms, asked to suggest one legal form which will 
be used for MFIs, Sa-Dhan in a post-evidence reply stated, among other things, that:- 
 ―….In order to prescribed one legal form and to facilitate regulation by RBI, the 
 most desirable form would be NBFC -MFI form.  The present entry point norm  for 
 NBFC-MFI and other prudential regulation would restrict a no. of NGO -MFIs to 
 transform to the NBFC -MFI form.  Therefore, it is not desirable to prescribe on 
 legal form.  It would also prevent local and community based institutions to 
 participate in the micro finance sector. 
  
 However, the RBI shall prescribe that MFIs with a specified level of assets shall 
 have to covert into a company.  Such stipulation will ensure that there is 
 uniformity in regard to capital, Reserve and other regulatory requirements to be 
 observed by MFIs‖. 
 
 
66. To a specific query as to whether feasibility study was done on entrusting the RBI 
or NABARD or any other agency to oversee implementation of the pro visions of the Bill, 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in a detailed note stated 
that:- 
―No feasibility study has been done on entrusting the RBI or NABARD or any 
other agency to oversee implementation of the provisions of the Bill . However 
during the series of meetings with the stakeholders including RBI and NABARD it 
was decided that the implementation of the provisions of the Bill will be done by 
RBI‖. 
Action Taken by RBI:- 
67. On account of the developments that affected the entire Micro Finance industry 
due to the A ndhra Pradesh  crisis, a sub -committee of the RBI‘s Central Board of 
Directors, chaired by Shri. Y.H. Malegam was constituted by RBI to study issues and 
concerns in the MFI sector. 
68. The Malegam Committee in their Report stated about the regulation of MFIs, 
among other things, as under:- 
―All NBFCs are currently regulated by Reserve Bank under Chapters III -B, III-C 
and V of the Reserve Bank of India Act. There is, ho wever, no separate category 
created for NBFCs operating in the Microfinance sector. 
 

 
35 
 
The need for a separate category of NBFCs operating in the Micro  Finance 
sector arises for a number of reasons. 
 
First, the borrowers in the Micro  Finance sector represent  a particularly 
vulnerable section of society. They lack individual bargaining power, have 
inadequate financial  literacy and live in an environment which is fragile and 
exposed to external shocks  which they are ill -equipped to absorb. They can, 
therefore, be easily exploited. 
 
Second, NBFCs operating in the Micro Finance sector not only compete amongst 
themselves but also directly compete with the SHG -Bank Linkage Programme  
(SBLP). The practices they adopt could have an adverse impact on the 
programme. In a representation made to the Sub -Committee by the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh, it has been argued, that the MFIs are riding ―piggy -back‖ on 
the SHG infrastructure  created by the programme and that JLGs are being 
formed by poaching members  from existing SHG s. About 30% of MFI loans are 
purportedly in Andhra Pradesh.  The Micro  Finance in India - A State of Sector 
Report 2010 also says that there are  many reports of SHGs splitting and 
becoming JLGs to avail of loans from MFIs.   The A.P. Government has also 
stated that as the loans given by MFIs are of shorter  duration than the loans 
given under the programme, recoveries by SHGs are  adversely affected and 
loans given by the SHGs are being used to repay loans  given by MFIs. While we 
did not, as committee, examine each of these issues in depth, the fact that these 
complaints have been made reinforces the need for a  separate and focused 
regulation. 
 
Thirdly, credit to the Micro Finance sector is an important plank in the scheme for  
financial inclusion. A fair and adequate regulation of NBFCs will encourage the 
growth of this sector while adequately protecting the interests of the borrowers. 
 
Fourth, over 75% of the finance obtained by NBFCs operating in this sector is  
provided by banks and financial institutions in cluding SIDBI. As at 31 st March 
2010, the aggregate amount outstanding in respect of loans granted by banks 
and SIDBI to NBFCs operating in the Microfinance sector amounted to Rs.13,800 
crores. In addition, banks were holding securitized paper issued by NBFCs for an 
amount of Rs.4200 crores. Banks and Fin ancial Institutions including S IDBI also 
had made investments in the equity of such NBFCs. Though this exposure may 
not be  significant in the context of the total assets of the banking system, it is 
increasing rapidly. 
 
 Finally, given the need to encourage the growth of the Micro Finance sector and 
 the vulnerable nature of the borrowers in the sector, there may be a need to give 
 special facilities or dispensation to NBFCs operating in this sector, alongside an 
 appropriate regulatory framework. This will be facilitated if a separate category of 
 NBFCs is created for this purpose. 
  
 We would, therefore, recommend that a separate category be created for NBFCs 
 operating in the Micro Finance Sector, such NBFCs being designated as NBFC-
 MFI‖. 

 
36 
 
 
69. The Malegam Committee also said that:- 
 
―…. both banks and NBFCs are infact regulated by Reserve Bank.  Therefore, 
the organizations which are not regulated by the RBI account for an estimated 
8% of the outstanding  MF loan portfolio.  Since cooperatives societies which 
have voting rights to members are excluded from the provisions of the proposed 
Act, this percentage may be even lower………If these entities are not regulated, 
a regulatory gap would be created and there fore we support the proposal in the 
proposed Act that these entities be regulated….‖.   
70. However, Smt. Shashi Rajagopalan, a member of the sub-committee, while 
disagreeing with the coverage of regulation, felt that ―given the small of entities likely to  
be brought within the ambit of such a law, Union Government may reconsider 
introducing such a law.  It may recommend to State Governments to introduce 
grievance redress mechanisms in State Money -lending Laws……, that is, MFIs that do 
not fall in the ambit of RBI regulation or State Cooperative Laws ‖. Subject to Smt. 
Shashi Rajagopalan‘s reservations, the Malegam Committee recommended that entities 
where aggregate loan portfolio does not exceed Rs.10 crores may be exempted from 
registration.   
71. RBI had is sued a circular dated 2 nd December, 2011 indicating the broad 
framework of the regulations based on the acceptance of recommendations made  by 
the Malegam Committee . Based on the representations from NBFCs on account of 
difficulties in complying with the framework modified the instructions vide its notification 
dated 3rd August, 2012.  A summary of the guidelines are as under: 
o Minimum Net Owned Fund (NOF) requirement for existing NBFCs reduced from 
Rs.5 crore to Rs.3 crore by March 2013 and Rs.5 crore by March 2014. 
o Minimum NOF requirement for existing NBFCs in NE r egion reduced from Rs.2 
crore to Rs.1 crore by March 2013 and  Rs. 2 crore by March 2014. 
o All existing NBFC to seek registration from RBI latest by October 31, 2012….. 
o Minimum share of income generating loans reduced from 75% to 70% providing 
30% scope for consumption or other loans. 
o Overall cap of individual lending rate of 26% removed.  
o Uniform margin cap of 12% changed to two slabs – 10% of larger MFI (w ith loan 
portfolio exceeding Rs.100 crore) and 12% for smaller MFIs. 
o Price band of 4% provided to MFIs to fixing different rates for different category 
of borrowers / loans. 
o Membership of at least one Credit Information Companies / bureau and 
exchange of date with the same made compulsory for NBFC-MFIs. 

 
37 
 
o Special provisions made for MFIs‘ AP portfolio…..  
o All NBFC-MFIs to become member of at least one SRO to be recognized by RBI 
and to follow Code of Conduct prescribed by SRO. 
o Though primary responsibility f or compliance lies with MFIs, SRO / lenders to 
ensure that system, practices and lending policies are compliant to regulatory 
frame-work. 
o Directions issued by RBI also covers other issues like compliance with 
conditionalities, geographical diversification, customer protection initiatives etc. 
72. RBI in its written memorandum suggested that  clauses related to delegation may 
be deleted / modified in view of the reasons mentioned above in para 60(3). 
 
73. The Governor, RBI made following deposition, among other things:- 
―....we have a mandate to register and regulate companies that are carrying on 
lending and investment activities .  But entities that are not companies , like 
partnerships, trusts and societies do not come under the ambit of RBI by statute 
even if they are undertaking lend ing and investment activities...... monitoring and 
supervising the large entities would also be consistent with our mandate to 
promote financial stability and clearly, the post crisis recognition across the world 
is that it is one of the primary activities of the Reserve Bank.   
....We say that regulation of MFIs that are incorporated should continue with the  
RBI for a variety of reasons. It allows uniformity in regulation of corporate  entities 
and it also allows uniformity of regulation across States and these large 
corporate entities  sometimes span multiple States. However, we think , regarding 
the small entities that typically operate within States, regulation should be with 
the State authorities who have the local presence and the understanding of local 
requirements.  Now, we are entirely happy to aid the local authorities.  Typically, 
we do coordinate the process of seeing whether there is any such activity of 
misdirection of deposits, of raising deposits under false pretex ts, etc. through 
what is called the State Level Coordination Committee..‖ 
 
74. The Governor, RBI also added that: 
 
..... inter-State MFIs that are not incorporated should not be allowed. 
 Currently the Bill is silent on that. But if you follow our prescription that States 
 should be regulating the un-incorporated MFIs, having a multi-State MFI, which is 
 un-incorporated, would result in conflict of regulation. So, it is better that if they 
 want to go across States, they incorporate and then it comes under our rules and 
 we can certainly monitor that entity 
....In the Bill, it is provided that the Central Government may issue directions to 
the Reserve Bank, to the Micro Finance Development Council or any State Micro 
Finance D evelopment Council on matters of policy or implementation of 
schemes, or any other measures for the orderly growth of development of MFIs.  

 
38 
 
This is an unusual provision. We feel that it tends to undermine the role of the 
regulator in operational matters. In Chapter III-B, for example , of the RBI Act, 
which is applicable to the NBFCs, there is no such provision empowering the 
Central Government to issue directions to the Bank or to the NBFCs.  Power to 
determine policy and to give directions to the NBFCs regulated by the Reserve 
Bank is exclusively vested under it. Even under the Banking (Regulation) Act, the 
Reserve Bank is fully empowered to issue directions to banks and to conduct 
inspections. Except for powers to direct the Reserve Bank to conduct inspection 
of a bank, there are no provisions for the Central Government to issue directions 
to the RBI or to the banks.  So, we would suggest a re -think of that particular 
paragraph. It does potentially undermines the role of the regulator.  
Then, the penalties that are stipulated in the Bill are quite nominal. If the 
imposition of the penalty has to act as a deterrent, then it must be substantial. 
We suggest that the quantum of the penalty could be a multiple of the amount of 
the financial consideration received or the amount that is involved in the violation 
subject to some minimum amount. So, that, we think, would be better than fixing 
it in nominal terms at Rs. 5 lakh or some thing of that order‖.  
75. Asked to examine the views of  the RBI on regulation of MFIs, the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) submitted a post-evidence reply as follows:-  
―The suggestion of the Committee has been examined. At present many of the 
State Governments regulate the money lenders under the respective Money 
Lending Laws of the State Government while the RBI regulates the NBFC -MFIs. 
However many of the MFIs do not get regulated by either of these two agencies 
and continue to exploit the poor. The Bill seeks to end this regula tory gap. A 
model law might be implemented by some State Governments while some others 
might not do so and the MFIs will continue to work without regulation. Hence it is 
proposed to have a Central law on the subject 
 The Bill has been formed to regulate th e MFIs and protect the interests of the 
 poor borrowers. The bill does not favour any particular stakeholder….  
 The legislative powers rest with the Parliament and it is for them to decide about 
 the regulatory powers being given to RBI or not. In our vie w RBI has over the 
 years demonstrated its regulatory competence in the banking sector and 
 therefore they need to be given the responsibility to manage this crucial financial 
 sector….. The Bill extends this regulatory jurisdiction of the RBI to include o ther 
 institutions like trusts, societies and companies which are presently unregulated‖. 
76. Further, the Department of Financial Services in a written reply stated that:- 
 ―RBI has been envisaged as the sole Regulator as MFI sector in the country to 
 ensure uniformity in approach as also dispensation of  micro finance directed at 
 consumer protection and sustainable development. The role  of State has been 
 envisaged through State Micro Finance Council and District Micro  Finance 
 Committees to review orderly growth of micro finance in the  State‖.   

 
39 
 
77. The Ministry of Women and Child Development in a written memorandum 
suggested that:- 
 ―Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK) may be delegated the powers of the Reserve 
 Bank in respect of Intermediary Micro Finance Organisations (IMO)  working with 
 RMK.  This may be kept in view while making a decision about delegation of 
 power to an agency of the Central Government‖.   
 
78. The Department of Financial Services, while not accepting the above mentioned 
suggestion stated in their written submission that:- 
 ―RMK cannot be delegated the regulatory powers as there would be conflict of 
 interest in its role as provider of micro finance services‖. 
 
79. The Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) during 
briefing held on 28 December, 2012 stated, among other things, that:- 
 ―Earlier NABARD was the regulator.  We have RBI in forefront to bring a 
 regulator, but we have a provision that other regulators ca n also be appointed by 
 the Central Government for a class of entities or for some categories, whatever 
 way the Government decides‖.   
80. Chairperson i/c, NABARD submitted the following on self - regulation of MFIs as 
under:- 
―While self -regulation is often heard and debated as a mechanism to regulate 
and manage MFIs, the experiences from Andhra Pradesh, from the two previous 
flash points, clearly demonstrate that either self -regulation or lenders‘ oversight 
does not help and a robust regulation must be the order of the day‖.   
81. The Ministry of Finance in a written submission stated among other things that at 
present there are no Self -Regulatory Organisations (SROs) of MFIs.  Asked about the 
details of SROs recognized by RBI, the RBI in a post -evidence reply stated, among 
other things, as under:- 
 ―(i) Number of SROs recogn ised by RBI since August, 2012: Nil 
 (ii) Number of SROs under consideration of RBI for recognition:  
         Nil.  However, we have received intent for recognition as SRO from one 
 entity viz; MFIN which is yet to submit a formal application in the matter.  
 (iii) Section of the Act under which the RBI recognises SROs:  
 Currently, there is no provision in the RBI Act 1934 to give recognition to 
 SROs.  
 ….. The SRO structure put in pl ace by the Bank therefore is in implementation of 
 the Malegam Committee recommendations.  Besides, RBI has the mandate of 
 customer protection and financial  inclusion. Given the profile  of the MFI 
 clientele, concerns on over indebtedness that has ridden the sector, there  was a 
 felt need for self regulatory body for the NBFC-MFIs that could function at  the 

 
40 
 
 grassroots and work towards grievance redressal, dispute resolution, 
 besides ensuring compliance to regulations, especially in the wake of the  events 
 in Andhra Pradesh‖.      
 
 
82.  When the Committee during the oral evidence suggested the Ministry to examine 
the feasibility of using postal network to lend credit; and using a hybrid model of SROs 
with Government/RBI nominees, the Ministry responded in a post-evidence reply as 
given below:- 
―The post offices do not offer credit facilities at present. India Post has applied for 
a banking license to RBI but no final decision has so far been taken. Clause 
25(2)(p)of the MFIDR Bill provides for grant of recognition to any SRO of MFIs for 
efficient conduct of the business of micro finance institutions. This is just an 
enabling provision for the RBI. The suggestion to have a hybrid model having 
Govt. / RBI nominees can be considered‖. 
83. On being asked, NABARD, SIDBI and representative of the State Government of 
Andhra Pradesh expressed their views on provisions proposed in the Bill for regulation 
of MFIs as under:- 
 ―NABARD:-  
  
….there should be one regulator for the entire microfinance sector, including 
NBFC-MFIs for taking the holistic view of the sector.  
 
While, ―regulation‖ refers to the set of rules and norms that apply (to microfinance 
institutions), but what is key is ―supervision‖ which is the process of enforcing 
compliance with those rules. Even during the AP crises, which had many NBFCs 
in tow, the regulatory norms were in vogue. Therefore, enforcement through 
supervision and oversight is more critical.  
 
Further, MFIs would need a tighter form of regulation, especially when MFIs take 
deposits. This could be ―prudential‖ regulation with adequate supervisory 
oversight, to ensure the protection of clients.  
 
Another issue that needs to be seen is the cost factor of regulating / supervising 
such a large number of entities across the length  and breadth of the country 
should also be taken into account. Another, alternate option should be to create a 
Micro Finance Regulatory Council with representation from all related bodies 
(RBI, NABARD, PFRDA, IRDA etc) with statutory powers. It could regul ate, 
address complaints, enforce, inspect etc. 
…..NABARD is seen more as a facilitator of the Micro Finance segment, rather 
than a regulator of the Micro Finance.  NABARD does not have the wherewithal 
to undertake and manage the regulation of this large an d dispersed sector. 

 
41 
 
However, if G overnment of India  and RBI decide to entrust the task, this would 
be first time any regulatory task is assigned to NABARD.    
  
 
 SIDBI:- 
 ….SIDBI, being resource provider to the MFIs, will restrict its role to play in 
 ensuring responsible financing and compliance with RBI guidelines by the MFIs.  
 SIDBI will continue its sector development role and associate with development 
 of SRO mechanism as enshrined in the Bill alongside taking up its responsible 
 financing agenda forward. 
 
 Representatives of the State Government of Andhra Pradesh: 
….from 2007 to 2010, when all these suicides and other things happened, there 
were only three NBFCs and 80 per cent of those loans were given by those three 
NBFCs. They were the NBFCs wh ich were under the control of the RBI .  They 
were registered with the RBI, and RBI could not control it. Now, we are talking 
about a regime where thousands of such MFIs are going to spring up. How a 
Central agency is going to control it? 
If at all any regulation has to come, this regulation is not sufficient and much 
more than this needs to be done…  
...if we see even this Act, this Act has become one side extreme of the total 
picture saying that MFIs are required, RBI will play a role, State level association 
will be there, but then most of the control will be from the RBI because it is a 
financial institution. The social capital, the empowerment, the income generation, 
everything has been left out of it. So, it does not become something like an 
organisation which has been working for a long time in the country. Keeping this 
mind, having a uniform structure and on the other side saying that in the next five 
years, we are going to have hundred per cent inclusiveness, every Indian in India 
will have a bank account and they will be eligible tomorrow to Rs.25,000. We 
should step in that mechanism also. Then again it has come out that its uniform 
structure, Government driven structure is not the solution to it. But what is the 
option? What has been produce d is a less than half -baked item which is 
supporting only one kind of a model and nothing more than that‖.  
84. Asked about the specific suggestion on the Bill, one of the representatives of the 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh submitted the following:- 
―…this national law will have to be substantially re -drafted because it basically 
sees MFI only as a banking activity where the Reserve Bank acts as a regulator 
and also manages the Micro Finance Development Fund where it envisages for 
national council which is fairly representative but a State council which is very 
miserly represented with hardly any role. Perhaps it could be given an advisory 
role or perhaps giving some monetary report. That will not work ……the State 
Government will have to be given a substantive role in the State council.  
Secondly, what is the role of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) in 
the State Rural Livelihoods Mission? Today, the Government of India is spending 

 
42 
 
Crores of Rupees building livelihoods mission in the State . So, the SRLMs will 
have to be a major stakeholder in this entire endeavour. They should, in fact, be 
the conveners of the State Council because they have a major role. They are 
doing the empowerment of these Self Help Groups. But no roles are being 
assigned to the empowerment aspect at all. What we see is that the MFIs are 
now being taken off from the interpretation of a money lender and said that they 
are the MFIs. Then they go unfettered. Their net worth is supposed to be Rs.5 
lakhs. In today‘s lending scenario, Rs.5 lakhs could be just ten people. With Rs.5 
lakhs net woth, anybody can come as a micro finance institution. So, that cap of 
the net owned funds should be increased substantially so that all fly by night 
operators do not just come in. Our inte ntion is to regulate the various types of 
aberrant people and fly by night operators. Here we say in clause 15(1)(c ), that  
the net owned funds should be Rs.5 lakhs. There are a whole lot of issues even 
in the present format of the Act. 
It gives recogniti on to self -regulatory organization. The self -regulation will come 
from the MFI sector. How can there be an Act where the self -regulation again is 
being given to the very same persons who perpetrate it? It is totally contradictory 
to the purpose of the Act and the roles being envisaged to them. So, we are 
allowing the MFIs to get away with what they want to do. Nothing will emerge and 
ultimately we will find that they will ultimately shield with this and get away even 
from the Money-Lenders Act which we are trying to do and trying to confront‖. 
85. To a specific query as to (i) whether the State Government of Andhra Pradesh is 
favour of this Bill being sent back to the Government of India for further consultation, 
redrafting and then presentation to Parliamen t; or (ii) in favour of improvements on the 
basis of suggestions that have been made before the Committee or pass the Bill with 
those improvements during the present Parliament, the Special Chief Secretary 
submitted the following:- 
―It must go back, Sir.  Tinkering will not help‖.  
Redressal of Grievances 
86. Clause 33 deals with redressal of Grievances against MFIs which¸  inter alia, 
provides that the Reserve Bank shall formulate a scheme for redressal of grievances of 
beneficiaries of micro finance services against MFIs and may entrust the functions of 
redressal of such grievance redressal to any ombudsman established under any other 
scheme framed by the Reserve Bank for clients of banks, with powers to issue 
directions to MFIs. 
 
 

 
43 
 
87. Ms. Smita Gupta, Expert in a written memorandum stated, inter alia, that:-  
 ―….Grievance redressal should be the task of the District Committees, who 
 should have the powers to receive complaints, take suo moto  cognizance and 
 issue speaking orders in a time bound manner…‖  
88. The Department of Financial Services in a written reply accepted the above 
suggestion for giving a greater role to District Micro Finance Committees at the stage of 
official amendments. 
89. AIDWA in a written memorandum, among other things, stated  that the 
seriousness of financial exploitation and the need for stiff criminal penalties has not 
been recognized.  In this regard, one of the representatives of AIDWA who deposed 
before the Committee submitted that:- 
 ―…in this Bill, there is only a Grievance Redressal Mechanism that is to be set up 
 the RBI and there is actually nothing, for instance, no criminal proceedings can 
 be initiated.  If you are abetting people to commit suicide by your own exploitative 
 practices, then we need some kind of puni tive measure to be included as part of 
 the draft‖. 
 
90. The Department of Financial Services while not accepting the suggestion stated 
that:- 
 ―It is felt that the envisaged provisions of the Bill are adequate and RBI should be 
 able to address these issu es by way of regulations.  Adequate penal provisions 
 are provided in the Bill for imprisonment and fine, which are quite severe.‖ 
 
91. Further, AIDWA in their written memorandum stated as under  on Clauses 34 -41 
dealing with Offences and Penalties:-  
 ―….Sections 34-41 have no specific provisions for initiating criminal proceedings 
against coercive and extortionist unfair practices currently employed by MFIs …. 
It is, therefore, suggested that these crucial sections should be rewritten and 
specific provisions for the initiation of criminal proceedings against extortion and 
coercive practices be inserted in the Bill‖ 
 
92. The Department of Financial Services in a written reply accepted the above 
mentioned suggestion for giving a greater role to District Micro  Finance Committees at 
the stage of official amendments. 
Accountability of MFIs to Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) and Urban Local 
Bodies:- 

 
44 
 
93. The 2 nd Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) in its 6 th Report on Local 
Governance (October, 2007) recommended, inter-alia, that Regulatory functions which 
can be performed by the Panchayats should be identified and devolved on a continuous 
basis. 
94. According to the information furnished in the website of State Government of 
Kerala, in the Kudumbashree Scheme , Community Development Societies works in 
tandem with the Local Self Governments, and are nodal agency for implementation of 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes(CSSs).  
95. In this regard, t he Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) , 
NABARD and SIDBI stated the following in a written submission:- 
―Department of Financial Services: 
The MFIs are not accountable to PRIs and Urban Local Bodies at present. 
However, the draft MF Bill envisages establishment of State Micro Finance Council 
in each State and a District Micro Finance Committee in each District to review the 
growth and development of micro finance activities in the district, monitor over -
indebtedness and methods of recovery used by the micro finance institutions. 
 
NABARD: Panchayats of elected bodies are basically conceived as implementers 
of development programmes and may not have adequate expertise in managing 
financial resources. Therefore, it is preferable they are not involved in such 
activities.   
 
SIDBI: ….The provisions of the Bill for M onitoring and Advisory Committees at 
National, State and District levels should address the issue of participatory 
governance in MFIs adequately‖. 
 
 
 
  

 
45 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 The Committee note that the micro finance sector serves  vulnerable 
sections of society, lacking bargaining power with low financial literacy and living 
in a social environment in which they can be easily exploited.  Therefore, any 
legislation intended to provide , promote and regulate micro finance should 
contain string of safeguards against this vulnerability.  The Committee having 
considered and heard the views of different stakeholders such as the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) ; State Government of Andhra 
Pradesh; Reserve Bank of India  (RBI); National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD); Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) ; All 
India Democratic Women Association (AIDWA) ; Micro Finance Institutions(MFIs) 
and Experts, observe that prima facie the Micro Finance Institutions 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012  has failed to address certain key issues 
which are germane to an ideal legislation on micro finance in the Country . The 
Committee, thus, desire that fundamental proposals in the Bill relating to margin; 
interest-rate cap; allowing collection of thrift by MFIs; enabling MFIs to render 
services other than credit like insurance, pension etc. , ceiling limit  on credit ; 
regulation etc.,  should be reviewed de-novo as highlighted in the succeeding 
paras:- 
(A). Objects and Reasons:- 
(i) The Bill begins with a glaring c ontradiction between the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons and Long -title of the Bill , as the former provides for 
promotion, development, regulation and orderly growth of MFIs, while the latter is 
confined to their development and regulation. 
 (ii) The insistence upon security or guarantee as per Clause 2(1)(h) of the 
Bill defeats the very objective of the Bill by keeping forever the poor households 
out of the micro finance ambit .  This provision also runs contrary to the  Ministry 
of Finance ’s own admission tha t one of the reasons hampering financial 
inclusion is the requirement of collateral by banks , which the poor borrowers 

 
46 
 
lack.  Further,  the Malegam Committee to study issues and conc erns in the MFI 
Sector also suggested that all loans to low-income borrowers should be without 
collateral; the Andhra Pradesh Micro Finance Institutions (Regulation of Money 
Lending) Act, 2011 bars MFIs from seeking any security for the loan; the RBI’s 
extant guidelines also clearly stipulate that loans should be provided to micro -
borrowers without collateral; and above all, as reported, MFIs are maintaining a 
99 per cent recovery rate with collateral-free loans.   
(iii) The constitution of Micro Finance Co uncils at National and  State 
levels and District  Micro Finance Committees  necessary for the promotion and 
development of MFIs , though specifically mentioned in the Statement of Objects 
and Reasons, are not mandatory as per provisions Clause 3, 8 and 10 
respectively of the Bill .  In the absence of provisions for mandatory constitution 
of these Councils / Committees , the uncertainty in achieving the objectives 
enshrined in the Bill would remain. 
(iv) T he terms “ financial inclusion”; “micro finance”; “poor hou seholds” 
are not defined in the Bill  indicating lack of focus on facilitating financial 
inclusion.     
(B). Financial Inclusion:- 
 (i)  Inclusive growth is the objective of t he Eleventh and Twelfth Five Year 
Plans.  However, the Ministry of Finance , the nodal Ministry for achieving 
financial inclusion, is implementing the financial inclusion agenda without a 
National Policy on Financial Inclusion.  Such National Policy was not formulated 
by the Ministry even after recommendation made in this regard by the Steering 
Committee of the Planning Commission way back in the year 2007.  Instead, the 
financial inclusion has been pursued over the decade in an ad-hoc and desultory 
manner such as preparation of annual Financial Inclusion Plans(FIPs); 
introduction of BC/BF model and frequent changes thereof; opening of bank 
accounts on target basis which are mostly dormant; various schemes / 
programmes at Central level such as Self Help Group -Bank Linkage Programme; 
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK); and at State level s uch as Kudumbashree Scheme 
in Kerala; Stree Nidhi Scheme in Andhra Pradesh etc.  The Ministry themselves 

 
47 
 
admitted that guidelines and regulations framed by the Government of India, RBI, 
IRDA and PFRDA for strengthening financial inclusion are yet to have a  
substantial impact on financial inclusion of vulnerable sections.  Moreover, the 
potential of vast network at the grass -root level of organisations such as Rural 
Cooperative Banks; Primary Agricultural Credit Societies(PACS) and Post Offices 
have not been  utilized fully.  In this situation, formulation of the National Policy 
on Financial Inclusion which includes micro finance is imperative on important 
grounds such as: (a) the financial sector lacking futuristic vision; (b) necessity of 
consolidation of ba nking system; (c) conflict over jurisdiction on enactment of 
Act on micro finance, etc.  Further, the N ational Policy on Financial Inclusion will 
be the guiding document for enactment of legislation on the subject.  This would 
ensure that there is no regul atory arbitrage and the concerns of State 
Governments and all stakeholders across the n ation are addressed and interests 
of common people are protected.  
 (ii) According to Dr. C.  Rangarajan Committee  on Financial Inclusion  
and RBI, financial inclusion of vulnerable groups is envisaged at an “affordable 
cost”.  But, the Bill lacks specific provisions which would p rovide and facilitate 
financial inclusion at an affordable cost to poor and weaker sections. 
  (iii) As observed by the Malegam Commit tee, NABARD and State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh,  MFIs may emerge as a threat and extinguish the 
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) .  T he share of the SHG -Bank Linkage Programme 
(SBLP) in terms of customers dropped from 78.27 per cent in 2008 to 70.72 per 
cent in 2010; the share of SBLP in incremental loans dropped from 64.96 per cent 
to 40.96 per cent and in actual terms is lower in 2010 than in 2008.   
 (iv) Further, the Committee note that the Ministry of Finance have 
themselves claimed that the rural banks and t he Primary Agricultural C redit 
Societies (PACS) functioning in around six lakh villages can be a useful catalyst 
in the financial inclusion campaign.  It is surprising that instead of tapping the 
potential of rural banks and PACS, Clause 2(1)(i) of the Bill exempts Cooperative 
Banks, Regional Rural Banks and PACs  from the definition of “Micro Finance 
Institutions”.  It would be appropriate to include all such institutions which are 

 
48 
 
present at the gr ass-roots level and have enormous potential for further 
strengthening and development, within the ambit of the Bill , making it more 
“inclusive”. 
(v) The Committee are unhappy to note that even after more than four 
decades of nationalization of banks, more than 40 per cent of population is still 
deprived of banking  facilities.  This reflects lack of commitment; and failure of 
regulation and policy making.  It would be appropriate that as a prerequisite to 
achieve sustainable and scalable financial inclusion, the Government should 
consider statutory right to open bank accounts.   
 
(C). Study / Evaluation on Micro Finance issues:- 
 The Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012, as 
compared to the Micro Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2007 
has proposed several changes such as: (i) scope and application extended to 
cover all MFIs in all forms; (ii) thrift mobilization  from public; (iii) shift in regulator 
from NABARD to RBI with powers to delegate to NABARD or any agency under 
the control of the Central Government as may be deemed fit; (iv) Ombudsman for 
redressal of Grievances; (v) extensive power of Regulator; (vi) Self -Regulatory 
Organisation (SRO) of MFIs for efficient conduct of the business of MFIs.   
However, no in-depth study / evaluation has been done by the Ministry on 
these aspects as also other important matters like impact on banks, SHGs; 
expenditure on Micro Finance Councils at National and State levels and District 
Micro Finance Committees and requirement of regulator; sector-related 
benchmarks; performance standards pertaining to methods of operation; source 
and cost of funding to MFIs (both from Banks and Equity Market); risk factors in 
pursuing financial inclusion as highlighted by the RBI such as money laundering; 
threat to financial stability;  and regulatory and supervisory structure to oversee 
the implementation of the provisions of the Bill.  
According to the first financial inclusion index, launched by CRISIL in 
June, 2013, Kerala is one of the top three states  in achievement of financial 
inclusion, where Kudumbashree Scheme is being implemented by the State 
Government and provides loan at the rates in the range of 11 -13 per cent.  

 
49 
 
Further, after the exit of MFIs, the State Government of Andhra Pradesh have 
been implementing the Stree Nidhi Scheme under which the interest is 14 per 
cent to the poor borrowers with operating cost of just one per cent.   Whereas, as 
per the RBI’s extant  guidelines, the rate of interest of MFIs may exceed 26 per 
cent. But, no study has been conducted to evaluate and replicate these existing 
successful Schemes in achieving financial inclusion.  The Bill is silent on the 
model legislation  on money lending  recommended by the RBI technical group 
which was also endorsed by the Dr.  Raghuram G.Rajan Committee  on Financial 
Sector Reforms.  
(D). Consultation with the State Governments and RBI:- 
The role of the State Governments is equally important in achieving 
financial inclusion and in implementing and monitoring the provisions of the Bill.  
However, only three State Governments namely, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and 
Tamil Nadu participated at the stage of formulation of the draft Bill.   The State 
Government of Andhra  Pradesh in a written memoranda submitted to the 
Standing Committee on Finance stated that the Bill seems to further the interests 
of MFIs, and  have sought wider consultation with the State Governments and 
other stakeholders.  The RBI which has been propos ed as the sole regulator for 
regulation of MFIs has also expressed reservations on several provisions of the 
Bill and suggested for further consultations. 
(E). Role of Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) 
The Committee note that the Second Administrative Reforms Commission 
in its 6 th Report submitted in 2007 recommended inter-alia that regulatory 
functions which can be performed by the Panchayats should be identified and 
devolved on a continuous basis. However, the Bill provides no representative 
space for elected local representatives in the Sta te Micro Finance Councils and 
District Micro Finance Committees proposed in the Bill.  The Committee note that 
the Kudumbashree scheme in Kerala is basically driven through concerted 
community action under the auspi ces of Local Self Governments. The 
Government should have considered involving t he Panchayat Raj 
Institutions(PRIs) in the functioning of MFIs. 

 
50 
 
 (F). Role of Banks 
The Standing Committee on Finance in their earlier reports have been 
reiterating the recommendation that the Government should open more brick and 
mortar branches to move towards financial inclusion.  The RBI also believes that 
only the banks have the ability to offer products required to bring in meaningful 
financial inclusion.  The need for the greater involvement of banks in provision of 
services to the low income group s has also been emphasized by the Malegam 
Committee and the Crisil’s first Report  (2013) on Financial Inclusion.  It is, 
therefore, felt that the Government should persist  with pursuing the bank -led 
model as prime vehicle for achieving financial inclusion. 
(G). Flow of funds to MFIs and Risks involved:- 
The Committee have been informed that according to Dr. Y.V. Reddy, 
former Governor, RBI, MFIs may pose a bigger risk to th e system than individual 
lenders. They also note that Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan Committee had also 
highlighted that the banking system is not insulated from risk because of its 
direct loan exposure to NBFCs.  The Ministry of Finance have also admitted that 
flow of equity funds to MFIs need to be examined .  The Committee are surprised 
to note that specific provisions have been incorporated in the Bill without 
properly analyzing the above risks and flow of equity funds to MFIs even though 
the Ministry have reservations on the same. 
  

 
51 
 
(H). Micro Finance Services and Affordability:- 
Micro-credit:- 
Clause 15(4) provides that every MFI shall give preference for providing 
micro credit facility to the “rural and urban poor” and “other disadvantaged 
sections of the people”.  It provides ample scope for MFIs to lend to other 
sections of Society instead of  focusing on the poor / weaker sections .  Further, 
Clause 2 (j) (A) provides for micro credit facilities involving such amount, not 
exceeding Rs.5 lakh for each individual and for such special purpose as may be 
specified by RBI.  As the credit ceiling prop osed is rather high considering the 
livelihood needs of the poor, there is a case for lowering the ceiling limit. 
Interest Rate:- 
The Committee note with alarm that the rate of interest on individual loans 
by NBFC-MFI may exceed 26 per cent as per RBI’s gu idelines.  The Committee 
have been informed that the high interest rates charged by few MFIs coupled with 
their “persuasive / coercive measures” was the main reason for Andhra Pradesh 
micro finance crisis.  Further, Clause 26 (2) of the Bill does not bind the RBI to 
specify mandatorily the margin for MFIs.  The Bill has, thus, left scope for an 
alarming situation wherein the interest rate may go well beyond 26 per cent 
envisaged in the RBI’s guidelines, thereby legitimizing and institutionalizing the 
usurious money lending practices.  It is imperative that f inancial services to the 
poor borrowers should be statutorily provided at an affordable cost.  In this 
regard, as suggested by the NABARD, it would be appropriate to examine the 
introduction of the concept of “Base Rates” for MFIs which is applicable to banks 
at present.   
 Collection of Thrift:- 
The Committee note that the Clause 2(1)(j)(B) allows MFIs to collect thrift. 
However, the Malegam Committee, Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan Committee and Dr. C. 
Rangarajan Committee and the State Government of Andhra Pradesh  are all 
unanimously against the collection of thrift by MFIs.  The RBI, the regulator of 
MFIs as proposed in the Bill, have also rejected the proposal on the grounds that 
feature wise, deposits and thri ft are essentially the same; and according to the 
policy of the RBI and also in line with international practice, only banks be 

 
52 
 
permitted to accept public deposits.  But, the Ministry of Finance have not 
accepted this suggestion and have contended that the  provision of thrift is only 
an enabling provision and that only those MFIs would get to collect thrift which 
fulfill the regulations of RBI.   
Another lacunae in the Bill relates to Clause 24(1) wherein, the RBI shall 
regulate, promote, and ensure orderly  growth of the MFIs, whereas Clause 49(1) 
provides that the Central Government may make rules including the manner of 
providing micro finance services under clause (j) of section 2 i.e. related to 
collection of thrift.  The Committee are concerned that the Bill, thus, leaves ample 
scope for overlap or conflict of jurisdiction between the Central Government and 
the Regulator.  It would have been appropriate if the Government aligned the 
provision relating to collection of thrift by MFIs in line with RBI’s po licy and 
international practice. 
 Pension and Insurance Services:- 
 The Committee note that Clause 2(1)(j) (C) allows the MFIs to provide 
pension and insurance services . This has invited objections from Insurance 
Development and Regulatory Authority (IRDA) which has stated that this 
provision would disturb the regulatory environment .  However, both the 
regulators namely, IRDA and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority (PFRDA) have suggested that if at all pension and insurance are 
defined as “micro finance services” under the Bill, their regulation should be left 
to the respective regulators which should be e xpressly stated in the Bill .  The 
Ministry of Finance have not accepted the s uggestion.  Further, the Committee 
note that some stakeholders have also expressed apprehension on the very 
merits of including these services within the ambit of MFIs.  Therefore, the 
Ministry should address these concerns appropria tely and reformulate their 
proposals.  
  

 
53 
 
(I). Lessons learnt from Micro Finance Crisis in Andhra Pradesh:- 
 The Committee have been informed that the main cause of large number of 
suicide of micro finance borrowers in Andhra Pradesh in 2010 is multiple cre dit 
lending, over -indebtedness, multiple memberships and coercive measures 
adopted by the MFIs.  When pointed out that the Bill is silent on measures to deal 
with these vital issues, the Ministry have stated that these are to be included at 
regulation making stage.  The Committee take a serious view that the Ministry 
have not learnt the right lesson from the micro finance crisis in Andhra Pradesh.   
The Committee  are unhappy to note that yet another pro vision in the Bill is 
devoid of safeguards on vital issues.  It has been suggested by some 
stakeholders that specific provisions to initiate criminal proceedings need to be 
incorporated in the Bill.  But, the Ministry have not accepted the same.  Adequate 
measures should thus be provided in the Bill itself, instead of resorting to 
regulation at later stage, to squarely deal with such core issues in micro finance.  
(J). Regulation of MFIs:- 
 The Committee note that both banks and incorporated MFIs are regula ted 
and supervised by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  The unincorporated MFIs , 
which are not regulated by the RBI , account for only an estimated 8% of the 
outstanding micro finance loan portfolio. Since the regulation mechanism in 
respect of different en tities engaged in micro finance such as body corporate, 
societies, trusts etc. are presently diffused, the Central Government through the 
present Bill seeks to place all such entities dealing with micro finance under the 
purview of RBI with the power to de legate to NABARD or other agencies.  It has 
been suggested that given the small number of entities likely to be brought within 
the ambit of such law, the Union Government may reconsider the present Bill; 
and  instead allow State Governments to bring those entities, which do not fall in 
the ambit of RBI regulation or State Cooperative laws , under the ambit of State 
Money-lending laws.  
    
  

 
54 
 
 In this regard, the Committee received the following divergent views / 
suggestions from various stakeholders:-  
(i) RBI have stated that in case the Government entrust s the regulation of 
MFIs  with the RBI, they needs to be consulted further. They have also 
suggested that while inter -state MFIs should be incorporated and placed 
under them; the non-corporatized  entities be left to the State 
Governments, for which a model law can be passed by the Central 
Government;  
(ii) Further, the Governor, RBI during evidence before the Committee 
submitted that Clause 44 (1) of the Bill, which mandates the Central 
Government to issue  directions to the RBI on the matters of MFIs,  is an 
unusual provision and potentially undermines the role of the regulator;  
(iii) NABARD and SIDBI have stated that they should be viewed as 
facilitators rather than regulators of the MF Is.  NABARD has fur ther stated 
that it does not have t he wherewithal to undertake and manage the 
regulation of this large and dispersed sector; and 
(iv) State Government of Andhra Pradesh has vehemently opposed the Bill 
in its present form, as in their view, MFIs, as per Hig h Court of Kerala 
judgment ( WA 540/2007 dated 18 th November, 2009 ), are money lenders 
who are primarily involved in lending and recovering of money, and 
respective State Government machinery has ground level information on 
the lending and recovery practices of the MFIs .  According to them,  the 
draft should have mandated the MFIs to operate within the ambit of the 
money lending regulation  and that the RBI as well as the proposed Self -
Regulatory Organisations (SROs) in the past failed to prevent the 2006 and 
2010 micro finance crises in Andhra Pradesh. 
  
  

 
55 
 
 Considering the onerous duties RBI has to perform as the Central Bank of 
the Country, the Committee are surprised that the Bill seeks to burden them 
further by entrusting the regulation and supervision of the entire micro finance 
sector to the RBI.   Further, the proposal for delegation of powers by RBI to an 
agency, which is not yet identified by the Government and its structure and 
capacity to oversee the functioning of MFIs, still uncertain, it may pose systemic 
risks to micro finance sector as such.  It  is also observed that the RBI is not yet 
empowered to recognize SROs as per the RBI Act, 1934.  Even the proposed bill 
is silent on bringing consequential amendments to the RBI Act, 1934.  
In the absence of concurrence of the proposed regulator namely, RB I and 
the reluctance of NABARD which is proposed to be the delegatee, it is apparent 
that the Ministry have not done adequate groundwork before bringing these 
proposals in the Bill.  The Committee would expect the Ministry to hold extensive 
consultations with all stakeholders including the regulator(s) before formulating 
their revised proposals.   
The Committee are thus inclined to suggest constitution of a unified and 
independent regulator for the entire micro finance sector as a whole, which may 
be termed  as the Micro Finance and Development Regulatory Council (MFDRC) 
with representatives from all agencies and institutions concerned like, RBI, 
NABARD and SIDBI and the nominees from Central Government and MFIs.  The 
proposed body may also have both State an d District tiers which may include the 
local elected representatives and the MFIs apart from nominees of the State 
Government.  Such a unified body with an integral mechanism will be in a 
position to address the concerns of the State Governments by in volving them in 
its processes and procedures.  
  
  

 
56 
 
 The Committee desire that the RBI, NABARD and SIDBI with their 
experience and expertise in the micro finance sector should play an active role in 
setting up the proposed regulatory body.  The proposed body may  also evolve 
procedures for setting up of SROs under its ambit; and to facilitate the 
development and growth of different micro finance models such as Self Help 
Group- Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP); Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK); State 
subsidy models like Ku dumbashree Scheme in Kerala; Stree Nidhi in Andhra 
Pradesh  as well as corporate models with requisite regulation. 
K. Conclusion:  
 In view of the issues and concerns highlighted above and, particularly 
considering the contradictory views on the Bill that have emerged between the 
Central Government on the one hand and findings of various Committees, views 
of State Government, and regulators namely, RBI, PFRDA, IRDA and financial 
institutions like NABARD on the other, the Committee find that the Bill is  rather 
sketchy with inadequate groundwork and lacking in consensus, requiring wider 
consultations with stakeholders and deeper study on vital issues.  The 
Committee are, therefore, constrained to convey their unacceptability of the Micro 
Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012 in its present form.  
The Committee would, thus, urge the Government to have wider consultations 
with the State Governments and stakeholders and arrive at a consensus; and  
reconsider / review the proposals conta ined in the Bill in all its ramifications and 
bring forth a fresh legislation before Parliament duly addressing the concerns 
expressed by the Committee. 
 
New Delhi;                 YASHWANT SINHA, 
11 February,2014                      Chairman, 
22 Magha, 1935 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
  

 
57 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
LIST OF INSTITUTIONS / ASSOCIATIONS / EXPERTS  
SUBMITTED MEMORANDA ON THE MICRO FINANCE  
INSTITUTIONS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) BILL, 2012 
 
1. Ministry of Women & Child Development  
2. Ministry of Rural Development 
3. Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region 
4. Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Department of 
Posts) 
5. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
6. State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
7. Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
8. Centre for Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL) 
9. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) 
10. Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
11 National Housing Bank (NHB) 
12. Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) 
13. Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) 
14. Indian Banks Association (IBA) 
15. All India Democratic Women‘s Association (AIDWA) 
16. Sa-Dhan Foundation 
17. Micro Finance Institutions Network (MFIN) 
18. SKS Micro Finance Ltd. 
19. International Network of Alternative Financial Institutions- India (INAFI) 
20. SAHULAT Microfinance Society 
21. AMMFO Charitable Society 
22. Micro-Credit Ratings International Limited (M-CRIL) 
23. PRS Legislative Research 
24. Nav Bharat Jagriti Kendra 

 
58 
 
 INDIVIDUALS / EXPERTS 
25. Shri Y.H. Malegam, Expert, Mumbai 
26. Prof. Ramesh S. Arunachalam, Global Expert on Micro Finance, Chennai 
27. Dr. Tara S. Nair, Associate Professor, Gujarat Institute of Development 
Research (GIDR), Ahmedabad  
28. Ms. Smita Gupta, Senior Visiting Fellow, Institute for Human 
Development, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi 
29. Dr. R. Ramakumar, Associate Professor, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, 
Mumbai 
30. Ms. Susan Thomas, Assistant Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of 
Development Research (IGIDR), Mumbai` 
31. Dr. M.S. Sriram Visiting Faculty, Indian Institute of Management, 
Bangalore 
 
 
 
  

 
59 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th December, 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary  
 

 
60 
 
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
   WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
  
1. Shri D.K. Mittal, Secretary 
2.  Shri Anurag Jain, Joint Secretary 
3.  Dr. Alok Pande, Director 
 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
 
1.  Shri P.K. Saha, Chief General Manager 
2.   Shri A.R. Samal, General Manager 
 
 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)  
 
      Shri B.R. Suran, Chief General Manager 
 
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) 
 
    Shri M.R. Umarji, Chief Legal Advisor 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman requested the Members to suggest the name(s) of 
stakeholders/experts to be called for evidence in connection with the examination of the 
‗Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012‘.  Then the Committee 
took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) on the ‗Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012‘.  The 
major issues that came up during the discussion included the legislative ju risdiction of 
Parliament to enact law on micro lending and its applicability in States; views of the State 
Governments; State and Central regulatory jurisidictions; position of charitable institutions 
offering micro finance services; collection of thrift b y MFIs; feasibility study; role of NABARD 
and RBI; source of capital of MFIs; cap on interest rate, etc.   
3. The Chairman directed the representatives of the Minsitry of Finance (Department of 
Financial services) to furnish replies to the points raised by  the Members during the 
discussion within a week‘s time. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 

 
61 
 
Part II 
(1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs.) 
   WITNESSES 
Xxx xxx xxx xxx 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
     The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
62 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 04th October, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1400 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh  
11.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
13.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
15.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
16.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
 
 
 
WITNESSES 

 
63 
 
(i)        Sa-Dhan Foundation  
 
1. Ms. Vijaylaxmi Das, Founding Member Sa -Dhan and               
Managing Director, Ananya Finance for Inclusive Growth 
2. Ms. Achla Savyasaachi, Vice President & Policy Team Leader 
(ii) SKS Micro Finance Ltd.  
 
1. Mr. M.R. Rao, Managing Director and CEO 
2. Mr. S. Dilli Raj, CFO 
3. Mr. J.S. Sai, Executive Vice President – Public Affairs 
 
(iii) Micro-finance Institutions Network (MFIN) 
 
1. Shri Samit Ghosh, President, MFIN & Founder & CEO, Ujjivan 
Financial Services Ltd. 
2. Shri Alok Prasad, CEO 
  
(iv) International Network of Alternative Financial Institutions (INAFI) 
  
1. Mr. M. Kalyanasundram, Chief Executive 
2. Mrs. Richa Audichya, Director INAFI India Board 
              
(v) Micro Credit Ratings International Limited (MCRIL) 
 
Mr. Sanjay Sinha, CEO 
 
(vi) Access Development Services 
 
1. Mr. Vipin Sharma, CEO 
  2. Ms. Radhika Agashe, Executive Director 
 
(vii)     All India Democratic Women‘s Association (AIDWA) 
1. Ms. T.N. Seema, MP, Rajya Sabha 
2. Ms. Kiran Moghe, Vice President 
3. Ms. Tapasi Praharaj, Member 
 
(viii)     Dr. R. Ramakumar, Associate Professor, Tata Institute of Social Sciences 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of (i) Sa-Dhan Foundation, 
(ii) SKS Micro Finance Ltd., (iii) Micro -finance Institutions Network (MFIN), (iv) International 

 
64 
 
Network of Alternative Financial Institutions (INAFI), (v) Micro Credit Ratings International 
Limited (MCRIL), (vi) Access Development Services, (vii) All India Democratic Women‘s 
Association (AIDWA) and expert Dr. R. Ramakumar, Associate Professor, Tata Institute of 
Social Sciences on the Micro Finance Institutions (Developme nt and Regulation) Bill, 2012.  
The major issues discussed during the sitting broadly related to provisions of the Bill, mainly 
the form of Micro Finance Institution (MFI); Micro Finance Services; Micro Credit Facilities; 
margin and interest rates; credit bureau; district micro finance committee; credit rating of 
MFIs; micro finance stability funds; offences and penalties; and Malegam Committee report 
on MFIs sector; growth of MFIs and its possible impact on financial inclusion/Self -Help 
Groups (SHGs); equity investment in MFIs; development and regulation of MFIs; role of State 
governments in regulation of MFIs; Kudumbshree scheme in Kerala vs MFIs; banks lending 
to MFIs and SHGs; MFIs and linkage with entrepreneurship, etc.  The Chairman directed all 
the representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members during the 
discussion within a period of ten days.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
65 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 25th October, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Dr. Baliram   
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh  
11.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
12.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
13.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
15.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
18.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
 
 
 

 
66 
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
 
1.    Dr. Rajan G. Raghuram, Governor 
2.   Shri Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor 
3.    Shri N S Vishwanathan, Principal Chief General Manager 
4.    Shri G S Hegde, Principal Legal Advisor 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Reserve Bank of 
India on the Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012.  The 
major issues discussed broadly related to definition of financial inclusion; banking system 
and financial inclusion; alternate model to MFIs; futurtistic vision on financial sector; the 
difference between ―thrift‖ and ―deposits‖; micro -credit and inte rest rate of Micro Finance 
Institutions (MFIs) and Self -Help Groups (SHGs);  micro finance services; Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) scheme and relevance of the development of MFIs; regulation of NBFC -
MFIs and Non-NBFC-MFIs; Flow of funds into MFIs; State an d District level Micro Finance 
Councils; etc. 
 
Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part II 
(1415 hrs. to 1530 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) 
 
1. Smt. Snehlata Shrivastava, Additional Secretary (Department of Financial 
Services) and Chairperson, NABARD 
 
2. Shri P.V.S. Suryakumar, Chief General Manager 
 
 

 
67 
 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI)  
 
1. Shri Sushil Muhnot, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri N.K. Maini, Deputy Managing Director 
3. Shri P.K. Saha, Chief General Manager 
4. Shri A.K. Kapur, Chief General Manager, 
5. Shri A.R. Samal, General Manager 
 
 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) and Small Industries Development Bank 
of India (SIDBI) on the Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 
2012.  The major issues, among other things, discussed were SHG -Bank linkage 
programme and micro finance; role of NABARD and SIDBI in promoting financial 
inclusion; functioning of district level committee to achieve financial inclusion; concepts of 
reasonable lending, client protection and promotion of transparency; micro finance 
services at an affordable cost to poor and disadvantaged section of the society; collection 
of thrift; funding to MFIs by NABARD and SIDBI and profit margin and its impact on 
SHGs; various models to achieve financial inclusion and their viability; regulation of 
NBFC-MFIs and Non -NBFC-MFIs; etc.  The Chairman directed the representatives  to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members.  
     
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
68 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th November, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
8.  Adv. A. Sampath 
9. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
13.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
69 
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh 
 
1.    Shri S.P. Tucker, Special Chief Secretary 
2.    Shri. J. Raymond Peter, Principal Secretary, PR&RD Department 
3.    Shri B. Rajasekhar, Chief Executive Officer, Society for Elimination of Rural    
       Poverty 
4.    Shri G.V.S. Reddy, Managing Director, Stree Nidhi, a Govt. subsidiary to    
       lend loans to Women Self-Help Groups in the State. 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh on the Micro Finance I nstitutions (Development and 
Regulation) Bill, 2012.  The Special Secretary, Government of Andhra Pradesh 
highlighted the views of the Government of Andhra Pradesh on the Bill and the issues 
related to.  The major issues, among other things, discussed were  relevance of Micro 
Finance Institutions (MFIs) when SHG -Bank linkage programme and various flagship 
programmes such as National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) are already in 
implementation; thrift and deposit; borrowing cost and interest rate of MFIs; 
transformation of NGO -MFIs into profit -MFIs; role of State Micro Finance Council 
proposed in the Bill; features of the Andhra Pradesh MFIs (Regulation of Money -
lending) Act, 2011; need for having a uniform law for regulation of MFIs; past 
experience over sel f-regulation mechanism of MFIs;       social responsibility of the 
States to achieve inclusive growth envisaged in 11 th and 12 th Five Year Plans;  
consultation with the State Governments and other stakeholders on the Bill etc.  The 
Chairman directed the representatives  to furnish written replies to the points raised by 
the Members within a week.  

 
70 
 
     
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
Part II 
(1240 hrs. to 1320 hrs.) 
 WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
1. Shri Rajiv Takru, Secretary 
2. Smt. Snehlata Shrivastava, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar, Joint Secretary  
 
 
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the Micro Finance Institutions 
(Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012.  The major issues, among other things, 
discussed were thrift and deposit; interest rate of MFIs and SHGs; skill development 
and entrepreneurship encouragement by MFIs; grievance redressal mechanism; 
regulation of MFIs; need for NBFC -MFIs; performance of public and private se ctor 
banks in achieving financial inclusion etc.  The Chairman directed the representatives  to 
furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members within a week.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 

 
71 
 
 
Part III 
 
(1320 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
 
4.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
5.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
6.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
           The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
72 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 31th January, 2014 from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.       Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.       Adv. A. Sampath 
5.       Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
6.       Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
7.       Dr. M. Thambi durai 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
8.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
9.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
10.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
11.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:- 
 
(i) xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 
 
(ii) xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 
 
(iii)  The Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012. 

 
73 
 
3. As some Members sought more time to consider and formulate their views on the 
above draft reports, the Committee decided to postpone the adoption of the draft reports to 
their next sitting. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
74 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th  February, 2014 from 1520 hrs to 1615 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
1.     Dr. Baliram 
2.     Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
3.     Shri Nishikant Dubey  
4.     Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
5. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
6. Shri Prem Das Rai  
7. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu  
8. Adv. A. Sampath  
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
10. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
12. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
13. Shri Piyush Goyal 
14. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
16. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
2.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
3.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
    2.  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX   
    3. The Committee thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 

 
75 
 
(i) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  
(ii)  The Micro Finance Institutions (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2012. 
4. The Committee adopted the above draft Reports without any 
modifications/amendments and authorised the Chairman to present the same to 
Parliament.   
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 