1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
       THE COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
83 


2 
 
EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
THE COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 February, 2014 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS  
                                                                                                            Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee………………………………….   (iii) 
 
Introduction……………………………………………………….   (v) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
     Page              
Nos. 
1. Introductory  1 
 
2. General                               
  
(i)    Framing of Regulations  
(ii) The National Competition Policy 
(iii) Filling up of vacancies in Competition Commission of    
India  
 
3 
3 
4 
3. Clause 2: Amendment of Section 2(y) (Definition of 
‗Turnover‘) 
5 
4. Clause3: Amendment of Section 3 (Anti -competitive 
agreements)        
7 
5. Clause 4: Amendment of Section 4 (Abuse of Dominant 
Position) 
11 
6. Clause 5: Amendment of Section 5 (Definition of Group)                   17 
7. Clause 6: Insertion of new Section 5A (Power to specify  
different value of assets and turnover) 
20 
8. Clause 7: Amendment of Section 9 (Insertion of sub -section 
1A to include Chairperson, CCI in the selection Committee 
for selection of members) 
26 
9. Clause(s) 9, 10 & 11: Amendment of Section 21(Reference 
by statutory authority), Section 21A (Reference by CCI) and 
Section 27 ( Orders by Commission after inquiry into 
29 

4 
 
agreements or abuse of dominant position) 
10. Clause 11: Amendment of Section 26  (Empowerment of  
the CCI to decide a matter where  the CCI does not agree 
with  Director-General‘s investigation)  
34 
11. Clause 12: Amendment of Section 27 (Providing an 
opportunity to party concerned, of being heard by the 
Commission before imposing penalty)  
39 
12. Clause 13: Amendment of Section 31 (reduction in overall 
time limit of deciding a case related to combinations to 180 
days instead of existing 210 days)  
43 
13. Clause 14: Amendment of Section 41: Substitution of Sub -
section (3) [Empowerment of Chairperson, CCI to approve 
search and seizure] 
47 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of sittings of the Committee  held on 1 February, 2013, 19 July, 2013, 2 
August, 2013, 31 January, 2014 and 11 February, 2014.  
 
II.  The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012. 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -   Additional Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   - Deputy Secretary 
                                                           
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Eighty -third Report on the  Competition (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012. 
2. The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012 introduced in Lok Sabha on 10 
December, 2012, was referred to the Committee on 21 December, 2012 for examination 
and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.    
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provis ions of the Bill from 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Competition Commission of India (CCI). 
4. Written views/memoranda were received from Luthra & Luthra (Law Offices), 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII), Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), 
Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS) International and Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant 
& Former Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and first Member & Acting Chairman 
of CCI. 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and CCI briefed the 
Committee at their sitting held on 1 February, 2013.  
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 19 July, 2013, heard the views of Shri 
Vinod Dhall, Consultant.  The Committee, at their sitting held on 2 August, 2013, heard 
the views of representatives of CII, ASSOCHAM & CUTS International.  
7. The Committee discussed the draft Report at their sitting(s) held on 31 January, 
2014 and 11 February, 2014 and adopted the same at their  sitting held on 11 February, 
2014. 
 
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and CCI for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
requisite material and information which were desired in connection with the 
examination of the Bill.      

7 
 
9. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the representatives of   CII, 
ASSOCHAM, CUTS International and Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant for appearing before 
the Committee and placing before them t heir considered views on the provisions of the 
Bill. 
10. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to Luthra & Luthra (Law 
Offices) & FICCI for placing before them their considered views on the provisions of the 
Bill in the form of memoranda. 
11. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                                    YASHWANT SINHA, 
11 February, 2014                                                                    Chairman, 
22 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Finance.  

8 
 
 
REPORT 
Introductory 
1. The Competition Act , 2002 was enacted to provide for establishment of a 
Commission to prevent practices having adverse effect on Competition, to promote and 
sustain Competition in markets, to protect the interest of consumers and to ensure 
freedom of trade carried on by other participant s and markets, in India.  It was 
subsequently amended in 2007 and 2009. 
2. The Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established in 2003; it became 
fully functional in 2009 after certain amendments through the Competition (Amendment) 
Act, 2007.  The Commission presently consists of the Chairperson and six Members.  In 
pursuance of the discussion in the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance on 
the working of the Commission in May 2011 ,  the Government constituted a  High Level 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Dhanendra Kumar (Former Chairman of 
CCI).  Th e terms of reference of the said Committee inter-alia included recommending 
changes required in the Competition Act for fine tuning it. 
3. The High Level Committee in its report submitted in February, 2012 
recommended changes in the Competition Act, 2002.  The amendments suggested 
were considered by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in consultation with CCI keeping in 
mind the following principles:- 
(i) Exceptions in law should be avoided as far as possible; 
(ii) The proposed amendments should be in coherence with t he proposed 
National Competition Policy (which is under active consideration); 
(iii) Competition Law should be dynamic and based on the realities of 
economic development and changes; and  
(iv) Wherever certain aspects could be taken care of by rules or regulations, 
these need not form part of legislation itself. 
4. Accordingly, the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was prepared  and  
referred to a Group of Ministers under the Chairmanship of Minster of Finance and 
comprising of Minister of Communications & I nformation Technology, Minister of Law & 

9 
 
Justice and Minister of Corporate Affairs.  As per the approval of the Group of Ministers, 
revised Competition (Amendment) Bill was submitted to the Cabi net for its approval in 
October, 2012. 
 
5.     The Competition (Amendme nt) Bill, 2012 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 10 
December, 2012. The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance by 
Hon‘ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21 December, 2012 for detailed examination and report 
thereon. 
6. As per the ‗Statement of  Objects and Reasons‘, the Competition (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012, inter alia, provides the following, namely:— 
―(a)  to insert a new sub -clause (g) in clause ( i) of sub -section (5) of section 3 
so as to provide that anti -competitive agreements  shall not restrict the 
matters r egarding the protection of intellectual property rights for the 
purposes of clause (i) of subsection (5) of the said section; 
 
(b)  to amend section 4 of the Act relating to abuse of dominant position so as 
to provide that no enterprise or group either jointly or singly shall abuse its 
dominant position; 
 
(c)  to amend sub-clause (i) of clause (b) in the Explanation to section 5 so as 
to increase the percentage of voting r ights from twenty -six per cent or 
more to fifty  per cent or more for the purp ose of regulation of 
combinations; 
 
(d)  to insert a new section 5A in the Act so as to confer power upon the 
Central Government to specify, in consultation with the Commission, 
different value of assets  and turnover for any class of enterprises for the 
purpose of section 5 of the Act; 
 
(e)  the reference of issues by the Statutory Authority to the Commission and 
the Commission to the Statutory Authority are made mandatory; 
 
(f)  to empower the Commission to decide the matter after hearing the 
concerned parties in cases where the Commission may not agree with 
Director General‘s investigation; 
 
(g)  to make provision that no penalty shall be imposed by the Commission for 
contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 without giving an 
opportunity of being heard to the concerned person; 
 
(h)  to amend sub -section (11) of section 31 so as to reduce the period from 
two hundred and ten days to one hundred and eighty days within which 

10 
 
the Commission has to pass an order or issue direction on combinations  
and also to amend subsection  (12) of the said section so as to increase 
the period from ninety working days  to one hundred and eighty days to 
bring the time period on par with  sub-section (11); 
 
(i)  to amend section 51 of the Act so as to substitute the  expression ‗‗the 
Secretary‘‘ in place of the ‗‗the Registrar‘‘ in clause (a) of     sub-section (2) 
of the said section as there is no post of the Registrar in the Commission‖. 
 
7. The Committee note that the Competition Act, which was enacted in 2002 
and notified in January, 2003 enables the Ministry/CCI to frame Regulations. The 
Committee find that even after the passage of more than 11 years, Regulations 
have not yet been framed till now in respect of a number of provisions of the Act. 
The Committee would urge upon the Ministry to frame these Regulations without 
further delay.  
 
The National Competition Policy: 
 
8. The Committee have been informed that the National Competition Policy to 
promote Competition Culture amongst all the stakeholders and to prom ote 
transparency, is under consideration. On being asked as to how this policy is going to 
have impact on the Competition Act or the amendments now proposed, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in their written reply stated that :- ―there is no incompatibilit y between 
the proposed policy and the provisions of the Competition Act or amendments 
thereunder which are now under consideration.  The proposed national policy 
essentially deals with objects like Competition impact assessment and appraisal of 
competitiveness within existing Departmental regulations which do not find place in the 
legislation‖. 
 
9. The Committee note that the need for National Competition Policy was first 
highlighted in the 11 th Five Year Plan Policy Document.  The Committee also note 
that Section 49 of the Competition Act also envisages a policy on competition. 
The draft National Competition Policy was submitted by a Committee constituted 
for the purpose  initially in July, 2011 and  finally in February, 2012. Thereafter, 
the draft was give n a final shape in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and is 
presently under reference to Committee of Secretaries constituted under the 

11 
 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. The Committee would expect that the 
Government would finalise the National Competition Policy expeditiously keeping 
in view both the general and specific observations/recommendations of the 
Committee on the subject. 
 
Filling up of vacancies in CCI 
 
10. On being asked about manpower and steps taken/proposed to ensure adequate 
staffing for C CI in the discharge of its duties , the Ministry in their post evidence reply 
have stated as under: 
 
―As against the sanctioned posts of 156 and 41 respectively for the Commission 
(CCI) and Office of Director General, the present strength is 84 and 19 
respectively.  As per the Recruitment Rules, all the posts in Office of the Director 
General are to be filled in by deputation while the posts in the Commission are to 
be filled in by a combination of methods viz., deputation, direct recruitment and 
promotion. During the last three years, three rounds of direct recruitment were 
carried out.  Besides, adequate efforts were also made to fill up the posts 
earmarked for deputation.  In addition to placing the advertisements in leading 
newspapers, various cadre contr olling authorities have also been requested to 
circulate the posts amongst the eligible candidates. In spite of repeated attempts 
by the Commission to fill up the vacant posts, both in the Office of Commission 
and in O/o Director General, candidates posses sing requisite qualification and 
experience could not be found and the Commission is working with 50 per cent of 
the sanctioned strength.  However, it has been ensured that the shortage of 
manpower does not adversely affect the efficiency of the Commission  by making 
the existing manpower to put extra efforts in an arduous manner and by 
engaging about 30 Experts/Professionals on short term basis (upto three years) 
to assist the Commission‖. 
 
11. The Committee note that various posts are lying vacant for more  than three 
years both in the office of CCI and in the office of Director -General.  The 
Committee in their earlier reports relating to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
have time and again expressed concern over persistent shortage of manpower in 
the CCI a nd DG office and its adverse impact on their functioning. The primary 
reason for vacancies, as stated by the Ministry is non -availability of the 
candidates possessing requisite qualifications and experience. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Governme nt to undertake comprehensive review of 
recruitment rules for smooth functioning of the Commission.  Efforts should be 

12 
 
made to recruit/engage domain experts/professionals on contractual basis with a 
view to professionalizing the working of the Commission and its offices. 
  
12. The Committee received written views/suggestions of experts and organizations    
viz Luthra & Luthra ( Law Offices ), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Associated Cha mbers of 
Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS) 
International and Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant & Former Secretary, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and first Member & Acting Chairman of CCI . After having 
considered the views o f the representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
Competition Commission of India ( CCI), organisations and experts , on  the 
various provisions contai ned in the Bill, the Committee are of the view  that 
certain provisions of the Bill may be recast to serve the intended objectives better 
as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs . The Committee desire that  
consequential changes may be appropriately incorporated in the Bill/Act. 
  
  
Clause 2: Amendment of Section 2(y) (Definition of „Turnover‟)  
 
13.  Section 2(y) of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
―Turnover‖ includes value of sale of goods or services. 
14.  The Bill proposes to amend Section 2 to redefine ―Turnover‖ as under: 
―after the words ‗goods or services‘, the words ‗excluding the taxes, if any, 
levied on sale of such goods or provision of services‘ shall be substituted‖. 
 
15. The justification for the proposed amendment, as furnished by the Ministry in 
their Background note, is as under: 
―Existing definition of turnover is ambiguou s on  the inclusion or exclusion of 
indirect taxes. This needs to be cla rified since turnover has to be precisely 
determined for the purposes of : - (i) Levy of penalty; (ii) Calculating threshold for 
notifying the Combination under Section 6 (2) of the Act.‖ 
 
  
16. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, Lu thra & Luthra ( Law 
Offices) have, among other things, stated: 
―…..The exclusion of indirect taxes in calculating turnover is in tune with  
international practice. The combination Regulations  as framed by the CCI 
provides that these indirect tax components need not be taken into account.  

13 
 
However, the law also needs to provide that the ‗Sales rebates‘, ‗grant‘ and/or 
‗subsidy‘, if any from State, should also be not reckoned for calculating ‗turnover‘. 
 
The Bill also proposes to insert Section 5A  that allows the Central Government, 
in consultation with the CCI, to specify different turnover for any class or classes 
of enterprises. There might be room to consider proposing a set of guidelines to 
calculate turnover as has been done in the European Commission (EC).‖ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. On this issue, Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant, in his written submission furnished to 
the Committee, has inter alia also suggested:  
―…..The amendment should make it obligatory f or the CCI to formulate 
regulations setting out operational guidelines for this purpose.‖ 
 
18. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs  in their written replies responded to the 
suggestion as follows:  
―Further amendment in the definition of the term ‗turnover‘ t o exclude ‗sales 
rebates‘, ‗grants‘, ‗subsidies‘ etc. ….. is not desirable as indirect taxes cannot be 
equated with such largesses. Tax is a levy which is chargeable by operation of 
law. The proposal to draft guidelines on pattern of European Commission(EC ) for 
calculating turnover will be considered by the CCI through regulations. 
……Section 64 of the Act already enables the CCI to frame necessary 
regulations, if so deemed fit by the CCI. Therefore, suggestion to create a 
separate regime in the Act making m andatory framing of regulations by the CCI 
for computation of turnover is not desirable…….‖. 
 
19. The CCI (Procedure in regard to the transaction of business relating to 
combinations) Regulations, 2011 (‗Combination Regulations‘) already contain a 
provision to aid in the calculation of turnover which state s that ‗indirect taxes‘ must be 
excluded in the computation of turnover. 
20. Further, t urnover as defined under Article 5  of the Merger Regulation of 
European Commission (EC) means ‗the amounts derived by the undertakings 
concerned in the preceding financial year from the sale of products and the provision of 
services falling within the undertakings ordinary activities after deduction of sales 
rebates and of value added tax and other taxes directly related to turnover‘. 
21. The Committee note that since the existing definition of the term “turnover” 
is stated to be unclear on inclusion or exclusion of indirect taxes , an amendment 
has been proposed to exclude the taxes levied on sale of goods and provision of  

14 
 
services. It has been submitted before the Committee by some stakeholders that 
the proposed  definition, however,  fails to meet the international norms of 
turnover, for example, Article 5 of the M erger Regulation of European 
Commission specifically excludes sales rebates. Although the Ministry have not 
accepted this suggestion, t he Committee , would suggest that the Ministry may 
consider such exclusions from computation of Turnover with a view to aligning 
the law with analogous international norms/practices. 
Clause 3: Amendment of Section 3 (Anti-competitive agreements)  
 
22. Section 3 of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
3. (1) ******* 
(4) Any agreement amongst enterprises or persons at different stages or levels of 
the production chain in different markets, in respect of production, supply, 
distribution, storage, sale or price of, or trade in goods or provision of services, 
including— 
 
(a) tie-in arrangement; 
(b) exclusive supply agreement; 
(c) exclusive distribution agreement; 
(d) refusal to deal; 
(e) resale price maintenance, 
 
shall be an agreement in contravention of sub -section (1) if such agreement  
causes or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition in India. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 
 
(a) "tie-in arrangement" includes any agreement requiring a purchaser of goods, 
as a condition of such purchase, to purchase some other goods;  
 
(b) "exclusive supply agreement" includes any agreement restricting in any 
manner the purchaser in the course of his trade from  acquiring or otherwise 
dealing in any goods other than those of the seller or any other person; 
 
(c)  "exclusive distribution agreement" includes any agreement to limit, restrict or 
withhold the output or supply of any goods or allocate any area or market  for 
the disposal or sale of the goods; 
 
(d)  "refusal to deal" includes any agreement which restricts, or is likely to restrict, 
by any method the persons or classes of persons to whom goods are sold or 
from whom goods are bought; 
 
(e) "resale price maintenance" includes any agreement to sell goods on condition 
that the prices to be charged on the resale by the purchaser shall be the 

15 
 
prices stipulated by the seller unless it is clearly stated that prices lower than 
those prices may be charged. 
 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall restrict— 
 
(i) the right of any person to restrain any infringement of, or to impose 
reasonable conditions, as may be necessary for protecting any of his rights 
which have been or may be conferred upon him under— 
 
************ 
23. The Bill proposes to amend Section 3 as under: 
―In section 3 of the principal Act,— 
 
(A) in sub -section (4), for the Explanation, the following  Explanation shall be 
substituted, namely:-— 
 
‗Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 
 
(a) "tie-in arrangement" includes any agreement requiring a purchaser of goods 
or recipient of services, as a condition of such purchase or provision of such 
services, to purchase some other goods or availing of some other services; 
 
(b) "exclusive supply agreement" includes a ny agreement restricting in any 
manner the purchaser of goods or recipient of services in the course of his 
trade from acquiring or otherwise dealing in any goods or services other than 
those of the seller or service provider or any other person; 
 
(c) "exclusive distribution agreement" includes any agreement to limit, restrict or 
withhold the output or supply of any goods or provision of services or allocate 
any area or market for the disposal or sale of the goods or provision of 
services; 
 
(d) "refusal to deal" includes any agreement which restricts, or is likely to restrict, 
by any method the persons or classes of persons to whom goods are sold or 
services are provided or from whom goods are bought or services are availed 
of; 
 
(e) "resale price maintenance",— 
 
 
(i) in case of goods includes any agreement to sell goods on condition that 
the prices to be charged on the resale by the purchaser shall be the 
prices stipulated by the seller unless it is clearly stated that prices lower 
than those prices may be charged; 
 
(ii) in case of services includes any agreement to provide services on 
condition that the prices to be charged on retailing of services by the 
recipient of services shall be the prices stipulated by the service provider 
unless it is clearly stated that prices lowe r than those prices may be 
charged;‘; 
 

16 
 
(B) in sub-section (5), in clause ( i) after sub -clause (f), the following sub -clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"(g) any other law for the time being in force relating to the protection of other 
intellectual property rights;". 
 
24. The justification for the proposed amendment, as furnished by the Ministry in 
their Background note, is as under: 
The words ―or services‖ are missing in all the five explanatory clauses and have 
been added. The spirit of Act, requires that bot h goods and services are required 
to be covered to make the expression ―goods and services‖. 
  
25. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, Luthra & Luthra ( Law 
Offices) have stated: 
―The definition of ‗tie -in arrangement‘ still seems to be inconsistent with the 
conventional definition.  Tie -in arrangement has been traditionally referred to 
situations where customers that purchase one product (the tying product) are 
required also to purchase another distinct product (the tied product) from th e 
same supplier or someone designated by the latter.  The definition of tie -in 
arrangement in the Act does not seem to necessitate that the two products are 
distinct [Explanation (a) of Section 3(4) of the Act defines a tie -in-arrangement 
requires a purcha ser of goods, as a condition of such purchase to purchase 
some other goods].  Perhaps a more coherent and precise definition of the same 
could be considered.  In the EC, there is a safe harbour rule regarding vertical 
agreements.  As per the guidelines rel ating to vertical restraints, if the mark et 
share of the supplier and the buyer is less than 30%, the agreement is presumed 
not to have an Appreciable Adverse Effect on Competition (AAEC).  There is no 
such safe harbour provision in the Act for vertical ag reements. The CCI has quite 
often looked at the EC guidelines on vertical agreements for guidance. For  
instance, in Automobile Dealers Association  vs. Global Automobile Limited & 
Ors. [Case No. 33/2011], the CCI cited the safe harbour rule of the EC guidelines 
on vertical restraints in support of its observation that in order for vertical 
agreements to cause an AAEC, there has to be a significant presence in the 
market.  This highlights the need for further clarifications and guidance in case of 
vertical agreements‖. 
 
26. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written replies have stated: 
 
―The statement that ‗…. the definition of tie -in arrangement in the Act does not 
seem to necessitate that the two products are different ‘ is not borne out from a 
plain reading of the definition of ‗tie-in arrangement‘ as given in Explanation (a) to 
section 3 (4) of the Act which clearly requires purchasing or availing of some 
‗other goods‘ or ‗other services‘. 

17 
 
  
The suggestion to incorporate ―safe harbour provisions‖ fro m EC jurisdiction for 
vertical agreements in section 3(4) of the Act may not be necessary as the Act in 
section 19(3) provides for sufficient flexibility to the Commission to determine 
appreciable adverse effect on competiti on arising out of such vertical  
agreements.  
 
It may be further noted that section 19(3) is robust enough to allow the 
Commission to balance the pro competitive and anti competitive effects of 
vertical agreements to determine appreciable adverse effect on competition 
arising out of such vertical agreements.  Therefore, the safe harbour provisions 
as in vogue in the EU do not appear to be required in our context.  
 
It may, however, be added that ―safe harbour provisions‖ can be built into the 
Regulations of the Commission as and when required‖.   
 
27. The Committee have  been informed that although Section 19(3) of the 
Competition Act, 2002 allows CCI to determine Appreciable Adverse Effect on 
Competition ( AAEC), the CCI quite often had to rely on European Commission 
(EC) Regulations on “safe harbour provisions”  in order to decide its case(s) . As 
agreed to by the Ministry, necessary provisions in the CCI Regulations for  “safe 
harbour provisions” may be incorporated under the Act. 
 
 
Clause 4: Amendment of Section 4 (Abuse of Dominant Position)  
28. Section 4 of the Act, reads as under: 
― (1) No enterprise or group shall abuse its dominant position. 
(2) There shall be an abuse of dominant position  under sub -section(1), if an  
enterprise or a group- 
 
(a) directly or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory— 
(i) condition in purchase or sale of goods or service; or 
 
(ii) price in purchase or sale (including predatory price) of goods or  
service. 
*********** 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression— 
 
(a) "dominant position" m eans a position of strength, enjoyed by an        
enterprise, in the relevant market, in India, which enables it to— 
 
(i)  operate independently of competitive forces prevailing in the 
relevant market; or 
(ii) affect its competitors or consumers or the rele vant market in its 
favour. 

18 
 
************ 
29. Section 19(4) of the Act, reads as under: 
 
(4) The Commission shall, while inquiring whether an enterprise enjoys a 
dominant position or not under section 4, have due regard to all or any of 
the following factors, namely:— 
 
*********** 
 
30. The Bill proposes to amend Section 4 as under: 
 
  ―after the words ‗or group‘, the words ‗jointly or singly‘ shall be inserted‖. 
 
31. The Ministry in their Background note justified the proposed amendment on the 
following grounds : 
―The present provision takes care of dominance by an individual company or a 
group company. It does not enable the CCI to look into cases of joint dominance 
of two different companies or by association cartels.‖   
 
 
32. In their written submission fur nished to the Committ ee, Luthra & Luthra ( Law 
Offices) have stated: 
―……Joint dominance may be inferred as collective dominance, a concept that is 
recognised in various jurisdictions including  European Commission ( EC). The 
main issue likely to arise is that  collective dominance might cover cases that 
relate to collusion and cartelization proscribed under Section 3 of the Act.  Since 
Section 4 of the Act, unlike Section 3, does not require the CCI (or the informant) 
to show an Appreciable Adverse Effect on Co mpetition (AAEC), this might result 
in a situation where enterprises acting in concert but not causing AAEC, as is 
necessary to contravene Section 3 (1) of the Act, might fall under the ambit of 
Section 4 (1).  Thus, to make the law a little more certain, a competitive impact, 
i.e. some sort of harm to competition should be made an essential parameter 
when assessing abuse of dominance.‖ 
 
33. In their written submission furnished to the Committee FICCI and CII have stated: 
 
FICCI 
 
There is fear of abuse of t his amendment which proposes to expand the 
applicability of Section 4 to cast its net over unrelated enterprises acting together 
and therefore potentially being ‗collectively dominant‘.  Practices that occur 
without any collusion or anti -competitive intent  may come within the purview if 
undertaken by a large section of the market especially in certain industries that 
are hyper competitive or highly regulated due to the nature of the industry.  
Conduct sought to be seized by the proposed amendment can b e dea lt with 
under the present S ection 3 of the Competition Act, 2002 (Anti -competitive 
agreements), which is wide enough to deal with any form of active or tacit 
collusion (including parallelism). 
 

19 
 
An Explanation (aa) below existing (a) below Section 4, may be added as under:   
   
(aa) Joint or collective dominant position means a position of economic strength, 
jointly or collectively enjoyed by a group of independent enterprises, in the 
relevant market in India, which enables them to- 
 
Charge excessively high and unfair price, as may be determined by the 
Commission by regulations, jointly or collectively and are able to control the 
relevant market independent of competitive forces prevailing in the relevant 
market, or integrate procurement, sale and after sales  services independent of 
other competitors in the relevant market;  
or 
adversely affect the remaining competitors or the consumes or the relevant 
market in its favour. 
 
Insert “or joint” between the words” dominant” and “position” in line second of 
sub-section (4) of section 19. 
 
…the proposed a mendment to present wording of S ection 4 be completely 
avoided.  If at all it needs to be retained, the following proposed wording should 
be added after section 4(2) (e) and before the ‗Explanation‘: 
 
―provided that it shall not be an abuse if the conduct of the dominant 
enterprise or group is objectively justified.‖ 
 
  
CII: 
 
The introduction of the concept of ―joint‖ dominance under Section 4 (1) of the 
Competition Act raises several concerns, including: 
 
(a) No defi nition of collective dominance: ……Although, the Competition Bill 
introduces the concept of joint dominance, there is no definition provided for 
same.  The absence of any clarification in this regard would result in the CCI 
having unbridled discretionary po wers to assess collective dominance by two or 
more enterprises. 
 
(b) Risk of scrutiny under both Section 3 (3) and Section 4: ……..  In the absence 
of clear evidence on concerted action (which may be lacking in concentrated 
markets), it may be difficult for the CCI to establish a case under Section 3(3) of 
the Competition Act.  In such an event, the CCI may with the proposed 
amendment, bring a case under section 4 (1) of the Competition Act, which does 
not require it to show the existence of an agreement or c oncerted action.  
Introduction of the concept of ―joint‖ dominance is likely to blur the distinction 
between Section 3(3) and Section 4 of the Competition Act. 
 
(c)  Increased cost of compliance: The introduction of the concept of ―joint‖ abuse 
of dominance would mean that an enterprise which was, on its own, not likely to 
be considered as dominant, may now become one. Consequently, its business 
practices which were permissible thus far may become problematic once the 
Competition Bill 2012 becomes the law. Firms which were traditionally not 

20 
 
concerned about compliance risks under Section 4 of the competition will now 
have to tread with caution and re-assess their business practices. 
 
(d)  Contradiction between Section 4(1) and Section 19(4): While the 
Government has introduced changes to the text of Section 4(1) of the 
Competition Act, there is no corresponding change in the language of Section 
19(4) of the Competition Act which prescribes the factors that the CCI shall 
consider while assessing dominance.         
 
In light of the above, and considering the fact that India‘s competition regime is at 
a nascent stage, the proposed amendment to include t he concept of joint 
dominance in  Section 4 of the Competition Act should be reconsidered by the 
Government‖. 
 
34. ASSOCHAM, in their post evidence reply, have, however, stated that they do not 
support the proposed amendment to Section 4 on the following grounds: 
  
 ―The concept is not very successful in matured jurisdictions and has been very 
sparingly used. India be ing a young jurisdiction, inserting this complex 
amendment may not be necessary at this stage since the principal law already 
captures this concept especially sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act.‖ 
 
 
35. Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant , in his written subm ission furnished to the 
Committee,  has also stated in this regard as follows: 
  
―Collective dominance is a complex concept and is not widely used. In the 
European Union, it did not find place in the original legislation (The Treaty for the 
European Union or TFEU) but grew during the 1990s through certain decisions of 
the courts. It has taken the courts several cases to progressively develop and 
clarify the concept, yet it is not frequently resorted to even in the EU. The 
difficulty in invoking this concept  arises from certain practical difficulties in 
enforcement of the concept: 
 
How to distinguish a position of collective dominance under Section 4 (as 
proposed) from a cartel under Section 3(3) of the Act? 
 
How to distinguish a position of collective domina nce from a structure of 
oligopoly, which is economically well understood and wherein a few players 
perforce are in a position of tacit cooperation? 
 
In the EU there is a very strict burden of evidentiary proof for collective 
dominance. This requires sophis ticated analysis by the competition authority. 
Competition law in India is still in a nascent stage and the capabilities of the CCI 
too are gradually progressing.  
 
In view of the above, it is submitted that it would be quite premature to introduce 
the concept of collective dominance at this point in time. It could create confusion 
in the minds of the market players and would also be a challenge for the CCI to 
enforce the concept. 
 

21 
 
If despite the above reservations, the concept of collective dominance is 
introduced in the Act, the definition of ―dominant position‖ in the Explanation to 
Section 4 would also need to be amended and the words ―jointly or singly‖ would 
need to be specifically included to ensure there are no ambiguities in the Act.‖ 
 
36. On being asked to clarify the necessity of proposed amendment to Section 4 of 
the Competition Act,  2002, the Chairperson, CCI while tendering evidence before the 
Committee stated: 
 
―.....if there are four or five entities in a oligopolistic market situation not 
structurally related to each other and they are not even forming a cartel because 
there is no evidence that there is a cartel, yet as economic entities they are 
acting in concert.  If it becomes a law, then it will certainly strengthen the hands 
of the Compet ition Commission to look at the cases of this type in a market 
where there are a few players and there may be no clear evidence of 
cartelisation but there is a sort of de jure cartel which is operating‖. 
 
37. In this regard, t he Ministry of Corporate Affai rs have submitted a detailed written 
reply as follows: 
―The provisions of S ections 3 and 4 of the Act are not mutually exclusive. 
Appreciable Adverse Effect on Competition (AAEC) is in -built in the very 
definition and factors of dominance as laid down in S ection 19(4) which enables 
the Commission to consider a number of factors to assess whether an enterprise 
enjoys a dominant position including as per Section 19(4)(m) ― any other factor 
which the Commission may consider relevant for the inquiry ‖. Therefore,  
separate AAEC is not required to be established in cases relating to abuse of 
dominant position. 
Defining ‗joint or collective dominance ‘ may not be necessary.  It may be noted 
that even in EU, the term ‗joint‘ or ‗collective‘ dominance is not defined, it  is a 
concept that has been developed through the jurisprudence of the EU courts. 
Further, provisions that cover joint dominance are intended to address the 
concern that firms which operate in oligopolistic markets may interact in such a 
way as to result i n higher prices and profits for those firms, but a welfare loss on 
account of consumers and left over competition. The provisions in this regard 
exist in jurisdictions like EU and  Canada. Russia introduced it in year 2006. 
 
 
The importance of collective d ominance from the Commission‘s perspective is 
that it would provide it with a tool against, say, oligopolists where explici t 
collusion cannot be proved. 
 
The apprehension based on the abuse of the proposed amendment to Section 4 
of the Act is misplaced. In  fact, one of the purposes of bringing -in the concept of 
‗joint dominance‘ on the statute book is to deal with entities which are structurally 
unrelated but are otherwise jointly dominant.  
 

22 
 
The further suggestion to  incorporate an explanation to S ection 4 of the Act to 
provide for the defence in such cases based on objective justification may not be 
necessary as the scheme of Section 4(2) of the Act gives sufficient defence to 
the parties in breach to deny the abuse.  
 
The suggestion for re -consideration of the proposed amendment to bring -in the 
concept of joint dominance does not appear to be correct. The grounds given for 
such suggestion inter alia  include risk of sc rutiny of a conduct under both 
Sections 3(3) and 4 of the Act. Such assumption is not well  placed. Provisions of 
Sections 3 and 4 are not mutually exclusive. Hence, the apprehension of scrutiny 
under both the provisions is based upon a mistaken assumption that both the 
provisions cannot be applied to examine an act/ conduct.  
 
The objection based on increased cost of compliance is also misplaced.  
 
The CCI through its advocacy initiatives encourages enterprises to adopt 
competition compliance programmes. CCI has also prepared a booklet on the 
subject for ready reference by the enterprises. 
 
 
The difficulties pointed out do not make out a case for not factoring in the 
possibility of two or more entities joining hands to gain dominance with a view to 
abuse that dominant position. 
 
The plea with regard to difficulty in distinguishing between ‗cartel s‘ and ‗joint 
dominance‘ appears to be untenable.  Cartels have been used in the context of 
‗anti-competitive agreements‘  which connote a situation (in S ection 3) where 
agreements, express or implied, are apparent.  Abuse of dominance (in Section 
4) operates in the general course of conducting business as evident from sub -
clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section 1 of   Section 4. 
 
 
 
 
38. The Ministry have, therefore, stated that the explanation (a) in Section 4, could, 
however, be suitably revised to include the cases of joint dominance as below: 
Abuse of dominant position...... 
(2)  There shall be an abuse of dominant position under sub -section (1), if an 
enterprise or a group  jointly or singly:- 
(a)  directly or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory-............ 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression:- 
(a)  "dominant position" means a position of strength, enjoyed by an enterprise 
or a group either jointly or singly , in the relevant market, in India, which 
enables it or them  to:- 
(i)  operate independently of competitive forces prevailing in the relevant 
market; or 
(ii)  affect its or their competitors or consumers or the relevant market in its or 
their favour. 
 
39. Subsequently, the Ministry have stated in their written replies as under: 
The proposed addition of the words ‗jointly‘ or ‗singly‘ in explanation (a) below 
Section 4 does not appear to be necessary as the amendment proposed in 

23 
 
Section 4(1) is of an explanatory nature;  It does not alter the ingredients of the 
concept of ‗dominant position‘.‖ 
 
 
40. The Ministry have agreed that S ection 19(4) of the Act needs co nsequential 
changes arising out of proposed concept of joint dom inance in Section 4 of the Act and 
the proposed draft amendment is as under: 
 
―(4)The Commission shall,  while inquiring whether an enterprise or a group 
either jointly or singly enjoys a dominant position or not............‖   
   
41. The Committee note that t he Bill  proposes to amend Section 4(1)  of the 
Competition Act, 2002  to provide that no enterprise or  group „jointly or singly ‟ 
shall abuse its dominant position. However, corresponding/consequential 
changes in Section 4(2), E xplanation(a) in Section 4 and Section 19(4) have not 
been proposed. On being pointed out, the Ministry  have furnished divergent 
views on amending Section 4.  Initially, the Ministry agreed to amend the 
aforesaid explanation, however, subsequently held the view that addition o f 
words „jointly or singly‟ in E xplanation(a) below Section 4 was not necessary as 
the proposed amendment in Section 4(1) does not alter the ingredients of the 
concept of „dominant position‟ . The Committee would expect the Ministry to 
reconcile this divergent position and bring in suitable amendments in the above 
Section so that there are no ambiguities in the proposed legislation. It is expected 
that the above amendments will help the CCI in dealing effectively with “collective 
dominance” cases, especially when firms operate in oligopolistic markets, 
interacting in a manner resulting in unusually higher prices an d profits to the 
detriment of consumers. 
 
 Clause 5: Amendment of Section 5 (Definition of Group)  
  
42. Explanation under Clause(b) of Section 5 of the Act reads as under: 
 
 ―Group‖ means two or more enterprises which, directly or indirectly, are in 
a position to – 
 
(i) exercise twenty -six per cent or more of the voting rights in  the 
other enterprise; or 
 
(ii) appoint more than fifty per cent of the members of the board of 
directors in the other enterprise; or 
 

24 
 
(ii)   control the management or affairs of the other enterprise; 
 
43. The Bill proposes to amend Section 5, as under: 
 
―…in the Explanation, in clause (b), in sub-clause (i), for the words ‗twenty-
six per cent‘, the words ‗fifty per cent‘ shall be substituted.‖ 
 
44. The justification for the proposed amendment as furnished by the Ministry in their 
Background note, is as under: 
 
 ―Ownership of a company is not considered to be explicit unless more than 50% 
shares are owned by an entity. Merger and combination cases with only 26% 
control by a group company were  included for compulsory notification. This was 
objected to by the industry , therefore, groups falling between twenty six and fifty 
percent shares were exempted under Section 54. It is now proposed through this 
amendment to build this provision in the Act.‖ 
 
45. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, Luthra & Luthra ( Law 
Offices), FICCI and ASSOCHAM have stated: 
 
Luthra & Luthra (Law Offices): 
―……One effect that is likely to arise from this amendment is a divergence 
between the notification  requirement under the SEBI (Substantial Acquisition of 
Shares and Takeovers) Regulation, 2011 (Takeover Code), which mandates an 
acquirer to make an open offer when the acquisition results into entitlement of 
25% or more voting rights in the ta rget compan y [ Regulation 3(1) of the 
Takeover Code]. Additionally, the Bill seems to have overlooked Schedule I Entry 
I of the Competition Commission of India (Procedure in regard to the transaction 
of business relating to combinations) Regulations, 2011 (Combinatio n 
regulations). Schedule I Entry I of the combination Regulations states that 
transactions comprising of acquisition less than 25% of voting rights need not 
notify. If the definition of group is altered as per the Bill, the Combination 
Regulations would need to be synchronized with the changes introduced through 
the Bill. Lastly, the increase in the limit of voting rights to 50% might present a 
situation where an acquirer that has 49% voting rights in one enterprise acquires 
49% voting rights in its direct competitor. This is likely to impact competition yet 
keep the scenario out of the purview of Section 6 of the Act [Section 6(1) of the 
Act prohibits an enterprise from entering into a transaction that may cause an 
AAEC.]. This shows that changing voting ri ghts from 26% to 50% when defining 
a group might be a bad law as it is not likely to prevent the AAEC the particular 
transaction is probably going to cause‖. 
 
FICCI: 

25 
 
―The amendment also brings the definition of ―group‖ in line with what constitutes 
a ―subsidiary‖ under the Companies  Act, 1956 – not clear what the distinction 
between ‗enterprise‘ and ‗group‘ remains as a result, since enterprise includes 
subsidiaries. 
 
Further, Para 8 of the Exemption Schedule exempts an acquisition of control / 
shares / voting rights or assets by one person or enterprise of another person or 
enterprise within the same Group. A clarification  regarding the applicability of 
Para 8 of the Exemption Schedule to intra - Group combinations, notwithstanding 
the provisions of Para 2 of the said Schedule would be in order‖. 
 
ASSOCHAM: 
 
―Such an insertion may lead to regulatory uncertainty and as such is not 
recommended to be inserted at this stage. The existing provisions of Section 4 
read with Section 28 of the Act and Statutory Regul ations of the CCI would cover 
instances of abuse by entities falling below the threshold. Also, the existing 
provisions of Section 54 enable the Government to exempt certain class of 
enterprises from the purview of the Act.‖ 
 
46. On being asked to respond to the objection stated to have been raised by the 
industry on shareholding pattern and ownership of Companies, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in their post-evidence reply have stated: 
 
 ―In terms of sub -clause (iii) of clause (b) under explanation to s ection 5 of the 
Act, a ‗group‘ can be determined on the basis of the extent of voting rights, ability 
to appoint a majority of the members of the Board or by control of the 
management of affairs of the enterprise. Thus, the extent of voting rights is only 
one of the three limbs that determines ‗group‘. 
 
By the proposed amendment, only those enterprises will be affected where the 
extent of voting rights is between 26% and 50%. However, the other two limbs of 
the ‗group‘ explanation as expressed above could s till be used to determine 
whether it is a group enterprise.  
 
This amendment is also in line with the notification dated 4 th March 2011 issued 
by the Government of India, whereby the Central Government, in public interest, 
had exempted the ‗Group‘ exercisi ng less than 50% of voting rights in the other 
enterprise from the provisions of Section 5 of the Act for a period of five years. 
 
47. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, CUTS have stated: 
―As same definition of ‗group‘ is applicable to Sections 4, 5 and 27 (and Sections 
4 and 27 make reference to definition under Section 5), it is pr eferable to define 
‗group‘ under Section 2.‖ 
 
48. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs while accepting the said suggestion have stated 
in their written replies as follows: 

26 
 
 
―The consequenti al changes in explanation C of S ection 4, explanation C of 
Section 5, explanation D of S ection 5 and sub-section (g) of Section 27 may also 
be required.‖ 
49. It has been suggested that as the same definition of „group‟ with re gard to 
enterprises operating in the market is applicable to all the relevant Sections in the 
Act, namely, Sections 4, 5 and 27, it would be preferable to define the term at the 
outset under Section 2 of the Act. The Committee desire that such basic 
definitions should not be dispersed in different provisions of the Act but under 
the definition section of the Act itself.   
Clause 6: Insertion of new Section 5A (Power to specify different value of assets 
and turnover) 
50. Clause 6 reads as under: 
 
―After S ection 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,  
namely:—  
"5A.Notwithstanding anything contained in S ection 5, the Central Government 
may, in consultation with the Commission, by notification, specify different value 
of assets and turnover for any class or classes of  enterprise for the purpose of 
Section 5". 
 
51.  Section  20(3) of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, the Central Government 
shall, on the expiry of a period of t wo years from the date of 
commencement of this Act  and thereafter every two years, in consultation 
with the Commission, by  notification, enhance or reduce, on the basis of 
the wholesale price index or  fluctuations in exchange rate of rupee or 
foreign curre ncies, the value of assets  or the value of turnover, for the 
purposes of that section. 
 
52.  Section 54 of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
 
The Central Government may, by notification, exempt from the application of this 
Act, or any provision thereof, and for such period as it may specify in such notification— 
 
(a)  any class of enterprises if such exemption is necessary in the interest of  
security of the State or public interest; 
 
(b)  any practice or agreement arising out of and in accordance wi th any 
obligation assumed by India under any treaty, agreement or convention 
with any other country or countries; 
 
(c)  any enterprise which performs a sovereign function on behalf of the 
Central Government or a State Government: 
 

27 
 
Provided that in case an enterprise is engaged in any activity including the 
activity relatable to the sovereign functions of the Government, the Central 
Government may grant exemption only in respect of activity relatable to the 
sovereign functions. 
 
 
53. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their Background note, justified the proposed 
amendment as stated below: 
―To enable different thresholds of value of assets and turnover for different 
classes of enterprises for the purpose of bringing them more closely under the 
Competition C ommission in the event of acquisitions, mergers and 
amalgamations. This was considered necessary to address specific sectors with 
implications or public interest (which may otherwise escape scrutiny because of 
high thresholds under Section 5).‖ 
 
54. The Ministry have further added that: 
 
―The background for this proposed amendment was that the Government of 
India, as part of its public policy paradigm, wanted to oversee the brownfield 
mergers and acquisitions in the pharmaceutical sectors as there was a ris ing 
concern that MNCs were coming into India and taking over the Indian 
pharmaceutical sector which may be to the detriment of the Indian consumers/ 
patients/ health care. 
 
A Committee was set up to look into this aspect and the committee 
recommended that brownfield acquisitions should be overseen and this aspect 
could be given to CCI. Taking this as a starting point, when CCI looked into the  
pharma sector, it was pointed out that unless the threshold are lowered, it may 
not be possible for CCI to look int o this issue. Therefore, in order for CCI to fulfill 
its mandate, and taking into account the special characteristics of Indian 
industries which impact public interest, such as pharma, this proposal is 
important. The proposed amendment simply empowers the Government to only 
raise or lower the thresholds.  
 
It may be pointed out that vide the proposed amendments the legislature would 
be conferring/ delegating the power upon the Government (which is to be 
exercised in consultation with CCI). Such conferment o f power by the legislature 
in favour of executive on the grounds of expediency should not be construed as 
detracting the power of the legislature. The legislature always retains its supreme 
authority and the executive would always be accountable for its ac tions to the 
legislature.   
 
In this context, it may be mentioned here that in select market situations, relative 
weight of a transaction, which may be much below the prescribed thresholds, 
may necessitate scrutiny on account of public good. Such ex ante scrutiny may 
prove to be better than ex post facto  remedial action under Section 4.  Further, 
the need for clarity in case of vertical/ conglomerate mergers can be addressed 
in the notification.‖ 

28 
 
 
 
55. When questioned about the need to give wide discretionar y powers to the 
Government under the newly proposed Section 5 A, the Ministry in their post evidence 
reply stated as under:  
―(i) The provisions of the Competition Act, 2002 relating to the combinations 
have been in force with effect from 1 st June, 2011. T he parties to a 
transaction are required to seek the Commission‘s approval only if they 
(the parties to such transaction) exceed the quantitative asset or turnover 
thresholds mentioned in the Act. These asset/turnover thresholds are 
uniform across all indu stry sectors.  It is noticed that these thresholds are 
so high as to minimize many cases of proposed combination coming 
within the purview of the Competition Commission.  Indeed, so far not a 
single case has been dealt with by the CCI.   
 
(ii) Further, it has been the experience of the Commission during the 
implementation of the combination provisions in the Act over the last 20 
months (since 1 st June 2011), that different kinds of industry sectors have 
different relationship between assets and thresholds, and that sometimes, 
certain important transactions may escape a mandatory filing with the 
Commission either due to the extremely high asset/turnover thresholds 
specified in the Act, or due to the ‗target company exemption‘ notification 
issued by the Minist ry of Corporate Affairs on 4 th March, 2011.  It is 
therefore essential to bridge this gap and bring relevant transactions in 
certain important sectors like the pharmaceuticals industry, within the 
purview of the Commission‘s mandate, for which the Governme nt of India 
has suggested an amendment to bring the new section 5A. 
 
(iii) It may also be stated that Section 54 of the Act already empowers the 
Central Government to exempt classes of enterprises from the application 
of the Act, if such exemption is neces sary in the interest of security of the 
State or public interest. The proposed amendment is only to enable the 
Government to raise or lower the threshold. 
 
 
(iv) ……. this aspect engaged the attention of the Government primarily in the 
context of apprehensi ons that combinations in the Pharmaceutical Sector 
may have adverse effect on prices of certain drugs owing to possible 
reduction in number of sources of supplying of a particular medicine, 
which will not only impinge on competition but will also have dele terious 
consequences for public health.    
 
Keeping in view such factors it is urged that an enabling power needs to 
be acquired to ensure that sectors where combinations at lower thresholds 
of turnover or asset values are likely to adversely affect public  interest the 
scrutiny of CCI could be brought into play.‖ 
 

29 
 
56. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, Luthra & Luthra  (Law 
Offices), ASSOCHAM, FICCI,  CII, CUTS and Shri Vinod Dhall , Consultant have 
suggested:  
 
 
Luthra & Luthra(Law Offices): 
―The power given to the Central Government to change the threshold limit for any 
enterprise might defeat the purpose of making notification mandatory for all 
sectors. This provision might be seen providing the government with very wide 
and discretionary powers. 
 
 ASSOCHAM and FICCI: 
The following may be added below the proposed insertion: 
Provided that prior to issuance of the notification, the Commission shall make a 
public announcement of the proposed different value of assets and turnover as 
above with economic and commercial justifications in its official website and by 
any other modes of communication with a direction to any person and/or 
enterprise directly or indirectly affected by such changes in assets and turnover 
to express its/their views in writing within a period of 30 calendar days from the 
date of publication of public notice. Provided further that the Commission, after 
receipt of the written views of the person and/or enterprises as above, shall 
announce the revised assets and turnover an d the reasons therefore after 
considering all the views within a reasonable period of time but not exceeding 60 
calendar days from the date of closure of the receipt of the views f rom persons 
and/or enterprises. 
 
CII:- 
…..Considering that the provisions relating to merger control in most jurisdictions 
apply uniformly across all industries sectors, and the fact that India‘s, merger 
control regime is still at a nascent stage, it is imperative that the Central 
Government reconsiders the idea of introducing sec tor specific thresholds or in 
the alternative introduce strict quantifiable criteria which must be satisfied before 
the Central Government /CCI may prescribe different thresholds for a class of 
enterprises. 
 
 CUTS:- 
In order to provide broad principles on t he basis of which the Central 
Government may be guided to specify thresholds other than those provided 
under S ection 5 (and to prevent thresholds being determined by other 
considerations), it is proposed to add the words ―keeping in mind objectives of 
this Act, after the words ‗the Central Government may‘.‖ 
 
 
 
 
 
Shri Vinod Dhall:- 

30 
 
…….if the proposed amendment is to be accepted, it is necessary to so 
circumscribe it that it can be used only in exceptional cases, and for very 
compelling reasons only.  
 
It is also suggested that the issue of how a revised set of thresholds would apply 
in case of a vertical or a conglomerate merger; where say a pharmaceutical 
major is acquiring a beverage company or a non -pharmaceutical company is 
acquiring a pharmaceutical company would need to be  clarified‖. 
 
57. The representative s of CII  and ASSOCHAM  while deposing before the 
Committee added further as under: 
CII: 
―.........The CII believes that the pharmaceuticals sector example should not now 
result in giving the blanket a bility for the Commission to now regulate each 
sector. What we feel this will do is, it will allow for multiple notifications for 
multiple sectors with multiple changes at multiple times, it will cause uncertainty, 
it will seek to capture low value transac tions which, from the philos ophy of the 
Competition Act, were not intended to be captured because that is why Section 5 
was enacted. We can give you a set of countries where this is done. But most 
countries do not have sector specific exemptions. So, India  would be in a clear 
minority if it also took that approach. 
We are still at the early stages of Competition Law. We still have to settle 
down. It has been two years since combination and merger regulations have 
taken effect. Therefore, our submission is t hat this may be a little too much ;  too 
soon and a concern in the pharmaceuticals sector should not lend itself to a 
blanket re-opening of Section 5. 
 
ASSOCHAM: 
 ―In Section 5 (A), there is a proposal to vest with the Government the power to 
issue notifications and reduce thresholds. ....... will bring in uncertainty. You will 
have notifications like you have in the Income Tax Act. Every six months, you will 
have a notification after notification. ......merger may never happen. The intent of 
competition bri nging strengths together may not happen and that will be again 
contrary to mergers of strengths of people for the ultimate benefit of the public. 
So, we have to be very careful, Sir, because we are going to hand over to the 
Government a power that can be u sed at any time without control and the y can 
bring down the thresholds ...........to the regulator, .......It is far too early; it is 
contrary to our requirement of size and the need for us to grow. We have had a 
blow. The entire economy of the world is ree ling under the 2008 recession. Our 
chance to grow now is going to happen. If at this stage, we are dealt with another 
blow which examines even smaller companies, then our dream of growing big in 
the global place will be defeated and, therefore, that requir es serious 
consideration.  
In the event, however, the hon. Committee feels that there is a need for us 
to provide or there must be adequate safeguards, there must be consultations. 

31 
 
Each time the Commission wants to go ahead and recommend something, it 
must hold consultations with the stakeholders ..... Today it is the pharma sector; 
tomorrow somebody may say even grocers. In the EU, people have been 
targeting and saying that people who manufacture eggs, poultry farmers, are 
subjected to this kind of a contro l because they are so dominant and they are so 
large. That may happen here also. We cannot fathom which sectors may be. But 
there is already a provision that the Parliament, in its wisdom, had already 
enacted, which is Section 54. ..... you can exempt certa in sectors for certain 
periods from the purview of the Act. That is adequate protection. ........Therefore, 
there is no need to duplicate or bring out something which is contrary to the Act.‖ 
 
58. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written replies have informed the 
Committee that t he argument advanced against introducing an enabling provision to 
prescribe a different threshold for a specific sector (or sectors) is based on 
apprehensions, which are patently unfounded for the following reasons: - 
 
―(i) Leaving aside lack of evidence about ‗indiscriminate use of such carve out 
in any jurisdiction the power to carry out scrutiny of a proposed 
combination will continue to be with the same regulator which will have to 
determine if a proposed combination ha s Appreciable Adverse Effect on 
Competition (AAEC).   
 
(ii) The timeliness prescribed in the Act for completion of the process of 
scrutiny in case of combinations are quite reasonable.  A sector with 
different threshold is thus not at a disadvantage vis -à-vis other sectors 
merely for the reason that a case of combination in a specified sector will 
put that sector at a disadvantage vis-à-vis other sector.‖ 
 
 
59. The Committee note that an amendment has been proposed to introduce a 
new Section 5A in the Competition Act, 2002, enabling the Central Government to 
lay down, in consultation with the CCI, different thresholds of values of assets 
and turnover for different classes of enterprises for the purposes of examining 
notifiable  combinations keeping in view industry specific market requirements. 
The Committee desire that necessary safeguards  may be built in  
Section 5A viz. quantifiable criteria and mandatory consultation with 
stakeholders. The Committee would also suggest that this provision may be used 
in a pragmatic manner that does not hamper the processes of consolidation and 
rationalization in industry. 
Clause 7:  Amendment of Section 9 (Inserti on of sub -section 1A to include 
Chairperson, CCI in the selection Committee for selection of members)  
 

32 
 
60. Section 9 of the Competition Act, 2002  reads as under: 
―Selection Committee for Chairperson and Members of Commission- 
 
9(1) The Chairperson and other members of the Commission shall be 
appointed by the Central Government, from a panel of names recommended b y 
a Selection Committee consisting of  
a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee ---- Chairperson; 
b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs ---- Member; 
c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice ---- Member; 
d) two experts of repute who have special knowledge ---- Members. 
of, and professional experience in international trade, economics, business, 
commerce, law, finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs or 
competition matters including competition law and policy 
 
9(2) the  term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of 
panel of names shall be such as may be prescribed.‖ 
 
 
61. The Bill proposes to amend Section 9 as under: 
―In section 9 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (1), the words "and other Members" shall be omitted; 
 
(b) after sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be inserted,  
namely:— 
 
 
(1A)The Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Central  
Government from a panel of names recommended by a Selection  
Committee consisting of— 
 
(a) the Chief Justice of India or his nominee — Chairperson; 
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs — Member; 
(c) the Secretary in the Ministry of Law and Justice — Member; 
(d) the Chairperson of the Commission — Member; 
(e) one expert  of reput e who has special knowledge of, and professional 
experience in, international trade, economics, business, commerce, 
law, finance, accountancy, management, industry, public affairs or 
competition matters including competition law and policy — Member. ‖ 
 
 
 
62. The requirement and justification for the proposed amendment, as furnished by 
the Ministry in their Background note, is as under: 
―To enable the Selection Committee to use the expertise of Chairperson, CCI for 
selection of Member as is the case for the selection of Members of the Company 
Law Board (CLB), where Chairperson, CLB is also a Member of the Selection 
Committee for selection of Member, CLB.‖ 
 
 

33 
 
63. In their written submission furni shed to the Committee, ASSOCHAM  and Shri 
Vinod Dhall, Consultant have stated:  
 
 
ASSOCHAM : 
―The proposal should not affect the performance of the Commission and  
adversely impact the industry and other stakeholders a la  SEBI, PNGRB  
(Petroleum and Natural G as Regulatory Board) etc. as such as suitable 
safeguard may be inserted either in the substantive law or Rules made in terms 
of section 63 of the Act.‖ 
 
Shri Vinod Dhall:  
…… This would enrich the proceedings of the Selection Committee as it would 
enable the Chairman, CCI to bring to the proceedings of the Selection Committee 
a perspective based on the actual functioning of CCI and the need to keep in 
mind any particular skills, background or experiences the selected candidate 
should have that would be most beneficial to the deliberations of the CCI. 
 
 
64. ASSOCHAM in their post evidence reply have, however,  stated as under: 
 
―Inclusion of Chairperson as one of the Members of the Selection Committee for 
other Members may disturb the equilibrium already existing. The Chairman is 
only the first amongst equals.  Chairperson can always be called by the Selection 
Committee for his/her expert views.  It is thus recommended to drop the 
proposed amendment.‖ 
65. The Chairperson, CCI while deposing before the Committee during oral evidence 
stated on the proposed Selection Committee as under: 
―  ......  The idea is that what particular skill is needed to be added or what is 
required in the Commission that input comes in.  If the input is there, I am sure 
the process of selection is going to be equally good.  So, that again is  something 
which is proposed as an institutional improvement ......‖ 
 
 
 
66. In this regard, the Ministry in their replies inter alia added as under: 
 
―…….  While the fact of the Committee being presided over by the Chief Justice 
of India or a sitting judge  of the Supreme Court itself ensures fair play on part of 
the Committee, building further safeguards in Rules could be considered at an 
appropriate stage. 
    

34 
 
67. When asked to explain the proposal for inclu sion of the Chair person as a 
member of the Select ion Committee and whether similar provisions exist in other 
regulatory bodies, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under: 
―The primary consideration is to bring in the perspective of the Commission itself 
while selecting members.  It may be poi nted out that similar procedure exists for 
the appointment of Members of SEBI and Company Law Board.‖ 
 
 
68. According to the Ministry,  the Bill proposes to include Chairperson, CCI as 
one of the Members of Selection Committee  so as to use his expertise in  
selection of Members of the Commission  in order to achieve institutional 
improvement. The Committee have been informed that similar provisions exist for 
the selection of Members of Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and 
Company Law Board (CLB).  In response to a suggestion of one of the 
stakeholders with regard to providing su itable safeguards,  the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs have stated that incorporating safeguards in Rules could be 
considered at an appropriate stage. As the Ministry have , in principle, agreed to 
the suggestion, the Committee recommend that it would be in the fitness of 
things if the requisite safeguards are provided in the Rules straightaway. 
 
 
69. The Committee further note that the Bill proposes to have two distinct 
Selection Committees- one for the „ Selection of Chairperson‟ and another for the 
„Selection of Members‟. However, no change has been proposed in heading of 
Section 9 which reads as “Selection Committee for Chairperson and Members of 
the Commission”. Similarly, no  change has been proposed in Section 9(2) which 
reads as “the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of 
panel of names shall be as such as may be prescribed”. The Committee, 
therefore, suggest that in the heading of Section 9 , for the words „Selection 
Committee‟, the words „Selection Committee(s) ‟ be substituted. Further, a sub - 
heading viz „Selection Committee for Chairperson‟ be inserted above Section 9(1). 
Similarly, after Section 9(1) and before the proposed Section 9 (1A) another s ub-
heading viz “Selection Committee for Members” be in serted. Consequential 
changes in other relevant Sections/Rules may also be made so as to avoid any 
ambiguity on this aspect. 
  

35 
 
Clause(s) 9, 10 & 11: Amendment of Section 21(Reference by statutory authority), 
Section 21A (Reference by CCI) and Section 27 (Orders by Commission after 
inquiry into agreements or abuse of dominant position) 
 
70. Section 21 of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
―(1) Where in the course of a proceeding before any statutor y authority an 
issue is raised by any party that any decision which such statutory 
authority has taken or proposes to take is or would be, contrary to any of 
the provisions of this Act, then such statutory authority may make a 
reference in respect of such issue to the Commission: 
 
Provided that any statutory authority, may, suo motu , make such  a 
reference to the Commission. 
 
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Commission shall give 
its opinion, within sixty days of receipt of such refer ence, to such statutory 
authority which shall consider the opinion of the Commission and 
thereafter, give its findings recording reasons therefor on the issues 
referred to in the said opinion.‖ 
 
71. The Bill proposes to amend Section 21 as under: 
―In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(a) for the words "is raised by any party", the word "arises" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "authority may", the words "authority shall" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) the proviso shall be omitted.‖ 
 
 
72. Section 21A of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
―(1)Where in the course of a proceeding before the Commission an issue is 
raised by any party that any decision which, the Commission has taken 
during such proceeding or proposes to take, is or would be contrary to any 
provision of this Act whose implementation is entrusted to a statutory 
authority, then the Commission may make a reference in respect of such 
issue to the statutory authority: 
 
Provided that the Commission, may, suo motu, make such a reference to 
the statutory authority. 
 
(2)On receipt of a reference under sub -section (1), the statutory authority shall 
give its opinion, within sixty days of receipt of such reference, to the 
Commission which shall consider the opinion of the statutory authority, 
and thereafter give its findings recording reasons therefor on the issues 
referred to in the said opinion‖. 
 
73. The Bill proposes to amend Section 21A as under: 

36 
 
―In section 21A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 
(a) for the words "is ra ised by any party", the word "arises" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) for the words "this Act", the words "any Act" shall be substituted; 
(c) for the words "Commission may", the words "Commission shall" shall 
be substituted; 
(d) the proviso shall be omitted.‖ 
 
74. The Bill also proposes to amend Section 27 as under: 
―in clause (g), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
‗Provided further that while passing orders under this section, the 
Commission shall give due regard to the opinio n given by the statutory 
authority, where such opinion has been obtained under the provisions of 
sub-section (1) of Section 21A of this Act.‘ 
 
75. In their written submission furnished to the Committee Shri Vinod Dhall, 
ASSOCHAM and FICCI  have stated : 
Shri Vinod Dhall: 
 
―It is difficult to visualise situations where any proposed order of the CCI would 
violate provisions of any Act or vice versa for other statutory authority. It is 
unclear how such an issue will be identified or what will be the basis to d etermine 
that such an issue has arisen (and at what stage of the proceeding) so as to 
obligate CCI or the statutory authority to make a reference. The mandatory 
nature of the provision also narrows the scope of application for such 
consultation process.  
 
There may also be apprehension that such mandatory consultations will 
inordinately delay the process of decision making especially in a combination 
case, where a time limit is set out by the Act.  
 
Therefore, it is suggested that both Sections 21 and 21A m ay be replaced by a 
separate provision whereby the CCI or the statutory authority should have the 
ability to consult each other if either is of the view that such consultation will 
assist in the decision making process. 
 
ASSOCHAM: 
―Deletion of the words ―i s raised by any party‖ and replacing the same by the 
word ―arises‖ will give rise to a situation where the authorities (i.e. CCI and the 
Statutory Authority) will have exclusive jurisdictions to decide as to whether or 
not a cross reference to each other i s necessary in cases of overlap of 
jurisdictions.  The intention may be good, but the consequences could be, at 
times, very complex and may lead to protracted litigations.  If this power of cross 
referencing  is given to the authorities with a mandate to c ompulsorily refer to 

37 
 
each other, the party/parties not agreeable or affected adversely by such cross 
referencing will have no opportunity to ventilate its grievances unless a remedy 
by way of an appeal is inserted in section 53A of the Act.   The Amendment  Bill 
has already considered a suitable amendment in section 27 (g) to take into 
consideration of this insertion as such addition of this in appeal provision will be 
in order.  Therefore, following sections may be inserted in section 53A; 
 
―In Section 53A(a) insert section 21, 21A before Section 26‖ 
 
 
 
FICCI : 
The proposed amendment to Section 27 states that due regard must be given to 
the opinion of the Statutory Authority sought through this process.   It may be 
helpful to move this amendment here, so tha t it applies to orders passed under 
Section 26 as well‖. Section 21A may be amended to include the following after 
the existing section: 
 
While passing any orders under the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall 
give due regard to the opinion given by such statutory authority.‖   
 
 
76. When asked as to how the mandatory consultation between CCI and sectoral 
regulators is proposed to be achieved and in the event of a disagreement, who will 
prevail, Chairperson, CCI while deposing before the Committee submitted as under: 
―...The other point which hon. Members had raised was sectoral regulators and 
CCI, and whether CCI is the super regulator, etc. CCI is purely a market 
regulator; it is nothing more than that – it is no less, no more; it is not a super 
regulator. The sectoral regulators have their functions to do, which relate to 
technical aspects, licensing conditions, maybe, tariffs, and so on and so forth. 
They tell that segment of industry what to do; the CCI will oversee what their 
behaviour is, what they should not do and  if they are doing something which 
they should not be doing, as laid down in the Act, and then to penalize them. 
The provision for consultation is voluntary. There have been 1 -2 instances where 
it has not worked. So, it was felt that  a stipulation of mandatory consultation 
would perhaps make things work more efficiently because these are the initial 
years where this process of regulation and the way the regulators function has to 
stabilize. As to the question, who will prevail? If it is the sectoral regulator‘s 
domain, we will consult them, and they will take the decision. If the sectoral 
regulator consults us, and it falls in the domain of the CCI, then CCI will take the 
final decision. The amendment Bill says that due regard will be had to the opinion 
of the sectoral regulator.‖ 
 
77. In this regard, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written replies have stated 
the following: 

38 
 
― (i) The amendment has been proposed as conflict of jurisdiction between 
regulators operating in diff erent sectors or different facets of economy 
would of necessity arise as a degree of over -lap in the functioning of 
competition regulator and sectoral regulators in areas like Power, 
Telecommunication and Civil Aviation etc. In a few cases, the process of 
voluntary consultation was not found to have worked.  Therefore, it has 
been felt that stipulation of mandatory consultation would make the entire 
process, work more efficiently and in harmony, instead of uncertainty and 
unpredictability associated with a voluntary process. 
 
(ii) The suggestion to move the proposed proviso to section 27 of the Act 
(which mandates the Commission to have due regard to the opinion of the 
statutory authority) to section 21 A itself is agreed to.  
(iii) The suggestion to make or ders making references to the sectoral 
regulator and vice versa  appealable is fraught with dangerous 
consequences as it will lead to multiplicity of litigation and prolonging 
matters‖. 
 
78. On further being asked about the position with regard to the juris diction of the 
Competition Commission of India vis -à-vis other sectoral regulators compared to the 
position in other countries of the world, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated 
as under: 
 
―Most of the regulatory authorities have been created u nder Acts of Parliament to 
serve specific tasks. Most of the sector specific regulators are tasked with (a) 
market development or entry regulation (b) tariff determination; (c) sector specific 
technical matters; (d) consumer issues etc. The role of such re gulators in 
creating the market which supports competition is well articulated in the relevant 
law. It would be, therefore, reasonable to say that in general the jurisdiction of 
sectoral regulators arises ex ante . On the other hand, the jurisdiction of 
Competition Commission arises ex post facto or after the commission of an overt 
act with implications on competition although there is a preventive jurisdiction 
also in a few cases. Various countries have now gained experiences to deal with 
the interface betw een sectoral regulatory authorities and the competition 
authority. Countries, with a longer exposure to competition regulator such as, 
those in the EU, Japan, USA and Australia and even some of the 'recent arrivals' 
such as, Pakistan, Indonesia, South Africa, South Korea, etc, have largely moved 
in the direction of allowing the competition authority to monitor and regulate the 
competition matters across all sectors of an economy. This indicates a policy 
position, taken by different countries, that regulatio n of competition matters 
require technical and sophisticated analysis, which can best be provided by a 
specialized regulator. Very rare exemptions (limited to select activity within a 
sector and granted for limited duration) have been carved to meet peculi ar 
economic conditions in a sector. Overall, a globally accepted method to sort out 
the issues between sectoral regulatory authorities and competition authority 
seems to be to encourage the regulators to enter into memorandum of 

39 
 
understanding (MOU) to foster mutual consultation and uniformity of approach to 
competition matters. From the analysis of various international jurisdictions, it is 
clear that Competition Commission should continue to be the sole regulator to 
take care of issues related to competiti on.  The sectoral regulators however, can 
continue to have limited jurisdiction for fair market practices and to promote 
efficiency in respective sector.‖ 
79. The Committee note that the existing provision for consultation between 
statutory authorities and  CCI in respect of matters falling within their respective 
jurisdiction is voluntary. The Bill proposes to amend Section 21 to make it 
mandatory for statutory authorities to make a reference to CCI if the decision 
taken or proposed to be taken by statutory  authority is or would be contrary to 
any of the provisions of the Competition Act. Similarly , the Bill proposes to 
amend Section 21  A to make it mandatory for CCI to make a reference to a 
statutory authority if the decision taken or proposed to be taken b y CCI is or 
would be contrary to any provision of the Act, whose implementation is entrusted 
to that statutory authority. The Bill also propose s to amend Section 27 to provide 
that the Commission sh all give due regard to the opinion given by the statutory 
authority. While welcoming these amendments as steps to bring about synergy 
and coordination amongst different statutory/regulatory bodies, the Committee 
desire that it may also be statutorily mandated upon both CCI as well as other 
regulators to state cat egorically the reasons for disagreement whenever 
instances of divergence of opinion arise during the consultation process.  
Clause 11: Amendment of Section 26 ( Empowerment of  the CCI to decide a 
matter where the CCI does not agree with Director-General‟s investigation)  
 
80. Section 26 of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 
     ―(1) On receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State  Government 
or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or information received under 
section 19, i f the Commission is of the opinion that there exists a prima facie 
case, it shall direct the Director General to cause an investigation to be made into 
the matter 
******** 
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under sub-section (1), submit a 
report on his findings within such period as may be specified by the Commission. 
 
********** 
(5) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub -section (3) recommends 
that there is no contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Commissio n shall 

40 
 
invite objections or suggestions from the Central Government or the State 
Government or the statutory authority or the parties concerned, as the case may 
be, on such report of the Director General. 
 
(6) If, after consideration of the objections and  suggestions referred to in sub 
section (5), if any, the Commission agrees with the recommendation of the 
Director General, it shall close the matter forthwith and pass such orders as it 
deems fit  and communicate its order to the Central Government or the State 
Government or the statutory authority or the parties concerned, as the case may 
be. 
 
(7)If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in sub 
section(5), if any, the Commission is of the opinion that further investigations is 
called for, it may direct further investigation in the matter by the Director General 
or cause further inquiriy to be made by in the matter or itself proceed with further 
inquiry in the matter in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
 
(8) If the report  of the Director General referred to in sub -section (3) recommends 
that there is contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, and the 
Commission is of the opinion that further inquiry is called for, it shall inquire into 
such contravention in accordance with the provisions of this Act.‖ 
 

41 
 
81. The Bill proposes to amend Sub-sections 7 and 8 of Section 26  as under: 
―In section 26 of the principal Act,— 
 
(a) in sub-section (7), after the words ‗in accordance with the provisions of  this 
Act‘, the words ‗and make appropriate orders thereon after hearing the  
concerned parties‘ shall be inserted; 
 
(b) in sub-section (8), after the words "in accordance with the provisions of  this 
Act", the words "and make appropriate orders thereon after hearing the  
concerned parties" shall be inserted‖. 
 
82. The requirement and justification for the proposed amendment, as furnished by 
the Ministry in their Background note, is as under: 
―The inability of the Commission to pass order under Section 26 when it does not 
agree wit h the DG‘s finding of contravention has been removed by adding the 
words ―and after the said inquiry, pass such orders as it deems fit‖. 
 
83. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, ASSOCHAM, CUTS and  
Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant have stated: 
 
ASSOCHAM: 
―The amended law will be prospective and enforceable only wh en notified by the 
Government. Therefore, all past cases and parties affected by such closure 
orders passed by the Commission thereof will continue to suffer.  As such, since 
the law has only come into effect on 20 th May, 2009, all parties affected by a few 
―closure‖ orders of the CCI may be allowed to get a relief of appeal within 60 
days from the date of notification of this amended section.  
 
CUTS: 
 
Under section 26(5), the Commis sion invites suggestions from relevant 
stakeholders in case the report of Director General recommends absence of 
contravention. Similar procedure must be implemented even if ca ses when the 
report of Director -General recommends contravention of provisions o f the Act, 
specifically when the Commission is being given the power to make appropriate 
orders. 
 
Shri Vinod Dhall: 
 
Sub-sections (5) to (7) of Section 26 deal with situations where the DG after 
investigation finds no contravention under the Act. The CCI i s then required to 
invite objections from the parties concerned. If after consideration the CCI agrees 
with the DG it passes appropriate orders. In the event that it does not agree with 
recommendations of the DG, it may direct the DG for further investigat ions; or 
proceed itself with further inquiry.  
 

42 
 
Sub-section (8) of Section 26 which deals with situations where the DG finds a 
violation under the Act does not lay down the procedure as set out  in Sub -
sections (5) to (7) of Section 26.  
 
It is submitted th at the CCI should have similar powers in both situations, that is 
where the DG report finds no violation [Sub-sections (5), (6) and (7)] and where it 
finds a violation [Sub -section (8)]. On the basis of principles of statutory 
interpretation the difference  in wordings may be construed to mean that the 
legislative intent in the two situations was different. Therefore, to remove any 
ambiguities in the Act it would be advisable to amend the clauses to make the 
language consistent. In either case, CCI should ha ve t he power after due 
process to:  agree with the DG, or disagree with the DG, or ord er or undertake 
further inquiry‖. 
 
84. The Chair person, CCI during oral evidence  before the Committee stated as 
under: 
―......the reason for that amendment is that the way  the law is worded, there is 
something which falls between the cracks and gives an impression that if the DG 
gives a report saying that some company is in violation and the Commission in its 
judicial process comes to the conclusion that there is no violati on, then the 
Commission cannot disagree with the Director -General.  I am sure that certainly 
cannot be the scheme which the legislature gives because the investigator 
cannot be the judge.  Since that aspect was missing, that is being brought in.  
Otherwise, the lawyers are certainly very intelligent to pick on loopholes.  They 
are going in appeal and saying that the Commission has no powers to go against 
the report of the DG.‖ 
85. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written replies have inter alia stated: 
―As the affected parties had opportunity to approach the High Courts under 
Articles 226/ 227 of the Constitution, it cannot be said that a legal vacuum 
existed for such parties.  Retrospective effect will lead to re -opening of settled 
issues.  
 
The Commission is guided by the principles of natural justice while conducting 
inquiry, hence there is no need to make the suggested amendments. 
 
The suggestion seeks to provide clarity  to the proposed amendments to S ection 
26 of the Act. However, as the  proposed amendment is  self-explanatory and 
comprehensive, no further amendment is required.‖ 
 
 
 
86. When asked about the criteria for over ruli ng the findings of the Director -General 
and the  cases over ruled by the Commission, the Ministry in their post evidenc e reply 
stated as under: 

43 
 
―The findings of the Director-General are examined by the Commission in the light 
of the replies/objections filed by the parties thereto.  The findings of the Director -
General may be rejected by the Commission if, after considering  the entire 
material available on record, contravention of the provisions of the Act is not 
established.‖ 
 
87. On being questioned as to why the discretionary powers of the Chair person, CCI 
are increasing, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as under: 
―The purpose of this amendment is to address lacunae which are present in the 
Act which is that once the DG provides the investigation report stating that there 
is a contravention and CCI does not agree with, a reading of the Act suggests 
that there is no provision under which CCI can disagree with the DG, which goes 
against the intention of the Legislature.           
 The proposal seeks to fill the procedural voids in the scheme of Section 26 
of the Act which currently does not explicitly provide for CCI to pass orders to 
close the case if the DG finds contravention and vice versa in the matters.‖ 
 
88. When specifically asked whether CCI is satisfied with their performance during 
last three years especially with reference to the cases investigated by Director General 
upheld and the cases investigated by Director General reversed, the Ministry in their 
post evidence reply have stated as under: 
 
 
―Since its inception, CCI received information on 333 matters and passed final 
orders in more than 251 cas es.  Matters concerning  the important sectors of the 
economy like infrastructure, finance, entertainment, information technology, 
telecom, civil aviation, energy, insurance, travel, automobile manufacturing, real 
estate and pharmaceuticals were received in the Commission.  
 
So far, Commission has referred 156 cases to Director General for investigation 
out of which report on 127 matters have been received and reports on 29 cases 
are pending.  In 45 cases, reports of Director General were accepted and order s 
were passed under Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002.  58 cases were 
closed after the receipt of report of Director General.  In 42 cases, the findings of 
the Director General were reversed by the Commission.‖  
  
89.      In a news item dated 31 January 2013,  it  was reported that:- 
 ―Experts have batted for relief for companies that have virtually lost the 'right to 
appeal' in several cases where the Competition Commission of India (CCI) has 
overruled the report filed by its investigation arm, whic h found the firms violating 
the Competition Act. Terming it as a 'lacunae' in the existing Competition Act, 
legal experts said the government and the CCI should look at providing 
'retrospective' relief in cases that have already been affected as the propos ed 
amendments to the competition laws may correct the situation only with 
prospective effect…. 
 

44 
 
In these cases and a few others, the complaints about companies indulging in 
cartelisation/abuse of dominance got verified and endorsed by the CCI's director 
general (DG) of investigations. However, in its final order, the CCI overruled the 
DG's report but did not specify the section of the Competition Act under which the 
complaints were dismissed. 
 
Although in many cases the complain ants approached the Competition Appellate 
Tribunal (COMPAT) against the CCI rulings, the appellate panel sought to know 
under which section of the Act was the CCI order challenged.  …… So, the 
question is whether CCI has the power to close a case where its rulings is 
contrary to the DG's findings‖.  
 
90. The Committee have been informed that since the existing provisions do 
not explicitly provide for CCI to pass orders if the Director -General finds 
contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or otherwise, t he proposed 
amendment s eeks to address this lacuna e by providing enabling power to CCI 
under Section 26(7) and 26(8) to pass an appropriate order after hearing the 
concerned parties.   
 
91. The Committee, however , take serious view of the fact that  the findings of 
the Director-General,  in as many as 42 cases, have already been reversed by CCI 
even though there are no explicit provisions in the Act to this effect at present.  
The Committee also take cognizance of the news item dated 31 st January, 2013 
which reported that there were instances  where the complaints about companies 
indulging in cartelization/abuse of dominance were got verified and endorsed by 
the Director General, however, the CCI finally overruled the Director General‟s 
report without specifying the Section under w hich the complaints were 
dismissed. W hen the affected parties approach ed the Competition Appellate 
Tribunal (COMPAT) against the CCI rulings , the appellate panel sought to know 
under which Section of the Act was the CCI order challenged.  The Committee are 
of the view that as a principle of natural justice, all such cases be allowed to get a 
relief of appeal within 60 days from the date of notification of this amended 
section. Necessary procedures may be put in place to make appropriate orders 
under the proposed amendment.  
 
 Clause 12: Amendment of Section 27 (Providing an opportunity to party 
concerned, of being heard by the Commission before imposing penalty)  
 
92. Section 27 of the Competition Act, 2002 reads as under: 

45 
 
“27. Where after inquiry the Commis sion finds that any agreement referred to in 
Section 3 or action of an enterprise in a dominant position, is in contravention of 
Section 3 or Section 4, as the case may be, it may pass all or any of the following 
orders, namely:— 
 
*******   
(b) impose such penalty, as it may deem fit which shall be not more than ten per 
cent of the average of the turnover for the last three preceding financial years, 
upon each of such person or enterprises which are parties 
to such agreements or abuse:  
 
Provided that in ca se any agreement referred to in Section 3 has been entered 
into by a cartel, the Commission may impose upon each producer, seller, 
distributor, trader or service provider included in that cartel, a penalty of up to 
three times of its profit for each year of the continuance of such agreement or ten 
per cent. of its turnover for each year of the continuance of such agreement, 
whichever is higher. 
 
******** 
 
(g) pass such other order or issue such directions as it may deem fit: 
 
Provided that while passing ord ers under this section, if the Commission comes 
to a finding, that an enterprise in contravention to Section 3 or Section 4 of the 
Act is a member of a group as defined in clause(b) of the Explanation to Section 
5 of the Act, and other members of such a gr oup are also responsible for, or 
have contributed to, such a contravention, then it may pass orders, under this 
section, against such members of the group‖. 
 
 
93. The Bill proposes to amend Section 27 to provide an opportunity to party 
concerned, of being heard by the Commission before imposing penalty as under : 
In section 27 of the principal Act,— 
(i) in clause (b), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
 
"Provided further that no such penalty shall be imposed by the 
Commission under this section without giving an opportunity of being 
heard to the producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider, as the 
case may be".  
 
(ii)  in clause (g), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
"Provided further  that while passing orders under this section, the 
Commission shall give due regard to the opinion given by the statutory 
authority, where such opinion has been obtained under the provisions of 
sub-section (1) of Section 21A of this Act.‖ 
 
 
94. In their wr itten submission furnished to the Committee, Luthra & Luthra ( Law 
Offices) ASSOCHAM, FICCI, and Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant have stated:  
 

46 
 
Luthra & Luthra (Law Offices): 
(i) The Bill does not seem to address the ambiguities that surround 
imposition of penalty .  The CCI has often calculated fines on the total 
turnover or profits of the enterprise without taking into account the level of 
trade and commerce affected.  This has been a problem especially in 
relation to cartel cases.  Thus, it might be beneficial if  a more precise 
methodology was provided to calculate fines. 
 
In the DLF order (Case No.19/2010), CCI imposed a fine of Rs.630 crores 
(approx.) that was based on its total turnover not its turnover from 
residential units.  Similarly, in the Cement cartel c ase (Case No.29/2010), 
a fine of Rs.6300 crores (approx.) was imposed on eleven cement 
manufacturers.  The penalty was calculated on the total turnover of the 
enterprises without even considering the proportion of business of the 
particular enterprise that  manufactured cement or the turnover of the 
enterprise from manufacturing of cement. 
ASSOCHAM/FICCI: 
 
(ii) The mitigating factors in relation to penalties may be further clarified i.e. in 
case of group companies with multiple businesses, the penalty should 
only be attributable to the business to which the inquiry relates and not of 
the entire group.   
 
 
……The Bill seeks to introduce the aforesaid requirement only while 
imposing a penalty on cartels and not other kinds of `anti -competitive 
agreements.‘ The Bill s hould incorporate the personal hearing process 
before penalizing any of the anti-competitive practices. 
 
On the lines of the UK Competition Act, the CCI should be required to 
issue/publish Guidance as to the appropriate amount of  penalty. 
 
 

47 
 
FICCI: 
(iii) ………..The Competition Bill, 2012 should incorporate the existence of a 
Corporate Competition Law Compliance programme as a defence or a 
mitigating factor for enterprises when faced with proceedings for a 
competition law violation. 
 
 
Shri Vinod Dhall: 
 
(iv) It is sugge sted that for the purpose of calculating penalty to be imposed, 
the Act must continue to provide for a cap on the penalty as currently 
provided in the Act. However, due regard must also be given to the 
relevant turnover of the enterprise in the relevant pr oduct/service in which 
the offence was committed. The amendment should, therefore, make it 
obligatory for the CCI to formulate Regulations setting out clear guidelines 
on imposition of penalty.‖ 
 
 
95. The representative of ASSOCHAM while deposing before th e Committee during 
oral evidence stated as under: 
  
“The proposal is..... limited only to the producer, seller, distributor, trader or 
service provider, as the case may be........ This may be amended only till the 
opportunity of being heard, whoever is aff ected, and not to certain classes 
only........If the intent is to provide penalty to the affected person, let it not be 
limited and, therefore, there should be an end after the opportunity of being 
heard so that I do not waste the time of the hon. Commission. 
 
96. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their written replies have submitted as under: 
(i) Section 27(b) provides adequate leeway to the Commission to determine 
the quantum of penalty.   As such, it would not be consistent with the legislative 
intent to take away the discretion conferred upon the Commission to impose 
penalty. As per the extant practise, the Commission before imposition of penalty 
considered various factors besides weighing aggravating and mitigating 
circumstances/ factors. Also given the current scenario it is also not always 
possible to determine or quantify the level of trade affected. 
 
It may be added that in EU and other jurisdictions where level of trade and 
commerce affected is taken into account while imposing penalty the upper cap of 
10% is linked to the worldwide turnover of the enterprises. 
 
(ii) It is agreed that the proposed proviso to section 27 of the Act could be 
suitably modified to extend its scope to all the entities upon whom the penalty is 
proposed to be imposed. 
 
(iii) There is no need to insert the suggested provision in the statute as the 
same can be achieved by making regulation or issuing guidelines by the CCI at 
appropriate stage. 
 
 

48 
 
(iv) It is submitted that proposed amendment does not envisage a separate 
hearing on the quantum of penalty. It only says that penalty shall not be imposed 
without giving an opportunity of being heard, which is nothing but explicitly 
providing that the principles of natural justice are required to be followed. 
Therefore, the CCI can f rame suitable guidelines through regulations at 
appropriate stage and a specific provision in the Act making mandatory framing 
of regulations by CCI for computation of penalties not required.  
 
(v) Further, while imposing fine the Commission can always tak e into the 
consideration the turnover related to the product or service involved in the 
anticompetitive conduct of the enterprise‖. 
 
97. On being asked about the criteria to impose penalty;  the total amount of penalty 
imposed; stayed at appellate level an d credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, the 
Ministry in their post evidence reply have stated as under: 
―The Commission has so far imposed a penalty of Rs.8015.03 crore out of which 
Rs.65.19 lacs has been realized and credited to Consolidated Fund of  India.  
Levy of Rs.84.00 lacs penalty has been dismissed by Competition Appellate 
Tribunal (COMPAT)/High Court.  Penalty of Rs.7959.47 Crore has been stayed 
by the Order o f COMPAT and a sum of Rs.54.06 crores  has neither been paid 
nor stayed/dismissed by the Courts‖.   
 
98. The Committee note that Section 27 (b) of the Act empowers the CCI to 
impose penalty for contravention of the provisions of Section 3 pertaining to 
“anti-competitive agreements” or Section 4 pertaining to “abuse of dominant 
position”.  The Committee, however, find that the Bill seeks to amend the proviso 
to Section 27 (b) so as to make it mandatory for CCI to give an opportunity of 
hearing to party concerned prior to imposition of penalty  on cartels only; but not 
in the case of other kinds of “anti-competitive agreements”. When suggested that 
the Bill should incorporate the personal hearing process before penalizing any of 
the anti competitive practices, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs , while agreeing to 
the suggestion stated that the pr oposed proviso to Section 27 (b) of the Act could 
be suitably modified to extend its scope to all the entities upon whom the penalty 
is proposed to be imposed. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to 
carry out necessary changes while bringing in the revised amendment Bill.  
 
 

49 
 
99. The Committee n ote that despite the Act empowering CCI to frame 
Regulations, the criteria for determination of penalty by the CCI has been a cause 
of concern as no specific Regulations  in this regard exist at present.   Although 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have stated that as per extant practice, the CCI, 
before imposition of penalty, considers various factors besides weighing 
aggravating and mitigating circumstances/factors, the imposition of penalty in 
the absence  of Regulations is not appropriate . The Committee   recommend the 
Government to ensure that suitable guidelines  for imposition of penalty are 
framed as agreed to by the Ministry in a time bound manner.  
 
100. The Committee further note that the Commission h as so far imposed a 
penalty of Rs.8015.03 crore out of which Rs.65.19 lacs  only has been realized and 
credited to Consolidated Fund of India.  While levy of Rs.84.00 lacs penalty has 
been dismissed by Competition Appellate Tribunal (COMPAT)/High Court ,   
penalty of Rs.7959.47 crore has been stayed by the Order of COMPAT and a sum 
of Rs.54.06 crores has neither been paid nor stayed/dismissed by the Courts .  
The Committee are constrained to observe that these figures poorly reflect upon 
the effectiveness of t he existing mechanism in realization of penalty. The very 
purpose of imposition of penalty is defeated if the amount is not realized for one 
reason or the other. Suitable regulations may, therefore, be made for this 
purpose. The Committee, also, urge upon the CCI to make diligent efforts to get 
the stay vacated and recover the amount of penalty imposed in all cases at the 
earliest. 
Clause 13: Amendment of Section 31 (reduction in overall time limit of deciding a 
case related to combinations to 180 days instead of existing 210 days)  
 
101. Sub sections 11 & 12 of Section 31 of the Act read as under: 
―11)  If the Commission does not, on the expiry of a period of [two hundred and 
ten days from the date of notice given to the Commission under sub section(2) of 
section 6], pass an order or issue direction in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (1) or sub -section (2) or sub -section (7), the combination shall be 
deemed to have been approved by the Commission. 
Explanation:- For the purposes of determining t he period of [two hundred and 
ten] days specified in this subsection, the period of thirty working days specified 
in sub -section (6) and a further period of thirty working days specified in sub -
section (8) shall be excluded. 
 

50 
 
12)  Where any extension of ti me is sought by the parties to the combination, 
the period of ninety working days shall be reckoned after deducting the extended 
time granted at the request of the parties.‖ 
 
102. The Bill proposes to amend Section 31 to reduce the overall time limit of de ciding 
a case related to combinations to 180 days, instead of existing 210 days,  as under: 
―In section 31 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub -section ( 11), for the words "two hundred and ten days", at both the 
places where they occur, the words "one hundred  and eighty days" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (12), for the words "ninety working days" the words "one 
hundred and eighty days" shall be substituted.‖ 
103. The Ministry in their B ackground note have stated that  in Section 31(12), the 
words ―ninety working days‖, appeared inadvertently instead of 210 days which is now 
being reduced to 180 days. 
 
104. Sub section 2A of Section 6 of the Act read as under: 
―No combination shall come into effect until two hundred and ten days have 
passed from the da y on which the notice has been given to the Commission 
under sub -section(2) or the Commission has passed orders under section 31, 
whichever is earlier.‖ 
 
105. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, ASSOCHAM, FICCI, 
CUTS and Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant have stated:  
 
 
 
ASSOCHAM and FICCI: 
 
―Without making changes in sub -section 2A of Section 6 to 180 days, the 
suggested amendment in this clause may come in conflict wit h the substantive 
provision of S ection 6(2A).  The following may, therefo re, be inserted in sub -
section 2A of Section 6: 
 
―replace two hundred ten days by one hundred and eighty days in line one‖ 
 
  
CUTS: 
 
―The provision of passing a prima facie  opinion within 30 days has been 
incorporated. Currently, this is in the regulations . CCI can require the parties to 
suggest modifications in addition to the existing provision of suggesting itself. 
Maximum period for approval has been restricted to 180 days instead of 210 
days (as proposed under the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012. Al l references 
to working days appearing in sub -sections 6, 8, 9, 11 & 12 have been amended 
so as to mean calendar days‖. 
 

51 
 
Shri Vinod Dhall: 
―At present, the Act allows the CCI up to 210 days to decide on a combination; 
this period is too long by internation al standards. It is suggested that the period 
for a combination inquiry be further reduced to 150 days instead of reducing it to 
180 days. For any additional information that the CCI requires from the parties, it 
has the power to seek such additional infor mation, and meanwhile the clock 
stops; thus the time taken for seeking additional information does not count 
towards the time limit of 210 days. In fact, the CCI has been using its power to 
stop the clock during its inquiry into mergers. Thus , a shorter period of 150 days 
should suffice for the CCI to complete its internal processes and form an opinion 
about approving or not approving the combination. It needs to be kept in mind 
that mergers are a part of the normal transactions taking place in the market, and 
it is desirable that the CCI process for analysing the merger is as expeditious as 
possible.  
The Amendment Bill does not provide for the corresponding amendment to 
Section 6 (2A), which states that no combination shall come into effect until two 
hundred and ten days have passed from the day on which the notice has been 
given to the CCI or orders have been passed under Section 31 of the Act‖. 
106. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs,  in their written replies have stated: 
―In light of the provisions conta ined in Competition Commission of India 
(Procedure in regard to the transaction of business relating to combinations) 
Regulations, 2011, there is no need to provide for passing of prima facie opinion 
within 30 days in the Act itself.  
 
The official Bill al ready reduces the period for approval of combinations to 180 
days. 
 
The suggestion to provide consequential changes in section 6(2A) of the Act in 
light of the amendments effected in Section 31 of the Act (replacing the time 
period from 210 days to 180 days), is agreed to. 
 
The suggestion to further reduce the time period to decide on a combination 
(from the proposed 180 days to 150 days) is not practicable keeping in view the 
fact that complex merger cases having far reaching implications on the 
competition in the market require in -depth analysis and also due to the limited 
resources and experience of CCI.‖ 
 
107. When asked as to whether this time -limit can be reduced further in today‘s world 
of very fast communication devices, the Ministry in their post ev idence reply stated as 
under: 
 
―The Act presently has a time period of 210 days within which the Commission 
has to make its final determination regarding any appreciable adverse effect on 
competition (AAEC) in the relevant market in India that may be caused due to the 

52 
 
proposed combination, or else the combination shall be deemed to have been 
approved by the Commission. 
 
The Commission, being sensitive to the requirements of the industry which seeks 
an expeditious decision on the combination notices, through  its Regulations, has 
put in place, shorter, self -imposed time periods of 30 days for a prima facie 
determination of AAEC , and of 180 days for a final determination of AAEC in the 
relevant market in India. So far, all the notices have been decided at the prima 
facie stage, i.e. within a period of 30 days. 
 
It has also been the experience of the Commission that the corresponding time 
periods for review of combination notices in various other mature jurisdictions are 
of a comparable duration or longer. There fore, the proposed amendment to 
reduce the mandatory period of clearance from 210 days to 180 days is in 
keeping with the self -imposed time limit prescribed by the Commission and 
compares favourably with the corresponding time periods in similar jurisdicti ons 
worldwide.‖ 
 
 
108. The Committee note that under Section 6(2) of the Act, any person or 
enterprise, who or which proposes to enter into a combination is required to give 
notice to the CCI. If the CCI does not pass an order or issue direction within a 
period of 210 days from the date of notice, the combination is deemed to have 
been approved by the CCI under Section 31(11) of the Act. The Bill proposes to 
reduce the time limit to 180 days. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs have stated 
that the proposed a mendment to reduce the mandatory period of clearance is in 
keeping with self imposed time limit prescribed by the Commission and the 
corresponding time periods in similar jurisdictions worldwide. The Committee, 
however, note that the Bill does not provide for the corresponding/consequential 
amendment to Section 6(2A) which states that no combination shall come into 
effect until 210 days have passed from the day on which the notice has been 
given to the Commission under sub -section (2) or the Commission has passed 
orders under Section 31, whichever is earlier. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that in the light of amendments proposed to be effected in Section 
31, consequential changes in Section 6(2A) of the Act may also be carried out and 
the words “two hu ndred and ten days” be replaced by the words “one hundred 
and eighty days”.  
 
 
  
 
Clause 14: Amendment of Section 41:  Substitution of Sub -section (3)  
[Empowerment of Chairperson, CCI to approve search and seizure] 
 

53 
 
109. Section 41 of the Act reads as under: 
41.(1) ******* 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (2), sections 240 and 240A 
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), so far as may be, shall apply to an  
investigation made by the Director General or any other person investigating  
under his authority, as they apply to an inspector appointed under that Act. 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, -- 
 
(a) the words ―the Central Government‖ under section 240 of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) shall be construed as ―the Commission‖; 
 
(b) the word ―Magistrate‖ under section 240A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) shall be construed as ―the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi‖. 
110. The Bill proposes to amend Section 41 as under: 
In section 41 of the principal Act,— 
(a) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
 
"(3) Where in the course of investigation, the Director General has reason 
to believe that any person or enterprise, to whom a notice under sub -section (2) 
has been issued,— 
 
(a) has omitted or failed to provide the information or produce  documents as 
required notice; or 
 
(b) would not provide the information or produce documents which  will be useful 
for, or relevant to, the investigation; or 
 
(c) would destroy, mutilate, alter, falsi fy or secrete the information  or documents 
useful for, or relevant to, the investigation, then,  he may, after obtaining the 
authorisation from the Chairperson of the 
Commission,— 
 
(i) enter, with such assistance and force, as may be required, the  place or 
places where such information or documents are expected to be kept; 
(ii) search such place or places, as the case may be; 
(iii) seize documents and take copies of information, including  electronic 
mail, hard disk of computer and such other media; 
(iv) record on oath statements of persons having knowledge of  the 
information or documents referred to in sub-clause (iii). 
 
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to 
searches and seizure shall apply, so far as may be, to searches and seizure 
under sub-section (3)."; 
(b) the Explanation shall be omitted.‖ 

54 
 
 
111. The justification for the proposed amendment as furnished by the Ministry in their 
Background note, is given below: 
―Provisions for search and seizure by Director General , CCI with the approval of 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi already exist as derived under Section 240 
and 240A of Companies Act. The revision is proposed:  
 
a) To remove cross-reference to Companies Act; and 
 
b) To empower Chairperson, CCI to approve search and sei zure in place of the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi who does not have all India Jurisdiction. 
Similar issues exist in certain laws like Income Tax Act.‖ 
 
 
 
112. In their written submission furnished to the Committee, ASSOCHAM, FICCI, CII , 
and Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant have stated:  
  
 
 ASSOCHAM: 
Authorization by the Chairperson of the Commission for an unannounced raid at 
the premises of any enterprise suspected to be in breach of any provision of the 
Act may be considered an expeditious solution but simultaneously may at times 
also be challenged by any party aggrieved by such authorization on the grounds 
that the Commission has become judge of its own cause.  Therefore, an 
independent authority viz. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate New Delhi may be 
considered to be retained. 
 
FICCI: 
Lack of checks and balances – CCI can‘t be an investigator and adjudicator of 
the same cause – prejudice. 
 
The power to authorize search and seizure should continue to vest with the 
Magistrate. 
 
CII: 
……the absence of a che ck and balance system, the amendment to the 
provisions on DG‘s powers to conduct ―search and seizure‖ where the 
Chairperson is empowered to sanction raids may potentially result in greater 
ingress on the right to privacy.  Therefore, it is suggested that t he 
GoI/Commission may consider: (i) introducing specific guidelines and best 
practices to be followed by the DG while conducting raids (e.g. clear, valid and 
reasoned orders should be issued for undertaking dawn raids, scope of a dawn 
raid should be spelt out in the order and list of information seized by the officer 
should be prepared and provided to the concerned entity and (ii) provide a 
provision for appeal before the  Competition Appellate Tribunal to challenge the 
decision of the Commission to conduct dawn raids, (in cases including not limited 

55 
 
to if the parties believe that there as no cogent reason or purpose for conducting 
such dawn raids on the enterprise). 
 
 
 
Shri Vinod Dhall: 
It may be clarified that the DG must have ―evidence to support‖ his bel ief that a 
search and seizure order should be issued; 
 
Proposed Sub -clause (a) may be modified to state that the party receiving the 
notice has failed ―without reasonable cause‖ to produce the evidence. Otherwise, 
this section could be open to abuse by the  DG issuing an unreasonable request 
or timeline and then immediately seeking search and seizure or der because it 
has not been met; 
 
 
Limiting the scope of search and seizure to information that is relevant (and 
deleting ―useful‖). The whole process should be aimed at obtaining relevant 
information and if it meets that test it must be useful. However, if a distinction is 
made the courts would logically read ―useful‖ as extending beyond information 
that is ―relevant‖ which could justify a fishing expedition; 
 
The DG may be required to make the request in writing specifying the provisions 
of the law and the facts relied on and the same obligation on the Chairman, CCI. 
This will ensure that there is no issue of the DG or Chairman not applying their 
minds to the facts before they make a decision; and 
 
It may also be considered whether the decision instead of resting with the 
Chairman, CCI may be entrusted to the Commission as a whole. This will ensure 
a wider application of mind before permitting a search and seizure operation.‖ 
 
 
 
 
113. In this regard, the representatives of CII and  ASSOCHAM while deposing before 
the Committee during oral evidence  stated further as under: 
CII: 
―First, there is no further guideline or rationale on the basis of which any such 
dawn raid could be started by the Chairman. The Chairman is the authority under 
whose permission an inquiry starts and only if he says so, it proceeds. Therefore, 
there is an inherent conflict of interest between assuming that you can allow an 
inquiry to start and then again objectively say that there should be no search and 
seizure.‖ 
ASSOCHAM: 
―They want to say that the Chairperson may simply sign off and go ahead and 
carry on the search and seizure. I respectfully submit that, that would be an 

56 
 
uncanalised power not required plus, and most important, in the last two years of 
the existence of this Commission, not a single instance has been brought before 
this Committee or before anybody to show that such a power was tried to be 
exercised and it resulted in failure. ......Therefore, to say that the Parliament must 
reconsider and amend its provision which was already there after much 
consideration earlier is of no consequence. ....... I respectfully commend, 
therefore, without any basis, there is no need to vest th e single individual, who 
has possibly a conflict of interest because he is initiating in the first instance.‖ 
 
114. In this regard, t he Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the Chairperson, 
CCI while tendering evidence before the Committee stated: 
 
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs: 
 
There is a Commission with considerable responsibility of adjudication and 
investigation. Probably to that extent it is a sui generis  regulator. So, possibly 
some of the enforcement powers are required. We do tak e on board the 
reservations or I would say certain doubts as to the possibility of misuse etc., and 
we will definitely be considering whether any safeguards etc., would be 
necessary.  
I would only like to crave your indulgence to point out similar provisio ns in the let 
us, say, Income Tax Act and Customs Act. Officials who would be hierarchy wise 
much less than the Chairman of Competition Commission and whose direct 
interest in the outcome of the case, in the interest of revenue I am not saying 
personal dir ect interest, would be much more than that of the Chairman, are 
vested with the power of issuing search and seizure warrant. But certainly I think 
the issue of safeguards needs to be seriously looked into. 
 
 
Chairperson, CCI: 
―.......the Act already provid es for search and seizures. ...... The reason why the 
process of getting a warrant is being shifted from the judicial side to the institution 
of the Commission is that in such cases, there has to be an element of speed 
and confidentiality. But what safeguards should be built in, whether the Chairman 
is competent to do this, it rests in your hand.‖ 
 
115. On being asked to clarify as to whether the proposed provision is necessary 
as  the Competition Act, 2002 is a civil and not a criminal law, the Ministry in their post 
evidence reply stated as under: 
…... Provisions relating to search and seizure also exist in Income Tax Act, 1961 
as well as the Central Excise Act, 1944  and the Narcotics Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, which are also Civil Acts in nature. 
 
The purpose of this amendment is to ensure that there is a speedy and 
confidential process of collecting relevant evidence, which may get 

57 
 
misplaced/hidden/lost in case action is not taken on an urgent basis, and which 
will impact the efficacy of enforcement by the Commission. 
  
Further, the bill inter alia provides certain conditions to be fulfilled and further it 
also provides that search and seizure shall be subject to the provisions of CrPC, 
1973 and as such sufficient safeguard exist in the proposal .  It could, however, 
be considered if, reasons for permitting such action could also be given while 
issuing such orders. 
 
116. The Ministry have further added that there is no provision in any law providing for 
appeal against search warrants and the sugge stion to provide the powers to the 
Commission instead of Chairperson is also not agreeable for the reasons of expediency 
and secrecy. 
 
117. The Committee note that with a view to ensuring speedy and confidential 
process of collecting information, the Government proposes to amend Section 41 
of the Competition Act, 2002 to empower Chairperson ,  CCI to approve search 
and seizure and to replace the existing provisions whereby Director -General has 
to approach the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi for the purpose. The Bill also 
provides that search and seizure shall be subject to the provisions of Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973.  The Committee are of the view  that the existing 
provisions lay down adequate checks and balances  with regard to search and 
seizure operations. The Committee also find that the Ministry have not cited any 
instance where the powers of search and seizure, whenever exercised, resulted in 
delay or leakage of confidential information. As a matter of fact, the Committee 
have been informed that the CCI, since its inception has not used these powers to 
obtain information. Considering these aspects and also the fact that the CCI is 
still in a stage of infancy, the Committee desire the Government to maintain 
status quo in the matter for the present. 
 
118. In conclusion, the Committee would like to urge upon the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and the Competition Commission of India to consider the 
following issues relating to the evolving Competition law in the country and its 
practice that have aris en in recent times and have engaged attention of the 
Committee. Necessary amendments may accordingly be brought in the statute 
and the regulations.   

58 
 
(i)       whether the  Commission should be a body comprising of only retired 
persons or it should be a smalle r multi-disciplinary body consisting of 
domain experts; 
 
(ii)       whether more substantive amendments are required to enable the CCI 
to play a more vibrant and meaningful role in the economic 
development of the country like creation of robust data -base and 
formulation of coherent norms/principles in prevention/detection of 
cartels, price -manipulation/rigging and other market practices inimical 
to competition and orderly functioning of markets; 
 
(iii)      whether the CCI should enhance its capacity to take cognizan ce of 
emerging trends and developments in industry relating to “unfair 
dominance” or “monopolistic practices”, such as cross -holdings in 
media ownership. 
 
 
(iv) protection of consumer interest through periodical studies/surveys on 
trends of consumer prices in different sectors. 
 
(v)       whether the law should be designed in a manner that is unduly 
restrictive with rigid thresholds or should it be a facilitator for growth of 
business and industry while promoting fair play and freedom in 
competition and reasonable prices for consumers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                    YASHWANT SINHA, 
11 February, 2014                                                                    Chairman, 
22 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Finance.  

59 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 1st February, 2013 from 1130 hrs to 1315 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
15.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
16.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
17.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri P.C. Tripathy     –  Director  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
  
 

60 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) 
     
1. Shri Naved Masood, Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Chawla, Chairperson, Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
3. Shri Manoj Kumar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
2. The representatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Competition Commission of 
India (CCI) briefed the Committee in co nnection with examination of ‗the Competition 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012‘.  The major issues discussed during the sitting broadly related to 
provisions contained in the Bill regarding inclusion of  Chairperson, CCI in the Selection 
Committee for Selection of M embers, empowering Commission to decide matters where 
Commission does not agree with Director General‘s Investigation, empowering 
Chairperson, CCI to approve search & seizure, reducing the overall time limit of deciding a 
case related to combination and se eking comments of experts on the proposed 
amendments; empowerment of CCI, fastrack disposal of cases by CCI, filling up of vacant 
posts, role of CCI to prevent practices having adverse effect on competition and to protect 
interest of consumers; status of N ational Competition Policy; cartelisation and monopolistic 
practices in cement, steel, oil, insurance, jute, pharmaceutical, airlines sectors;  other 
monopolistic practices harmful to interest of consumer; reported abuse of dominant position 
by railways, oil marketing companies, banks, insurance companies, ports, airlines; amount 
of penalty imposed by CCI and credited to Consolidated Fund of India; etc. The Chairman 
then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs / Competition 
Commission of India (CCI) to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the 
discussion within fifteen days. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
     The Committee then adjourned. 

61 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th July, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Shri Nishikant Dubey 
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
5.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
3. XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
,  
 

62 
 
WITNESS 
     Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant & Former Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant & Former 
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the ‗Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012‘.  The 
major issues discussed included among other things , definition of turnover; need to 
formulate regulations to determine turnover for the purpose of imposing penalty or deciding 
a merger; concept of collective dominance in India vis -à-vis European Union; need to 
reduce number of days from 180 to 150 to decide cases of  merger; necessity to gran t 
search & seizure powers to Chairman, Competition Commission of India (CCI); functioning 
of CCI and justific ation for its existence; existence of many regulators in the Country, etc.  
The Chairman then directed the witness to furnish replies to the querie s raised by the 
Members at the earliest. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witness then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

63 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 2nd August, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1420 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay  
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
5.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
6.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
7.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
8.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
9.  Shr Prem Das Rai 
10.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
11.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
12. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
13. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
  
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
15.  Shri Piyush Goyal  
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
      
 
WITNESSES 
CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRY (CII)  
 
1. Ms. Zia Mody, Managing Partner, AZB & Partners 
 2. Mr. Arjun Uppal, Vice President -Corporate Affairs, DCM Shriram 
Consolidated Limited 
3. Mr. Samir R Gandhi, Partner, AZB & Partners 

64 
 
4. Mr. Marut Sen Gupta, Deputy Director General, Confederation of Indian 
Industry  
CONSUMER UNITY & TRUST SOCIETY (CUTS International)  
 
1. Pradeep S. Mehta, Secretary General, CUTS International and 
Chairman, CUTS Institute for Regulation & Competition 
 
2. Udai S. Mehta, Associate Director, CUTS International & Centre Head, 
CUTS Centre for Competition, Investment & Economic Regulation 
(CUTS CCIER) 
 
 
ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY OF INDIA 
(ASSOCHAM) 
 
1. Mr. Ramji Srinivasan, Chairperson, ASSOCHAM National Council for 
Competition Law & Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India 
 
2. Mr. Manas Kumar Chaudhuri, Co -chairperson, ASSOCHAM National 
Council for Competition Law & Partner, Khaitan & Co. 
 
3. Mr. G.R. Bhatia, Member, ASSOCHAM National Council for Competition 
Law & Advocate, Supreme Court of India 
 
 
2. The representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), the Associated 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), and Consumer Unity and T rust Society 
(CUTS International) briefed the Committee in connection with examination of ‗the 
Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012‘ and issues related therewith.  The major issues 
discussed during the sitting broadly related to merits of the amendments, mea sures to 
strengthen the Amendment Bill, threshold above which mandatory filing is required, concept 
of collective and joint dominance, cartelization, abuse of dominance, anti -competitive 
agreements, power of search and seizure and procedure thereof, danger  of leakage of 
information during judicial process, international experiences regarding competition laws, 
overall functioning of the Competition Commission, concerns of the industry, protection of 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), list of exemptions, pen alties on ‗affected turnover‘, 
composition and strength of Competition Commission, composition of selection committee of 
members, provision of compensation in case of class action litigation and above all,  
requirement of striking a balance between the nee d of economic growth and need to exist 
with a fair competition. The Chairman directed the representatives of Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), and 

65 
 
Consumer Unity and Trust Society (CUTS International) to furnish written replies to the points 
raised by the Members during the discussion within a period of ten days.  
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
    
The witness then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

66 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 31th January, 2014 from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.       Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.       Adv. A. Sampath 
5.       Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
6.       Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
7.       Dr. M. Thambi durai 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
8.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
9.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
10.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
11.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:- 
 
(i) The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012; 
 
(ii) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX;  
 
(iii)  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX. 

67 
 
3. As some Members sought more time to consider and formulate their views on the 
above draft reports, the Committee decided to postpone the adoption of the draft reports to 
their next sitting. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

68 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th  February, 2014 from 1520 hrs to 1615 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.     Dr. Baliram 
3.     Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4.     Shri Nishikant Dubey  
5.     Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7.     Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.     Shri Prem Das Rai 
9.     Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
10.   Adv. A. Sampath 
11.   Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.   Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
14. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
15. Shri Piyush Goyal 
16. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
2.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
3.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
2.  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
    3. The Committee thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption:- 

69 
 
(i) The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2012; and 
(ii)  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
4. The Committee adopted the above  draft Reports without any 
modifications/amendments and authorised the Chairman to present the same to 
Parliament.   
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 