 1 
76 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF  FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Sixty-
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue)  
 
 
 
SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


 2 
 
 
SEVENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in Sixty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 18 October, 2013 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


 3 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………(iii) 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………...... (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………   1 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27 September, 2013................ 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Sixty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue)…………………………………… 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora    -  Under Secretary 
                                                      
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

 5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Seventy Sixth Report on action taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Sixty Eighth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue).  
 2. The Sixty Eighth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2013.  Replies indicating action taken on all the 
recommendations contained in the R eport were furnished by the Government on 20 
August, 2013.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 27 
September, 2013. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixty Eighth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
 27 September, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
 05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 

 6 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by Governm ent on the recommendations/observations contained in their 68 th 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) which was presented to Lok Sabha / Laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 22nd April, 2013. 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 16 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
analyzed and categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16  
       (Total 12) 
(Chapter II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. Nil 
                  (Total Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  5, 8, 9 and 15 
       (Total 4)  
(Chapter IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which final replies by 
the Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL                  
(Total - Nil)  
(Chapter V) 

 7 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations contained in 
Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
Broadening Tax Base 
(Recommendation Para No. 2) 
5. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) had stated that in the last 
10 years the tax col lection in respect of Direct Taxes has increased by more than 
700%, while the number of tax -payers has grown by only about 35%. In this 
regard, while giving slab -wise information, the Department had informed that 
income slab upto Rs. 5 lakh comprises of 98 .38% of total assesses, while above 
20 lakh slab comprises of a meager 0.38% of total assesses. In this connection, 
while furnishing information with respect to the Direct Taxes Code Bill, 2010, the 
Department had intimated that the percentage of taxes col lected in the 0 -5 lakh 
slab was only 10.1% for the year 2011 -12 while the percentage of tax collected in 
the above 20 lakh slab was 63% for the corresponding year. Similarly, with regard 
to Corporate Taxes, the Committee note on the basis of facts furnishe d in the 
course of examination of Direct Taxes Code Bill, 2010 that for the Financial Year 
2008-09, there were 4,63, 507 number of tax -payers in 0 -100 crore slab, whereas 
above Rs. 500 crore slab, it was a mere 186 tax -payers. This situation presented 
before the Committee clearly suggest that income tax base in revenue terms is 
rather narrow which has adversely affected tax buoyancy. The Committee also 
found that Permanent Account Number (PAN) has been allotted to more than 11 
crore entities, while income t ax returns have been filed by only 3.5 crore entities. 
Further, a huge gap has also been noticed between number of entities to whom 
Tax Deduction and Collection Account Number (TAN) has been allotted vis -à-vis 
number of deductors filing TDS submissions. The Committee therefore desired that 
strenuous efforts should be made by the Department both in terms of policy as well 
as enforcement action in widening the tax base, which obviously is not 
commensurate with the growth in income and wealth witnessed over the years. 
6. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows : 

 8 
“The observation of the Hon‟ble Committee that efforts should be made by 
the Department both in terms of policy as well as enforcement action in 
widening the tax base has been du ly noted.  It has always been the 
endeavour of the Department to expand the tax base.  Various 
administrative and legislative measures undertaken in the past few years in 
this direction.  
 
The Income-tax Department (ITD) regularly collects information abou t high-
value transactions of specified categories through the mechanisms of 
Annual Information Return (AIR) and Central Information Branch (CIB). 
Information Technology is being increasingly used by ITD for collection, 
collation and dissemination of taxpay ers‟ information in a more effective 
manner. The information collected by ITD is utilized in various statutory 
proceedings including search & seizure; survey and scrutiny assessments 
which have an impact on deepening and widening of tax base.  
 
ITD has als o set up an Integrated Taxpayer Data Management System 
(ITDMS) to electronically collate and analyse the information collected from 
various sources. In some select cases 360 degrees profile is created for 
enquiries/investigation purposes. The ITDMS is used  to identify and profile 
high-risk taxpayers. 
 
As part of the widening of tax base exercise, ITD has identified persons 
holding PAN who have taxable income but who have not filed returns of 
income. Rule -based algorithms have been used to identify high prio rity 
cases for follow -up and monitoring. In the month of March 2013, on the 
basis of information collected from various sources about persons who have 
undertaken high-value financial transactions but have not filed their returns 
of income for A.Y. 2010 -11 and A.Y. 2011 -12, letters were issued to 
1,05,000 such persons. This process is on -going and to date we have 
issued letters to 1,75,000 persons”. 
 
7. The Committee note that in order to expand the tax base, Income tax 
Department has set up an Integrated Ta xpayer Data Management System 
(ITDMS) to electronically collate and anaylse the information collected from 
various sources.  However, tax buoyancy is not commensurate with the 
growth in income and wealth witnessed over the years.  Numbers of notices 
issued are very low as compared to 11 crore PAN Card holders.  The Income -
tax Department should therefore look at this aspect closely.  As commented 

 9 
upon in their earlier reports, the Committee desire that there is a need to 
plug tax evasion as well as avoidance  to increase tax buoyancy.  In this 
regard, Committee further desire that the Income Tax Department should 
optimally use information technology to keep a close watch over the high 
spending individuals and large monetary transactions and bring them into 
tax net so as to broaden the tax base instead of frittering away their limited 
resources on fixed -income groups.  Instead of depending on TDS and 
Advance Tax, Income-tax Department should adopt pro -active approach and 
induce those PAN Card holders who were li able to pay tax to file their 
income tax return. Simultaneously the ambit of TDS / TCS should also be 
widened.  
 
Presumptive tax 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
8. In the context of tax base, the Committee found that presently there were 
provisions in the Income Tax Act for levying Presumptive Tax, wherein the concept 
of “Presumptive Tax” has been introduced to bring a number of business and 
service providers, irrespective of their area of operations, earning substantial 
income. The Committee however, observed  that the existing provisions have not 
been yielding the potential quantum of tax and would therefore recommend that 
the present presumptive tax regime be reviewed so that substantial tax is 
generated through this source, as there is evidently a large numb er of individuals 
in businesses, trades, services and professions which are still outside the tax net.  
  
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows : 
“With a view to building an atmosphere of trust, encourage voluntary 
compliance a nd to widen the tax base, Finance Act, 1992 introduced a 
simplified procedure for taxation for small shop keepers by inserting section 
115K in the Income -tax Act, 1961 („the Act‟). The Finance Act, 1994 
introduced presumptive taxation scheme for certain ca tegories of business 
for simplifying the determination of business income and minimizing 
compliance cost. Section 44AD and Section 44AE were inserted in the Act 
for providing presumptive taxation scheme for the assessees engaged in 
the business of civil co nstruction and in the business of plying, leasing or 

 10 
hiring of trucks. Considering substantial growth in small businesses since 
the introduction of presumptive taxation scheme for certain businesses in 
1994, the Finance (No.2) Act, 2009 revised the presump tive taxation 
scheme under the Act. The existing section 44AD was substituted by a new 
section 44AD and the scope of presumptive taxation scheme was expanded 
to all small businesses. 
 
It is apparent from the above, the provisions relating to the presumptiv e 
taxation scheme in the Act are continuously reviewed to achieve the twin 
objective of widening the tax base and for reducing the compliance burden 
on small assesses”. 
 
10. The Committee find the reply furnished by the Ministry to be rather 
general and no n contextual.  The Committee find that presumptive tax 
provisions were revised only once so far in 2009 and the Ministry have not 
elaborated on the tax yield arising from this review.  Considering substantial 
growth in small businesses and the self -employed since the introduction of 
presumptive taxation scheme for certain businesses in 1994, the Committee 
would reiterate their recommendation that the present Presumptive tax 
regime be geared up with a view to generating substantial tax through this 
source and the net of Presumptive Tax should be widened.  In the meantime, 
the Committee desire that the Income Tax Department should prepare a 
zone-wise list / data -base of all the categories of businessmen, traders, 
professionals, service providers etc. ,who can be brought under the 
Presumptive Tax net, depending upon their size / turnover etc. 

 11 
 
Progressive Tax Policies 
(Recommendation Para No. 5) 
 
11. With a view to making the tax base broader as also progressive in nature, 
the Committee had sought information f rom the Department on the number of new 
assesses added each year and percentage of tax collected from them slab-wise for 
the last 5 years. The Committee had been informed that in the year 2008 -09, 
17,84,709 new assesses were added, while only 7,21,709 new assesses were 
added in 2011 -12. They had not been able to furnish figures for 2012 -13. The 
Department had also not been able to provide slab -wise information on new 
assesses. Based on this information as also the information on the number of tax -
payers and  tax collected slab -wise both for individuals and corporate made 
available in the context of the examination of Direct Taxes Code Bill, 2010, the 
Committee cannot but conclude that tax policies presently being pursued are 
seemingly not as progressive as th ey ought to be. The Committee would thus like 
to be apprised of the extent of new assesses added to the tax base each year 
slab-wise within a period of one month. The Committee would also like to urge the 
Department to widen the tax base in a genuine manner by adding new assesses to 
the base at the higher income slabs rather than plateauing it off by way of 
accretions at the lower income slabs, which will only increase the number of 
returns without commensurate revenue. The Committee also desired that slab -
wise, category -wise data of tax collections should also be maintained so that 
appropriate policy responses can be formulated. 
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as under : 
“With reference to the observation of the Hon‟ble Committee that it would 
like to be apprised of the extent of new assessees added to the tax base 
each year slab wise, it is submitted, that the data desired by the Hon‟ble 
Committee is not maintained.    
 
It is submitted that the Department is pursuing the objective  of widening of 
tax base with its limited resources. The Department is having consistent 
acute shortage of manpower at all levels due to which large data available 

 12 
with the Department in form of CIB/AIR information also cannot be optimally 
utilized. Howeve r, all possible measures are being/shall be taken by the 
Department to widen the tax base.  
In the month of March 2013, on the basis of information collected from 
various sources about persons who have undertaken high -value financial 
transactions but have not filed their returns of income for A.Y. 2010 -11 and 
A.Y. 2011 -12, letters have been issued to 1,05,000 such persons. More 
such letters are being issued in the current financial year”.   
13. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry is not 
maintaining slab -wise, category -wise data of tax collections.  The Ministry 
has also not mentioned the steps taken or proposed to be taken for 
maintaining slab -wise, category -wise data of tax collection.  The reply of 
Ministry that acute shortage of manpow er at all levels, due to which large 
data available with the Department in form of CIB / AIR information cannot be 
optimally utilized, is not tenable in the era of Information Technology and in 
a country afflicted with a serious problem of unemployment.  A s commented 
upon earlier in their reports, the Committee are of the firm opinion that lack 
of slab-wise / category-wise data of tax collection is a serious impediment in 
formulating Progressive Tax Policies.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation that slab -wise / category -wise data of tax collections 
should be maintained so that appropriate policy responses can be 
formulated. 
 
Action Plan for Tax Arrears 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8) 
 
14. As regards tax arrears, both direct and indirect ta xes, the Committee found 
that the situation is becoming grimmer by the day, as they find that in direct taxes 
the arrear demand increased in 2012 -13 to Rs. 4,82,027 crore from Rs. 3,33,079 
crore in 2011 -12 and Rs. 2,48,927 crore in 2010 -11; while in indire ct taxes it has 
steeply increased to Rs. 1,03,975 crore in 2012 -13 from Rs. 33,791 crore in 2008 -
09; with service tax arrears registering a tenfold increase in 2012 -13. The Ministry 
in their reply have only stated in a routine and general manner that where ver 

 13 
specific amounts of arrears have been locked up in cases pending before Courts / 
Appellate fora, early hearing petitions are filed and efforts are made to get stay 
orders vacated, and that dedicated teams of officers have been created in the field 
formations for expeditious recovery. The Committee, however, do not found any 
solace in such generalized submissions, as the steadily mounting arrears in both 
direct and indirect taxes have assumed alarming proportions. The Committee 
would therefore recommende d urgent, time -bound and concrete action plan to 
clear the backlog and realize the revenue dues. This will go a long way in helping 
the Government to bridge the fiscal deficit. The Committee desired that a status 
report in the matter be submitted within 3 months of the presentation of the Report 
to the Committee.  
 
15. The Ministry in their Action taken reply stated as under : 
CBDT 
S. No. F.Y. Arrear 
Demand  
 
Cash collection out 
of arrear demand 
1. 2006-07 116766 12285 
2 2007-08 120662 9071 
3 2008-09 130733 10016 
4 2009-10 213646 11939 
5 2010-11 248927 12011 
6 2011-12  333079 19654 
7 2012-13 482027 23995 
 
The component of arrear demand jumped due to inclusion of demands 
related to Hassan Ali Group/B.C Dalal and Harshad Mehta Group. These 
cases are pr esently under Legal Proceedings under various Acts. 
Therefore, recovery in these cases by operation of Income Tax Act alone is 
not possible. However, the cash collection have been showing a steady 
growth. 

 14 
Though all efforts are made as per procedures to re cover the demand, 
some of the demands may prove to be difficult to recover due to following 
reasons: 
•  Companies under Liquidation  
• Cases before BIFR 
• Demand on protective basis 
• Cases before Income Tax Settlement Commission (ITSC) 
• Cases where there are no assets for recovery 
• Assessee being Notified persons 
• Cases where demand is pending write off 
• Assessee not traceable 
 
Apart from the dossier of arrear demand cases which are regularly 
monitored on quarterly basis at various levels of CIT/CCIT/C BDT, the 
concern of the Committee regarding rising arrear demand are shared by the 
CBDT by setting up a Special Cell which is working on following points: 
a) Under sub -head „Assessee not traceable‟/‟assessee having no assets‟ there 
are demand of Rs. 212245 cr ore as on 31.03.2013 (it includes demand of Rs. 
165669.6 cr. of Hassan Ali Group) 
b) Under sub -head „Demand Not Under Dispute‟, recoverable demand is being 
identified for immediate recovery. 
c) PAN of cases in which assessee is not traceable has been referred to FIU-IND 
and process of identifying their bank accounts and recovery is under progress. 
Till date nearly Rs. 31 crore have been recovered.  
d) The Guidelines for „Reward to Informant‟ regarding cash collection from 
outstanding arrear demand is under process of finalization. 
 
Standard Operating Procedures have been issued for effective 
implementation by the field formation leading to reduction of arrear demand 
entries and wiping out of fiscal deficit. Demand Management Month has 
been launched from 24th April to 25th May 2013. 
Further, following steps are being taken to implement the views of the 
Committee: 
1. CCsIT have been instructed to make all possible efforts at their end to get 
all ITAT matters under adjournment vacated and decided. 
2. CCsIT have been instructed to get stay on recovery revoked in the cases of 
High Court/Supreme Court matters. 
3. Preferably no dossier case should be kept under any stay except in Court 
matters and case covered by instruction No.1914. 

 15 
4. The field has been instructed that in all cases cov ered under head „any 
other demand‟ rectification etc. must be done immediately so that these 
demands are wiped out. 
5. CIT(A) have been instructed to dispose off the matters expeditiously and not 
to grant stay on collection of demand.  
6. The CCsIT have been ins tructed to strictly monitor demand not fallen due 
for recovery in all cases above Rs. 1 cr. i.e. dossier cases.  
7. The performance of TRO as per TRO Action Plan, to be monitored on 
periodical basis.  
 
CBEC 
To realize/liquidate the indirect tax arrears, the f ollowing Action Plan has 
been implemented by the CBEC: 
(i) Wherever substantial amounts of arrears have been locked up in cases 
pending before Courts/appellate fora, early hearing petitions are filed and 
efforts are made to vacate stay orders. Cases of similar  nature are being 
bunched for expeditious disposal by the appellate authorities. 
 
(ii) The cases pending before Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, 
Debt Recovery Tribunal, Official Liquidator etc. are being actively followed 
up. 
 
(iii) Wherever revenue  arrears are free from all legal encumbrances, action is 
taken for speedy implementation of favorable orders passed by Courts. 
Where no stay has been granted or the stay granted has lapsed, prompt 
action is taken for realization of arrears by attachment of  
movable/immovable assets of the defaulters or recovery from sums due to 
such assessees. 
 
(iv) Dedicated teams of officers have been created in the field formations for 
expeditious recovery of indirect tax arrears. 
 
(v) Recovery provisions have been strengthened by  amending Section 11 of 
the Central Excise Act, 1944 & Section 142 of the Customs Act, 1962 vide 
Finance Act, 2013. 
 

 16 
 
Assets not available for Recovery 
(Recommendation Para No. 9) 
 
16. In the context of revenue arrears, the Committee found that there are large 
number of cases involving tax revenue to the tune of Rs. 1,94,073 crore, wherein 
no assets are available for recovery and an amount of Rs. 3,657 crore where the 
assessees are not at all traceable. In CBEC, the corresponding amount involving 
non–recoverable cases have revenue involvement of about Rs. 4,770 crore. While 
expressing their concern on such state of affairs in regard to recovery of revenue 
dues, the Committee would like the Department to enquire into the reasons as to 
how these cases involvi ng such huge amount of dues from assesses became un -
recoverable in the first place. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter.  
 
17. The Ministry in their Action taken reply stated as under : 
CBDT 
“The arrear demand outstanding has be en analyzed and it is revealed that 
huge demands were raised in Hassan Ali Group of cases                   (Rs. 
165669.6 crore). All known immovable and moveable assets belonging to 
the group have been attached.  
However, as per existing guidelines, recov ery through sale of attached 
properties can be made only after the decision of the appeal filed before 
the ITAT.  
The appeals of the Hassan Ali Khan group of cases, filed by the assessees 
are pending before the ITAT .These cases were filed before ITAT in 
F.Y.2010 -2011. The department has appointed Special Counsel to defend 
these cases with the approval of Ministry of Law. The assessee is in judicial 
custody and has been seeking adjournments.  
There are no matching assets against arrear demand outstanding i n 
Hassan Ali Group.   
 
CBEC 

 17 
Tax arrears are of two types – Stayed and Unstayed.  The category „Stayed 
Arrears‟ covers all cases where the Supreme Court, the High Courts, the 
CESTAT (Tribunal) or the Commissioners (Appeals) have stayed the 
recovery proceedi ngs pending finalization of the appeal. In these cases, 
recovery action is not possible till finalization of the appeals or vacation of 
such stay, whichever is earlier.   
The category,  „Unstayed Arrears‟ covers, cases where it is possible to 
proceed with the recovery action, since the amounts involved are not 
covered by any stay order.  However, in such cases, actual recovery even 
after initiation of proceedings under the provisions of Indirect tax laws, may 
get delayed on account of various reasons, inclu ding assessees not 
traceable or no assets available. The reasons are broadly listed below:  
(i) Assets not available or individuals not traceable. In Customs, there are 
many cases where unscrupulous importers/exporters, after availing of 
benefits which are sub ject to fulfillment of post -importation/exportation 
conditions, just disappear.  In the event of non -fulfillment of such 
conditions, it becomes extremely difficult to trace such firms/persons and 
recover the amounts. 
(ii) There are many assessees who operate fr om rented premises or use 
machinery and capital goods which are on loan or lease basis.  In the 
event of a demand, recovery cannot be made from a property, which 
does not belong to the assessee. 
(iii)While in some cases, the assessees are unable to pay the arre ars on 
account of financial difficulties or lack of resources, in others, even after 
the properties of the defaulters have been auctioned, the full amount due 
to the Government cannot be recovered. 
(iv) In some cases, especially those where the defaulters are a bsconding, it 
becomes difficult to identify their assets. 
(v) In cases where action has been initiated under Section 142 of Customs Act, 
1962, references have to be made to the District Land Revenue 
authorities and the responses are generally very slow.  
These are some of the reasons due to which cases involving huge amount 
of dues from assesses became un -recoverable. The steps being taken to 
recover the dues are listed against para no. 8 above”. 
 

 18 
18. The Committee are constrained to note that in direct taxes o ut of total 
Arrear Demand of Rs. 4,82,027 crore in 2012 -13, only Rs. 23,995 crore have 
been collected which is less than 5% of the total Arrear Demand.  This is 
obviously a very abysmal situation from revenue point of view.  Under the 
sub-head „Assessee no t traceable / assessee having no assets, there are 
demands of Rs. 2,12,245 crore as on 31.3.2013 (which includes demand of 
Rs. 1,65,669.6 crore of Hassan Ali Group).  The Committee are not convinced 
with the submission of the CBDT that component of arrear demand jumped 
due to inclusion of demands related to Hassan Ali Group / B.C. Dalal and 
Harshad Mehta Group.  These cases are presently under Legal Proceedings 
under various Acts and   therefore, recovery in these cases by operation of 
Income Tax Act alone is not possible.  On the question of how such a grim 
situation arose in the first place, when such a huge amount of arrear demand 
could not be collected, the reply of the Ministry remained silent. As this 
amounts to inaction, the Ministry owes an explanati on in this regard to the 
Committee.  The Committee would thus reiterate their recommendation that 
urgent, time bound and concrete action plan to realize the arrear demand 
should be initiated and bring the legal proceedings to an end at an early 
date, which will go a long way in helping the Government to bridge the fiscal 
deficit and will also prove the efficacy of the collection machinery of the 
Ministry. 
Search and Seizure Operations  
(Recommendation Para No. 15) 
 
19. While justifying the need for search a nd seizure operations, the Department 
of Revenue had stated that these operations are essential not only for reinforcing 
the tax-base and collections, but also for gathering critical evidences. According to 
the Department, in the present circumstances, non -intrusive methods like TDS / 
TCS and intrusive methods like search, survey etc. supplement each other to 
enhance the efficiency of tax administration, detect tax evasion and boost tax 
collections. However, during the course of discussions with field offic ials in their 
study visits, the Committee were informed that it was not possible to correlate the 

 19 
actual tax yield with the estimates made at the time of searches etc. Further, the 
Department have stated in their reply that the data pertaining to revenue r ealised / 
collected out of search & seizure or survey operations is not maintained. The 
Committee would therefore like the Department to conduct an objective evaluation 
with a view to ascertaining the actual revenue yield or outcomes of these intrusive 
methods of tax collection and as to whether the tax estimates made originally at 
the time of booking a case could be high-pitched or simply zealous.    
 
20. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows : 
CBDT 
 
“The Observation of the Committee is noted for future guidance. 
 
CBEC 
Anti evasion is the third prong of compliance verification in the liberalized 
tax regime of self assessment. Search & seizure operations are needed to 
ensure quick and meaningful investigation and effective finaliza tion of any 
case. Generally, search and seizure operations are resorted to only in cases 
where it appears that the documents of evidentiary value are secreted with 
an intention to evade duty/taxes. In all other cases, investigations are 
carried out through  non-intrusive methods, such as summoning and 
recording of statements, independent market inquiries, profiling, studies etc.  
Intrusive methods, like, search and seizure operations are used only when 
there is proven justifications. It is not possible to as certain the actual 
revenue yield or outcome of these intrusive methods at the time of carrying 
out search and seizure. The net outcome, in revenue terms, cannot be 
attributed to either intrusive or non -intrusive methods alone as such a 
distribution would n ot be possible in any scientific way. It is not possible to 
assess the contribution of any single tool of investigation in isolation as the 
outcome is always of a combinatorial use of different methods. Moreover, at 
the time of booking a case, the estimate s of evasion of tax/duty is based on 
preliminary examination of documents/records/evidences whereas final 
evaluation is made after completion of investigations. 
In Customs evasion cases, it has been seen that crucial evidence e.g. 
offending goods can only be recovered by undertaking search & seizure 
operations. One cannot expect a smuggler of Red Sanders, Gold or for that 
matter Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic Substances to respond to written 
communications like letters or even summons. Even in cases involvin g 

 20 
commercial frauds, there has been a tendency to enter to unproductive but 
protracted litigation so as to avert responding to non -intrusive methods of 
investigation. Intrusive methods have their own utility in such cases. 
Searches are an effective method of unearthing undisclosed informal 
accounts, communications and other such evidences of parallel transactions 
in cases of commercial fraud. It may further not be possible to quantify the 
outcome of these operations for the simple reason that these methods also 
have some deterrent value.  
 
Further, not only in cases of search, but even in other cases, the amount of 
evasion as quantified at the time of detection remains an estimate only. 
Estimations involve an element of subjectivity and though every effort i s 
made to ensure objectivity in such cases yet the amount involved can never 
be predicted exactly. The evasion estimated at the time of initiating an 
investigation is based on intelligence. The demand raised is an outcome of 
the evidence that can be gather ed during the investigation. As such, even if 
there is a gap between the two, it does not necessarily mean that either the 
initial estimate or the final demand is invalid.  
 
On a macro level, looking at the data for the last six years, tabulated below, 
it can be safely premised that the estimates made at the time of booking a 
case are not pitched to extraordinarily high levels. As can be seen that as 
against the amount of detections reported i.e. Rs. 13190.97 Crore for the 
years 2007-08 to 2012-13, the amount demanded in SCN issued during the 
same period is Rs. 13254.34 Crore. The figures being in a comparable 
zone, however do indicate that the estimations at an aggregate level over 
an extended period of time do show a clear correlation between the initial 
estimation and the final demand”. 
 
              Anti Smuggling Performance of DRI and Commissionerates (Rs. in crores) 
Item of Work 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Total   
Commercial 
Fraud Cases 
Detected 
876.03 2011.30 838.00 1297.06 2198.20 5970.38 13190.97   
Investigation 
completed and 
SCN issued in 
CF cases 
1221.77 2128.23 1457.68 3270.80 2968.31 2207.55 13254.34   
 
21. The Committee had recommended that the Department of Revenue 
should conduct an objective evaluation with a view to ascertaining the actual 

 21 
revenue yield or outcome of search / seizure / survey operations so as to 
ensure that tax estimates originally made are not high -pitched.  In response, 
the CBDT have tersely stated that “the observation of the Committee is noted 
for future guidance”.  The Committee while taking a serious view of such a 
casual reply, find this response from CBDT unbecoming of the Department 
of Revenue responsible for mobilizing revenue. The Committee would, 
therefore, seek a detailed response from the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Revenue) on this issue.  The Committee would also take this opportunity 
to reiterate their persistent recommendation that the Department of Revenue 
(both CBDT and CBEC) should develop and maintain data -base 
comprehensive enough to cover their search/seizure/survey operations, 
which would correctly reflect both the initial tax estimates and the eventual 
tax yield therefrom and which will make their functioning more meaningful 
and effective. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              YASHWANT SINHA 
27 September, 2013                               Chairman, 
05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Finance  

 22 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1310 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
                 Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Baliram  
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
   
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
16.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
2.    At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Subodh Kant Sahai and congratulated 
him on his nomination to the Committee for the year 2013 -14.  The Committee thereafter 
took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption :-  
(i)  XX   XX     XX    XX 
XX   XX     XX    XX 

 23 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixty -eighth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue); 
 
(iii)  XX   XX     XX    XX 
XX   XX     XX    XX 
 
 
(iv)  XX   XX     XX    XX 
XX   XX     XX    XX 
 
(v)    XX   XX     XX    XX 
XX   XX     XX    XX 
 
3.     The Committee adopted the above draft reports with minor modifications.  
The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the 
modifications suggested and present these Reports to Hon‟ble 
Speaker/Parliament. 
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 24 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-
14) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF 
REVENUE) 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
16  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos.1,2,3,4,6,7,10,11,12,13,14 &16) 
 
12 75% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s 
replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
(vide Recommendations at Sl. No.5, 
8, 9 & 15) 
 
04 25% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil - 
 