STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2011-2012)
33
lR;eso t;rs
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Shravana, 1933 (Saka)


THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,
EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND
DISINVESTMENT)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2011-2012)
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 30 June, 2011
Presented to Lok Sabha on ............................2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on .................................2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Shravana, 1933 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.O.F. No. 33
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2011 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................... (v)
PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
I. Budgetary Allocation.............................................................. 1
II. Departments of Economic Affairs and Expenditure................. 9
A. Demand No. 35 – Transfer to States and Union Territories:
Underutilization of funds under major State Plan Schemes...... 9
B. Inflation........................................................................ 12
C. Budgetary Reforms....................................................... 18
D. Rate of Interest on General Provident Fund.................... 25
III. Department of Financial Services........................................... 26
A. Expansion of Banking Services....................................... 26
B. Lending to Agriculture and Weaker Sections................... 32
C. Debt Recovery Tribunals............................................... 43
D. Repudiation of Insurance Policies................................... 45
IV . Department of Disinvestment................................................. 57
Disinvestment Policy .............................................................. 57
PART II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee................... 60
A
PPENDICES
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 8th April,
2011 and 25th May , 2011...................................................... 69
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
12. Smt. Jayaprada Nahata
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G .M. Siddeshwara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
*21. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 28.01.2011 vice Shri Y .S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, ceased
to be a member of the Committee on his resignation from Lok Sabha.
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Y .P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
4. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance (2010-11),
having been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-third Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial
Services and Disinvestment).
2. The Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and
Disinvestment) were laid on the Table of the House on 11 March, 2011. Under
Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha,
the Standing Committee on Finance are required to consider the Demands
for Grants of the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and make
reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament. Thereafter, the
Demands are considered by the House in the light of the reports of the
Committee. However, this year, the Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment) were passed by Lok Sabha prior to
their consideration by the Standing Committee on Finance. Nonetheless, in
pursuance of the observation made by the Chair, the Committee examined
the Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments
of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment) and
issues arising therefrom.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment) on 08 April, 2011.
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held
on 25 May, 2011. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are given in
appendix to the Report.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment) for appearing before the Committee
and furnishing the material and information which the Committee desired in
connection with the examination of the Demands for Grants (2011-12).
(v)
 N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
20 June, 2011 Chairman,
30 Jaishtha, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
CHAPTER I
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
1.0 The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the administration of
the finances of the Central Government. It is concerned with economic and
financial matters affecting the country as a whole, including mobilization of
resources for development. It regulates the expenditure of the Central
Government, including the transfer of resources to States. The Ministry
comprises of the five Departments namely:
(i) Department of Economic Affairs
(ii) Department of Expenditure
(iii) Department of Revenue
(iv) Department of Disinvestment; and
(v) Department of Financial Services
1.1 The Ministry of Finance is responsible in all for 13 Demands for
Grants, which cover the above 5 Departments. These Demands are namely:
(a) Demand No. 32 –Department of Economic Affairs
(b) Demand No. 33 – Department of Financial Services
(c) Demand No. 34 – Appropriation – Interest Payments
(d) Demand No. 35 – Transfers to State and Union Territory
Governments
(e) Demand No. 36 – Loans to Government Servants etc.
(f) Demand No. 37 – Appropriation – Repayment of Debt
(g) Demand No. 38 – Department of Expenditure
u

2
(h) Demand No. 39 – Pensions
(i) Demand No. 40 – Indian Audit and Accounts Department
(j) Demand No. 41 – Department of Revenue
(k) Demand No. 42 – Direct Taxes
(l) Demand No. 43 – Indirect Taxes
(m) Demand No. 44 – Department of Disinvestment
The Detailed Demands for Grants and the Outcome Budget of the
Ministry for 2011-12 were laid on the Table of the House on 11.3.2011.
1.2 This Report deals with four out of five Departments under the
Ministry of Finance covering 10 Demands. Matters relating to one
Department viz. Department of Revenue and three Demands for Grants
concerning the Department are dealt with in a separate report.
A. Department of Economic Affairs
1.3 The Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) deals with four
Demands. These are: (i) Demand No. 32, Department of Economic Affairs,
(ii) Demand No. 34, Appropriation— Interest Payments, (iii) Demand
No. 36, Loans to Government Servants etc., and (iv) Demand No. 37,
Appropriation—Repayment of Debt. The DEA Demands for Grants
predominantly cover interest payments and repayment of debt.
(i) Demand No. 32: Department of Economic Affairs
1.4 Total Budget provision for 2011-12 is Rs. 10,233.24 crore. The
break-up is for Plan Rs. 2040.00 crore and Non-Plan  Rs. 8193.24 crore.
The significant components of expenditure are:—
• Contribution to Railways for Safety Works – Rs. 1040.63 crore.
These funds would be used for constructing road over bridges
and under bridges and for ensuring safety at unmanned level
crossings etc. There is a net increase in the allocation for this
scheme by Rs. 110.82 crore over RE 2010-11.
• Assistance for Infrastructure Development through Public
Private Partnership (PPP) by providing Viability Gap Funding –

3
Rs. 499.37 crore. The allocation for BE 2011-12 has been stepped
up by Rs. 374.37 crore over the RE 2010-11 of Rs. 125 crore.
• National Social Security Fund for   Unorganised   Sector workers–
Rs. 500 crore. During 2010-11 Rs. 1000 crore was deposited in
the Fund.
NON-PLAN
• Subsidies to Railways towards dividend relief and other
concessions from general revenue–Rs. 3022.61 crore. The
support has been enhanced over the previous year.
• Reimbursement of losses on operating strategic Railway lines–
Rs. 657.92 crore. There is an increase in allocation over the
previous year.
• Purchase of coins from Security Printing and Minting Corporation
of India Ltd. for supply to Reserve Bank of India–Rs. 1584.80
crore.
• Investment in Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India
Limited (SPMCIL) as equity–Rs. 400 crore.
• Transfer to Guarantee Redemption Fund–Rs. 300 crore.
• Interest Equalization Support to EXIM Bank of India for lines of
credit extended to developing countries and supported by
Government of India–Rs. 139.69 crore.
• Investment in International Financial Institutions including
provisions for India’s subscription to International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) towards payment for
General Capital Increase (GCI) and Selective Capital Increase
(SCI); India’s share of capital replenishments of the African
Development Fund and contributions towards the capital stock
of the African Development Bank as well as IMF–Rs.12192.09
crore (net  Rs. 3424.34 crore).
• Other expenditures include contribution to various international
bodies i.e. UNDP; Technical Assistance Scheme of Asian

4
Development Bank (ADB)/India Trust Fund in ADB; Global
Environment Facility (GEF) etc., Grants-in-Aid to institutions,
Technical Aid to South and South East Asia under the Colombo
Plan. The Budget provision under Demand No. 32 Secretariat/
establishment expenditure of the Department of Economic Affairs
including the newly created G-20 Secretariat and the Department
of Currency, National Savings Institute and its network of regional
offices, Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT), in addition to
establishment expenditure of the Economic wings of the Embassy
of India, Washington, Tokyo and Beijing.
New initiatives
• The Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC)
has been set up under the chairmanship of Justice (retd.)
BN Srikrishna with a view to review the existing legislative and
regulatory system governing the financial sector in India, and to
bring it in tune with the current requirements.
• The Directorate of Currency has been set up with the mandate
to monitor and review the integrity of existing security
features of Indian Bank Notes for revision and updating and also
undertake  technology transfer for all key inputs required for
indigenization of currency and coinage e.g. paper, ink, machinery
software etc.
• An Economic and Commercial Wing in the Embassy of India,
Beijing, China has been created in May, 2010.
• A National Capacity Building Programme has recently been
launched to enhance capacities of public functionaries in
identifying, conceptualizing, structuring and managing PPPs.
• Membership of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in June
2010—an important initiative of the G-20 for anti money
laundering. India has also joined the Task Force on Financial
Integrity and Economic Development, Eurasian Group (EAG) and
Global Forum on Transparency and exchange of Information for
Tax purposes.

5
(ii) Demand No. 34: Appropriation—Interest Payments
1.5 Interest Payments cover payment of interest on Central
Government debt obligations e.g. treasury bills and connected securities
issued to RBI, other internal debts, external debts of Government of India,
State Provident Funds, Insurance and Pension Funds, Special Deposits with
the Government and payments on account of other contractual services.  The
net expenditure projected for 2011-12 is Rs. 2,67,986.17 crore which is
11.3 % over the RE 2010-11. The increase is mainly due to higher requirement
for interest on market loans, discount on treasury bills, market stabilization
scheme, Insurance and Pension funds, Small Savings deposits/Certificates
and operational expenses, and State Provident Funds.
(iii) Demand No. 36 : Loans to Government Servants etc.
1.6 The budget provision under this grant includes the requirement
of all the Ministries and Departments and their subordinate organizations and
Union Territory administrations for release of loans and advances like, House
building, motor vehicles, computers.  It also includes provisions for advances
to Members of Parliament for purchase of motor conveyance. Total budget
provision under Non Plan is Rs. 300 crore for this demand.
(iv) Demand No. 37: Appropriation—Repayment of Debt
1.7 Repayment of Debt is a charged expenditure.  This caters to the
repayment of borrowings of the Central Government both internal and
external as well as for discharge of treasury bills of different maturities,
ways and means advances, etc. The Budget allocation in this Demand is
netted against the receipts into Government account of fresh internal/
external debt and cash balance adjustment. The net expenditure on this
demand is nil for the year ending 2010-11. The BE 2011-12 provisions is
Rs. 31,55,216.93 crore.
B. Department of Expenditure
1.8 The Department of Expenditure oversees the expenditure
management in the Central Ministries and Departments through the interface
with the Financial Advisors. The overall coordination of the Outcome Budget
of different Ministries/Departments, release of funds to State Governments

6
for implementing developmental works and matters relating to Central Plan
are the important activities of the Department which provide the entire canvas
of developmental activity of the Central Government.
1.9 One of the main functions of the Department of Expenditure is
to appraise projects which come before the Expenditure Finance Committee
and the Public Investment Board.
1.10 There are three Demands directly administered by the Department
of Expenditure. The most important Demand is Demand No. 35 which is
about transfers to States and Union Territories. The other Demand is Demand
No. 38 about administrative expenditure of the Department of Expenditure
and Demand No. 39 which relates to pensions. Demand No. 35 relates to
the two main transfers. One is the Central Assistance to States for Plans and
the other one is the Grants to States under the proviso of Article 275 (1)
of the Constitution on the recommendations of the Finance Commission.
These are known as the Finance Commission Grants.  A net provision of
Rs. 1,30,365.23 crore has been made in BE 2011-12 for the Grant.
1.11 Demand No. 38 deals with the administrative expenditure of the
Department of Expenditure which comprises the Department of Expenditure,
Central Pension Accounting Office, Controller General of Accounts, Pay and
Accounts Office.  The total budget provision under this demand is Rs. 101.97
crore for 2011-12.
1.12 Demand No. 39 is about pension which is payment of pension
and gratuity to civilian pensioners, including provision for payment of
pensions and gratuities including those charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India, which are later recovered from the State Governments. This Demand
is administered by the Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO).  The net
budgetary provision is Rs. 16,000.00 crore in the year 2011-12.
1.13 The budget provision under Demand No. 40 includes establish-
ment related expenditure of the office of the C&AG and the Civil Audit and
Accounts offices under his control. This also includes expenditure on audit
of Postal and Telecommunication Department, Defence   Audit offices and
Overseas Audit offices. The budget provision kept for BE 2011-12 is
Rs. 2398.56 crore. This will be netted against the recoveries from UN

7
organizations towards audit functions performed by the C&AG, reimburse-
ment of Postal and telecommunication audit costs and Railway audit. The
net expenditure is slated at Rs. 2253.08 crore.
C. Department of Financial Services
1.14 The Department of Financial Services has only one Demand viz.
Demand No. 33.  The total budget provision for 2011-12 is Rs. 23,705.94
crore   which includes Rs. 78 crore  under Plan and Rs. 15,855.94 crore
under Non-Plan.
The provision under this Grant caters to the following:—
• Secretariat/establishment expenditure of the Department of
Financial Services; office of Custodian and Special courts set up
for investigating irregularities involving transactions in securities,
Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
(AAIFR), Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
(BIFR) and Debt Recovery Tribunals. It also includes grants to
Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authority   (PFRDA) and
expenses related to office of the Court of Liquidator, Kolkata.
• Contribution for constitution of Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF)
and Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF) (Rs. 10 crore
each).
• Payment of subsidy towards interest subvention of 1 per cent on
Housing Loans up to Rs. 10 lakh (Rs. 500 crore).
• Payment to LIC for implementation of pension Plan for senior
citizens scheme (Rs 199.61 crore).
• Payment to Farmers Debt Relief Fund for implementation of
Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008
(Rs 6,000.00 crore).
• Financial Inclusion Plans—Swabhiman Scheme (Rs. 50 crore).
• Payment of subsidy towards interest subvention for providing
short term credit to Farmers (Rs. 4868.00 crore).

8
• Revival of Long Term Co-operative Credit structure in the country
(Rs. 1000.00 crore).
• Subscription to the share capital of Export-Import Bank of India
(Rs. 300.00 crore).
• Swavalamban Scheme under New Pension System (NPS)
(Rs. 220.00 crore).
• Equity support to India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd.
(IIFCL) (Rs. 1000.00 crore).
• Contribution to Securities Redemption Fund for redeeming SLR
Marketable Securities issued against subscription in the rights
issue of equity shares of State Bank of India (Rs. 625.00 crore).
• Recapitalisation of Public Sector Banks (Rs. 6000.00 crore).
• Recapitalisation of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) (Rs. 500.00
crore).
D. Department of Disinvestment
1.15 Demand No. 44 pertains to the Department of Disinvestment. This
Department has no Plan or Non-Plan Scheme. The entire Budget Provision
is under Non-Plan for salary/wages, payment for professional/special
services and for other administrative expenses. BE under Revenue Section
for the year 2011-12 is Rs. 62.63 crore.
1.16 The Government has in November, 2005 constituted “National
Investment Fund” (NIF) to be maintained outside the Consolidated Fund of
India into which the proceeds from disinvestments of Central Public Sector
Enterprises would be channelized. The Government has decided that all
proceeds from disinvestment of CPSEs deposited in the NIF over a period
of three years from April, 2009 to March, 2012, would be utilized in full
to support social sector schemes to be decided by Planning Commission/
Department of Expenditure.

9
CHAPTER II
DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS AND EXPENDITURE
A. Demand No. 35 — Transfer to States and Union Territories:
Underutilization of funds under major State Plan Schemes
2.0 Demand  No. 35 deals with Plan Transfers to States apart from
provision for grants payable to States under Article 275 (1) of the Constitution
on the basis of recommendations of successive Finance Commissions, Block
grants for State Plan Schemes, short term Ways and Means Advances to
States, assistance from National Calamity Contingency Fund (NCCF) and
Debt Relief to States. The major   State Plan Transfers include Schemes like
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (Rs.12522 crore),
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (Rs.12,620 crore) and the
National Social Assistance Programme (Rs. 6107.61 crore). A net provision
of Rs.1,30,365.23 crore has been made in BE 2011-12 for the Grant.
2.1 Asked to furnish the details of savings under major State Plan
schemes and Non-Plan schemes, the Ministry, in their post evidence
submission, informed as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Scheme Nodal Shortfall against BE
No. Ministry*
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
1 2 3 4567
1. Accelerated Irrigation MoWR - - 1175.61 2742.47
Benefits Programme
(AIBP)
2. National Social MoRD - - - 516.14
Assistance Programme
(NSAP)

10
1 2 3 456 7
3. ACA for Jawaharlal - - - - -
Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission
3.1 (i) Sub Mission on MoUD 0.90 - 1340.78 4432.70
Urban Infrastructure
and Governance
(SMUIG)
3.2 (ii) Urban Infrastructure MoUD - - 2797.62 276.56
Development for Small
and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT)
3.3 (iii) Sub Mission on Basic Mo 300.34 183.86 934.47 297.63
Services to Urban HUPA
Poor (SMBSUP)
3.4 (iv) Integrated Housing Mo - - 331.73 127.27
and Slum Development HUPA
(IHSD)
*MoWR — Ministry of Water Resources;  MoRD — Ministry of Rural
Development; MoUD — Ministry of Urban Development; MoHUPA — Ministry
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
Releases for implementation of schemes are made from Demand
No. 35 on the recommendations of line ministries.  Savings occur when
the line ministries are unable to recommend releases to the full extent
of available funds.  Recommendations can only be made if the projects
posed by State Governments fulfil the eligibility criteria prescribed in
the scheme guidelines and demonstrate significant expenditure of earlier
releases.  Under JNNURM, releases were also held back on account
of short release or non-release of matching shares by State
Governments or Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), withdrawal of projects
and delay in commencement.  In the case of projects under the Urban
Infrastructure and Governance sub-mission of JNNURM, release of
funds is also linked to progress in reforms by ULBs/State Governments.

11
Details of savings under major Non-Plan Schemes operated by
Ministry of Finance
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Scheme Shortfall against BE
No.
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
1. Maintenance of Roads 1 13.27 1052.32 858.76 -
and Bridges
2. State Specific Needs 531.30 1 179.78 445.78 -
3. Local Bodies Grant 1 196.90 2224.47 1320.39 339.23
These non-plan transfers are based on the recommendations of Finance
Commissions. Such non-plan releases are linked to prescribed pre-
conditions like preparation of duly approved Action Plan, utilisation
certificates of earlier releases and adequate outlays in the States’
budgets.  Savings occur when budgeted amounts are not released to
States on account of non-fulfilment of requirements.
The releases for maintenance of roads & bridges under the
Twelfth Finance Commission (award period 2005-10) required the
States to make a minimum budgetary provision and demonstrate that
expenditure has been incurred. Some States do not fulfil these
conditions.
Subsequent releases for State Specific Grants require expenditure of
the previous installments. Some States did not provide utilization/
completion certificates for previous releases.
The main requirement for release of local bodies grants was that the
previous grant should have been released by the States to local bodies
within a prescribed period.  In case the release was delayed, interest
was to be released for the delayed period along-with the principal
amount of the grant to qualify further for next releases.  Some States
did not comply with this requirement.”

12
B. Inflation
2.2 At present, the major pressure on prices is emanating from the
food and energy sectors. After remaining in double digit for four successive
months (April-July), headline inflation came down to single digit and stood
at 8.2 per cent in January 2011.
2.3 In Manufactured Products, out of the 12 sub groups, Wholesale
Price Index (WPI) has increased in 9 sub-groups in January 2011 as
compared to December 2010 (Table 1). However, in January 2011 WPI
inflation in 8 sub-groups had remained below 5 per cent. In the remaining
3 sub-groups inflation was in the range of 5-10 per cent. It may be noted
that in Food Products (Wt. 9.97 %), both index and inflation has declined
in January 2011 as compared to corresponding month of last year.
Table 1: WPI and inflation in Manufactured Products Group
Weight Index Inflation
(%)
Jan-10 Dec-10 Jan-11 Jan-10 Jan-11
1 234567
Manufactured Products 64.97 125.2 128.9 129.9 4.77 3.75
(A) Food Product 9.97 145.5 142.7 144.0 19.16 –1.03
(B) Beverages, Tobacco 1.76 137.4 144.4 146.0 6.02 6.26
and Tobacco Products
(C) Textiles 7.33 110.2 118.9 120.4 6.47 9.26
(D) Wood & Wood 0.59 143.7 150.8 149.2 5.51 3.83
Products
(E) Paper  & Paper Products 2.03 119.8 125.6 125.4 2.39 4.67
(F) Leather & Leather 0.84 126.4 128.0 128.6 1.77 1.74
Products
(G) Rubber & Plastic 2.99 119.1 125.1 127.1 2.94 6.72
Products

13
1 234567
(H) Chemicals and 12.02 119.3 123.5 124.2 2.49 4.11
Chemical Products
(I) Non-Metallic Mineral 2.56 140.7 144.4 143.5 4.22 1.99
Products
(J) Basic Metals, Alloys 10.75 128.2 134.5 136.5 –0.47 6.47
& Metal Products
(K) Machinery & Machine 8.93 118.4 121.1 121.4 0.25 2.53
Tools
(L) Transport, Equipment 5.21 118.1 119.7 119.9 1.20 1.52
and Parts
2.4 The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) has
introduced new Wholesale Price Index (WPI) series on 14 September 2010
with 2004-05 as the base year. The new series consists of 676 items as
against 435 items in the old series. The total number of price quotations has
also increased from 1918 in the old series to 5482 in the new series, indicating
better representation of the prices in the wholesale market. DIPP has also
started disseminating detailed information on inflation month over month,
build up from March and year-on-year basis for all 676 commodities in the
WPI basket with breakdown for three major groups, viz. primary articles
(weight 20.12%), fuel group (weight 14.91%) and manufactured products
(weight 64.97%). Further, DIPP also releases WPI based inflation on weekly
basis for primary articles (weight 20.12%) and fuel group (weight 14.91%).
DIPP in their monthly release of WPI data also indicate inflation in food
articles in primary group (weight 14.34%) and food products in
manufactured group (weight 9.97%). Similarly in the weekly releases also,
DIPP provides information regarding inflation in food articles in primary
group (weight 14.34%).
2.5 The all India Consumer Price Index for Industrial Workers (CPI-
IW) is compiled and released by Labour Bureau, Ministry of Labour &
Employment. The existing series of index numbers for CPI-IW has 2001=100
as the base year and covers 392 items and 289 markets spread over

14
78 centers. Under CPI-IW, the indices at disaggregated level are available
for six major groups and food is one of them with a weight of 46.20%. The
food index in CPI-IW, which reflects the movement in retail prices of food
items and food index in WPI which reflect movement in wholesale prices
of food items are used in the formulation of Government policy and the
management of food economy.
2.6 While tendering his oral evidence, the Chief Economic Adviser,
summed up the inflation scenario as under:—
“Inflation continues to be high. The last monthly figure that we have,
it stands at 8.31 per cent overall inflation, that is WPI inflation. It is
high but one has also to remember that it was even higher earlier in
the year and if you look at the two of the most important indicators
which is overall inflation WPI, it was 11 per cent last year in April,
it is now 8.31 per cent. It is high but it is on a downward trajectory.
The overall food was at 20.22 per cent  last year in February and now
it is down to 6.45 per cent and this 6.45 per cent for a country where
there are so many people who are below the poverty line is a high food
inflation. But one again has to remember that it has come down from
20.22 per cent… Let me start on the new normal on which a lot has
been written and it is also related to the question put earlier.  It was
asked whether it is a fact that India is growing fast and whether that
does mean that we have to get used to higher inflation. The Department
of Economic Affairs did some calculation which we put out in the
Economic Survey and it did cause a little bit of misunderstanding. We
argued that if India grows very rapidly in the next 20 to 30 years and
drawing a little bit of experience in China and South Korea, there is
a bit of higher pressure on the inflation caused by that. In fact, our
calculations are done with a lot of assumptions. There will be a two
per cent extra inflation caused by the rapid growth.  But that does not
mean — and this was a misunderstanding — that inflation caused has
to be plus two per cent or it has to be higher.  In the end, we are
following a whole lot of policies like monetary policies, fiscal policies
and specifically interventions in agricultural products. If we keep the
base very low, then the additional two could be on a base of one per
cent or even zero per cent. So, the new normal may not be six or

15
seven per cent and we could keep it wherever it was. We will get the
additional inflation caused by the growth but it is additional to a base
which we should try our best to keep very low.
2.7 When asked about the reasons for inflation, the Ministry, in their
post evidence submission, replied as under:—
“During the first half of 2010-11, the headline year-on-year inflation
started with a double-digit level and remained substantially high due to
low base effect and unfavourable agricultural supply conditions.
However, the second half showed a moderation in overall inflation due
to decline in food prices. In December 2010 and January 2011, WPI
inflation remained sticky at 9.41 per cent and 9.35 per cent respectively
mainly on account of high inflation in fruits, vegetables and protein rich
items. The average headline inflation has increased to 9.39 per cent
during current fiscal as against 3.57 per cent last year. In March 2011,
WPI inflation recorded at 8.98 per cent, which is significantly lower
than 10.23 per cent in March 2010. Inflation in the month of March
is mainly contributed by non-food, manufactured and fuel items. The
high international crude oil prices are also putting pressure on the
headline inflation.
Food inflation
A major concern in the domestic economy has been food price inflation
during the year 2010-11. At the beginning of the year, food inflation
was high in some of the food items like sugar, some cereals and pulses,
however, the trend has moderated at the end of the year. The overall
WPI food inflation (weight 24.31%) has significantly declined to
6.8 per cent in March 2011 after reaching a peak of 20.22 per cent
in February 2010. Inflation continues to be a cause of concern and the
Government is taking a number of steps, both structural and
macroeconomic, to combat the inflation.”
2.8 On being asked about reasons for retail prices being very high
vis-à-vis wholesale price index, the Chief Economic Advisor stated
following:—
“There were questions raised about WPI being the wholesale price
whereas the retail is what the people suffers from. That is right. So,

16
what we should look at to check on that is the consumer price index
that we collect…Now, if you look at CPI, your guess was right that
the inflation is bigger.  So, the retail inflation is bigger than the inflation
that is taking place at the wholesale level.  However, even here the
situation is bad but it is better than what it was because we nowadays
give three consumer price indexes for different segments of population
and one wholesale price index.  All these four indexes in October came
to a single digit. So, inflation from October whether you are looking
at wholesale price index or consumer price index, all were into single
digit from October.  Now, the single digit does not mean that it is a
comfort level that we should feel good about.  But, nevertheless, that
is indeed the case.”
2.9 Asked about the measures taken to prevent spiraling prices, the
Ministry in their written replies, informed as under:—
“The Government monitors the price situation regularly as price stability
remains high on its agenda. In order to mitigate the effects of inflation
on common man the Government has taken several measures that
include selective ban on exports and futures trading in food grains, zero
import duty on select food items, permitting import of pulses and sugar
by public sector undertakings, distribution of imported pulses and edible
oils through the PDS and release of higher quota of non-levy sugar.
State Governments are empowered to act against black marketers and
hoarders of food items by holding in abeyance the removal of
restrictions on licensing, stock limits and movement of food articles
under the Essential Commodities Act 1955. In addition, the Government
has been rolling back the fiscal stimulus and the Reserve Bank of India
has taken policy measures to curb excess liquidity. In response to these
measures, the WPI food inflation has declined to 9.3 per cent in January
2011 from its peak of 20.2 per cent in February 2010.”
2.10 In a post evidence reply, the Ministry, further informed:—
“Reflecting the underlying inflationary pressures, the Reserve Bank of
India has revised its inflation projection for March 2011 from 5.5 per
cent to 7.0 per cent in its Third Quarter Review of Monetary Policy
of January 2011. In addition, it also pointed out several upside risks

17
to inflation such as risk of persistent high food inflation spilling over
to the general inflation process. The Reserve Bank of India, therefore,
has indicated that it would continue to persist with anti-inflationary
stance.”
2.11 On the issue of leakages in public distribution system, the
Chief Economic Advisor stated following during the course of oral
evidence:—
“PDS and leakage, I do want to touch on. Here I feel, in fact, all parties
should get together and make the appeal for the same kind of change
because the leakage is indeed very heavy. When the FCI is collecting
food and then trying to give it through PDS to ordinary people, there
are good studies, and I have to once again refer to statistical studies,
which do show and this is using the age-old techniques of Prasanta
Mohalanobis statistical techniques, which show that a lot of leakage
takes place. The poor do not get the food that is sent to the poor.  The
Hon. Minister of Finance has announced a change for this and this one
I think is in the correct direction. These kinds of changes were
suggested earlier that some of subsidies like for kerosene, which has
been announced, should be given directly to the people who are
supposed to be getting the subsidy instead of trying to keep the price
low because that causes all the leakage. So, this is a personal view on
this matter.  Of course, on kerosene it is a governmental position now
because the Government has announced for kerosene, for LPG and for
fertilizers, the subsidy should be direct.”
2.12 Questioned on the relation of growth and inflation, the Ministry,
in their post evidence submission, replied as under:—
“The economy remained on the path of rapid resurgence which began
in 2009-10 and has virtually returned to the high growth path that it
had achieved during 2005-08, before the global financial crisis and
economic meltdown. India’s growth story this year has been
remarkable by any standards. What makes it even more significant is
that this is happening on the heels of a year in which growth was a
robust 8 per cent; so there is no base effect to lay claims on this year’s

18
achievement. Further, as the growth prospect over the medium to long
term looks excellent. However, as often happens with strong recovery,
the economy has come under strain from high inflation. Since the
growth is in real terms, the average person has the cushion of more
goods and services. Nevertheless, inflation, especially when it is centred
on food, as has been the case in recent times in India, can be a cause
of considerable distress for the common man and woman.
When growth is as high as it has been for India this year, if it were
the case that all segments of the population were partaking in the growth
in exactly the same way, then inflation would not be a matter of great
concern. This is because the growth being real, everybody is better
off and the inflation does not take away anything from this. It is
when the average growth is unevenly distributed that we have to
worry about the worse-off and vulnerable segments of society.
Hypothetically it is possible that while the average Indian is better off
by the per capita income growth of approximately 7 per cent per annum
that the country has had, some poor people are actually worse off
because their nominal incomes have hardly grown and inflation has
negated that growth.
In designing inflation control measures it is important to be aware that
sudden, sharp policy induced contractions in demand can cause
unemployment to rise. Given that India’s inflation data are remarkably
comprehensive and are published on a weekly and monthly basis,
whereas our employment statistics come out with long intervals and
timelag, the trade off between inflation and employment escapes public
awareness and slants discourse. There is however, enough evidence
from around the world that, at least in the short run, there is a negative
relation between inflation and unemployment. This is what makes it
critical for Government to carefully calibrate the demand management
measures when bringing down inflation. There is no known formula
for doing this.”
C. Budgetary Reforms
3.0 Ministry of Finance have taken various measures towards
budgetary process reforms, expenditure management, monitoring and the

19
structure/format of the presentation of Budget with a view to bringing
transparency and accountability to the process. The steps initiated by the
Ministry are as follows:—
Expenditure management and monitoring
3.1 Ministry of Finance holds mid-year review-meetings with all
Ministries/ Departments in the month of October/November of each financial
year to fix the expenditure ceiling for Plan and Non-Plan expenditure for the
current year and Non-Plan expenditure in the ensuing financial year. While
finalizing the expenditure ceiling of the Ministries/Departments, the pace of
expenditure by the Ministries/Departments, the expenditure incurred by
Ministries/Departments upto September of that financial year, committed
liabilities/contractual obligations during the remaining part of financial year
and the absorptive capacity of the Ministry/Department are taken into account
and the expenditure ceiling fixed accordingly. Similarly, the Non-Plan
expenditure ceiling for the ensuing financial year is also fixed taking into
consideration the above fiscal parameters. The expenditure ceiling of
Ministry/Department in the current financial year and in the next financial
year are fixed strictly based on the performance, requirements of the
administrative Ministry/Department. In case, the expenditure of a particular
Ministry/Department is not keeping pace, the expenditure ceiling of that
Ministry/Department is reduced and the savings occurred therefrom are
re-allocated to Ministries/Departments where additionalities are required.
D. Budgetary process reforms and structure/format of presen-
tation of Budget
3.2 Till Budget 2010-2011, Statements of Budget Estimates of
Ministries/Departments depicted Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates of the
current financial year and Budget Estimates for the next financial year. From
Budget 2011-2012, the scheme-wise actual expenditure for the previous year
are shown in the Statements of Budget Estimates alongside Budget Estimates,
Revised Estimates of the current financial year and Budget Estimates for the
next financial year. This ensures transparency and brings out the expenditure
trends of a Ministry/Department. This is brought out in Expenditure V ol.II
wherein scheme-wise details of allocations/expenditure of the Ministries/
Departments are brought out.

20
3.3 While giving his budget speech, 2011-12 the Finance Minister
stated following with regard to reforms in budgeting and management of
economy:—
“I see the Budget for 2011-12 as a transition towards a more transparent
and result oriented economic management system in India. We are
taking major steps in simplifying and placing the administrative
procedures concerning taxation, trade and tariffs and social transfers
on electronic interface, free of discretion and bureaucratic delays.
This will set the tone for a newer, vibrant and more efficient
economy.”
3.4 While explaining the shortcomings of the existing classification
of revenue and capital expenditure, the Finance Secretary, in her deposition
before the Committee, stated as below:—
“Sir, there is one clarification. When we have indicated it as an object
head under revenue expenditure, it is not necessarily only Non-Plan,
it is also Plan because last time when we had appeared before the
Standing Committee on Finance, a concern was expressed that capital
expenditure was going down over the years. At that time, it was clarified
that under Bharat Nirman and other schemes, which have been launched
by the Government, a major part of the grants to States, which has
to be shown necessarily as revenue expenditure, is going for capital
formation and we would like to show it in a transparent fashion in the
Budget and that is why, an object head was created under grants-in-
aid to the States where grants specifically given for capital formation
were indicated. There is a separate statement, Statement VI in V olume I
which indicates the money which is going for formation of capital
assets and it is also reflected in the individual Detailed Demands for
Grants of the concerned Ministries. So, it is more an exercise in
transparency and also to show that in effect, it is going for capital
formation, but we cannot show that in the Government of India books
because these are not the assets which are owned by the Union
Government.”
3.5 Asked whether the Government maintains separate information on
savings effected through economy measures and savings made due to non

21
utilisation of funds, the Ministry, in their post evidence submission stated as
below:—
“In Government Accounting System, there are two types of accounts
prepared by the Government.  In the case of Union Government, the
same are prepared in the form of (i) Union Government Finance
Accounts and (ii) Union Government Appropriation Accounts.
Union Government Finance Accounts shows the details of expenditure
(net of recoveries) and receipts (net of refunds) by Major and Minor
Heads of Account.  This account is a compiled accounts across all
Ministries/Departments showing the expenditure and receipts by heads
of account. This account shows the expenditure and receipts based on
the account received from the Ministries/Departments in the form of
Statement of Central Transactions and a consolidated account is
prepared. This does not show the comparison between the amount
authorised through the Appropriation Act and the actual expenditure.
It is a compilation of accounts showing expenditure and receipt as
reported by Public Sector Banks authorised to handle Government
transactions and other accounting adjustments authorised through
accounting devices such as ‘Transfer Entries’, ‘Journal Entries’, etc.
as carried out by the Ministries/Departments.
As regards Union Government Appropriation Accounts, such accounts
are prepared Demand/Appropriation-wise, on gross basis, showing the
comparison between the amounts authorised by Appropriation Acts
including the Supplementary Demands for Grants, Re-appropriations
made, actual expenditure and the resultant savings or excess as the case
may be under the units of appropriation. This account is exclusively
for expenditure account and does not contain the details of revenue and
capital receipts.  It may be mentioned here that the amounts authorised
through Appropriation Act under different units of appropriation
(including the amount authorised through Supplementary Demands for
Grants and amount authorised through re-appropriation) will be shown
under total Grants/Appropriation. Against this total Grant/Appropriation,
actual expenditure is shown for comparison. The resultant savings or
excess expenditure is also shown for better appraisal. It may also be
mentioned that amount of respective sections, such as Revenue voted,

22
Revenue charged, Capital voted and Capital charged of the Demands/
Appropriation concerned, irrespective of the re-allocation of funds done
through technical supplementary.  While doing the re-allocation of funds
from one section to another section within the same Grants/
Appropriation, the additionalities authorised through Appropriation Act
get added to the respective sections whereas the reductions (effected
through technical supplementary) are reflected either in the surrenders
or in the savings (unutilised amounts).  This system also enables line
Ministries/Departments to explain the non-utilisation of funds under
units of appropriation against the amounts authorised through
Appropriation Act.  This system is amply in order and time tested one
and hence does not call for review.
In so far as distinction between savings due to economy measures and
savings on account of non-implementation of schemes/programmes
and this Ministry’s initiative/proposal to classify savings as such, to
achieve better allocation of resources, it may be mentioned that
mandatory cut are generally imposed on establishment expenditure such
as OTA, Domestic/Foreign Travel Expenses, Publications, Professional
services, Office Expenses, POL, etc.  Mandatory payments like interest
payments, repayment of debt, Defence Capital, salaries, pension and
the Finance Commission grants to the State Governments are exempt
from the economy measures stipulated by this Ministry.  Largely, the
savings arising out of mandatory economy measures are absorbed in
the additionalities allowed in the same Grants due to higher expenditure
on account of salaries (due to grant of higher scales, dearness
allowance, increment), pension, higher outlays on flagship programmes
(depending on the pace of expenditure), subsidies, grants to State
Government and other committed payments peculiar to each Demand/
Appropriations.  Thus, the savings arising out of economy measures
are largely not visible in the Demands/Appropriations and resultant
accounts of the Government.
As regards this Ministry’s initiative/proposal to capture savings on non-
implementation of schemes/programmes, it may be mentioned that the
same is clearly visible in the Statement of Budget Estimates in respect
of each Demand/Appropriation. While presenting the budget for the next
year, the Expenditure Budget V olume 2 shows the schematic

23
expenditure provided in the current year (both budgeted and revised
estimates) together with budgeted expenditure for the next financial
year.  Further, in the overall scheme of things, savings captured in a
particular grant/appropriation/schemes/programmes are reflected in the
revised estimates and the same get distributed in other Demands/
Appropriations where additionalities are allowed. The additionalities
allowed in other Demands/Appropriations or in schemes/programmes
are provided through Supplementary Demands for Grants either as cash
supplementary in case of different grants/appropriations, or as technical
supplementary within the same grant/appropriation requiring re-
allocation of funds to different sections (Revenue voted, Revenue
charged, Capital voted and Capital charged) of the grant/appropriation.
Thus, the present system of budgeting and accounting is adequate to
take care of the re-allocation of funds and explain the re-allocations in
a transparent manner.   While the re-allocation of funds within the same
section of the Grant/Appropriation is explained in the body of the
Supplementary Demands for Grants, the re-allocation of savings across
the Demands/Appropriation is not possible as there is no one-to-one
correspondence between the savings effected in one Demand and the
additionality allowed in another Demand.”
3.6 Questioned about the measures taken to initiate public expenditure
reforms, the Ministry, in a post evidence reply stated as under:
“Government has constituted a High Level Expert Committee (HLEC)
to suggest measures for efficient management of public sector
expenditure vide order no. 12/1/2009-FR dated 22nd April 2010.
The composition of the HLEC is as below:
1. Dr. C Rangarajan, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to
Prime Minister – Chairman
2. Member (FR), Planning Commission
3. Secretary, Planning Commission
4. Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
5. Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
6. Chief Economic Advisor, Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance

24
7. Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance
8. Representative of Comptroller General of India
9. Dr. M.G. Rao, Director, National Institute of Public Finance &
Policy, New Delhi
10. Dr. Nitin Desai, Honorary Professor, ICRIER, New Delhi
11. Prof. D.K. Srivastava, Director, Madras School of Economics
12. Prof. Ravinder Dholakia, Professor, IIM Ahmedabad
13. Principal Finance Secretary, Government of West Bengal
14. Principal Finance Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu
15. Principal Finance Secretary, Government of Madhya Pradesh
16. Principal Finance Secretary, Government of Assam
17. Principal Finance Secretary, Government of Maharashtra
18. Adviser (FR), Planning Commission – Member Secretary
The Terms of Reference of HLEC are as follows:—
1. TOR-1: To clearly define the scope of the Public Sector Plan and
the expenditures incurred there-under keeping in view the changes
in the administrative machinery for implementation of the Plan and
the new mechanisms that have evolved such as SPVs and PPPs.
2. TOR-2: To suggest an action plan for the abolition of the
classification of expenditure into Plan and non-plan which
includes the detailing of the changes in the mandates of the various
organizational units in the Government that deal with allocation
of public resources and the management of public expenditure.
3. TOR-3: To suggest a proper framework for taking a compre-
hensive view of the total transfer of resources from the Centre
to the States including ensuring its accounting and reporting in
a uniform manner.
4. TOR-4: To examine the accountability concerns arising out of
the direct transfer of the funds to the States/district level bodies

25
under CSS and to suggest an appropriate mechanism to guard
against dilution of accountability.
5. TOR-5: To examine the classification of expenditure into Revenue
and Capital in the context of the constitutional provisions and
requirements under the Fiscal Responsibility Acts and to suggest
measures to address the inconsistencies in our current system of
classification so as to ensure rational and effective public
expenditure management. In this context, the Committee should
consider the merit of classifying the expenditure as revenue or
capital depending on the end use.
HLEC has held four meetings so far. The report of the HLEC is yet
to be finalized. Government will consider the report of the HLEC as
and when it is finalized.”
D. Rate of Interest on General Provident Fund
4.0 The rate of interest applicable to General Provident Fund has
remained static at 8 percent for the last few years.  While the interest rate
on Employees Provident Fund has been increased to 9.5 percent for the year
2010-11.  When asked for the reasons for this anomaly, the Ministry in their
written submission stated as under:
“The rate of interest on Employees Provident Fund has been increased
to 9.5 % in 2010-11 based on the reported returns on their investments
and availability of surpluses in ‘interest-suspense’ account of EPF.
However, since the actual surplus in interest suspense account (ISA)
will be known after updating all the member accounts in six months,
it has been stipulated that if any shortfall is noticed in ISA, then the
same should be adjusted in the interest rate to be fixed for 2011-2012.
The rate of interest on Government employees’ General Provident Fund
remaining static at 8%, may be seen in the context of the same rate
being given during previous years also, when the market interest rates
were lower than 8%.”

26
CHAPTER III
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES
A. Expansion of Banking Services
5.0 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010-11 directed all
banks to provide appropriate banking facilities to habitations having population
in excess of 2000 by March, 2012 using various models and technologies
including branchless banking through Business Correspondents (BCs).
5.1 Accordingly, the banks through the forum of State Level Banker’s
Committees have formulated their road maps for Financial Inclusion and have
identified approximately 73,000 habitations having a population of over 2000
for providing banking facilities by March, 2012. These habitations have been
allocated to Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks, Private Sector Banks
and Cooperative Banks for providing banking facilities in a time bound
manner. The Private Sector banks have been allocated 1785 habitations across
the country under this campaign, which is estimated to provide new bank
accounts to around 5 crore rural households across the country. This
Financial Inclusion Campaign has been named  “Swabhimaan” and aims at
providing branchless banking through use of technology.  Banks will provide
basic services like deposits, withdrawals and remittances using the services
of Business Correspondents (Bank Saathi).  The initiative enables Government
subsidies and social security benefits to now be directly credited to the
accounts of the beneficiaries who would be able to draw the money from
the Business Correspondents in their village itself.
5.2 At present there are around 6 lakh villages across the country and
about 85000 total bank branches/offices. Of this, around 30,000 are in the
rural areas. Thus, large portions of the country, particularly in rural areas
are outside the formal banking system. The Financial Inclusion Programme
will use various models and technologies including branchless banking
through Business Correspondents.  The total number of no-frill accounts in
the country are 5.06 crore (as on March 31, 2010). The Financial Inclusion
Programme estimates that an additional 5 crore new accounts in the rural
areas will be opened as a result of steps taken to provide banking facilities
in the 73,000 new habitations.

27
5.3 Asked to furnish the total number of BCs/BFs employed by banks,
the Ministry informed as under:—
“As per the information received from Banks, and State Level Bankers’
Committee (SLBC), the total number of BCs/BFs employed by public
sector, private sector, RRBs and cooperative banks as on 31.03.2011
is 26,123.”
5.4 The Committee were informed about the recent reports on BCs
appointed by SBI indulging in malpractices. SBI noticed that while conducting
the cash transactions i.e. deposit/withdrawal/remittances, some Customer
Service Point operators (CSPs) have been found to indulge in malpractices
such as asking for unauthorized money (over and above the Bank’s approved
rates of charges from the customers, for the service they are rendering,
particularly in remittances transaction). Considering that this behavior poses
serious risk to the reputation of the Bank and needs to be checked ab-initio,
the SBI on their part as a proactive step has taken following risk mitigation
measures and issued instructions to the operating units:-
(i) Due diligence to be exercised at the time of selection of BC/CSP.
(ii) Involvement of Link Branch/CMFs in the process of selection of
CSPs and carrying out due diligence as applicable for BC.
(iii) Displaying Do’s and Dont’s for customers while dealing with BCs/
CSPs at the outlet.
(iv) Displaying the structure of fees/charges to be borne by the
customers at CSP outlet.
(v)  Close monitoring of the activities of CSPs/BCs by Channel
Management Facilitators (CMF)/ Link Branch/ CM (Rural)/AGM
of the Region including periodical visits.
(vi) Obtaining of feedback from customers at periodic interval by
CMFs/Link Branch and analysis thereof.
(vii) Audit of the CSP outlet by Circle Auditors while conducting the
audit of the Link Branch.
(viii) Imparting training to CSPs/BCs and hand holdings.

28
(ix) Customer education and financial literacy- Awareness campaign
in the villages where CSPs are functioning by CMFs/Link Branch/
District coordinator.
(x) Identifying opinion leaders in the villages and keeping contacts
with them for knowing the functioning of CSPs/BCs.
(xi) The contact numbers of Link Branch Managers/CMFs/
CM (Rural) AGM (Region) should be prominently displayed in the
CSP with an advice to customers to contact any of the officials
for any instance of overcharging/unauthorized charges by the
CSPs.
The Bank has a dedicated cadre of Channel Management Facilitators
to monitor and mentor the BCs.
5.5 Questioned about any study of the performance of BCs, the
Ministry, in a post evidence reply, stated as under:—
“Reserve Bank of India, in the year 2009, had constituted a Working
Group to examine the experience of the business correspondents (BC)
model and suggest measures, to enlarge the category of persons that
can act as BCs, keeping in view the regulatory and supervisory
framework and consumer protection issues. The report, inter-alia,
examined ways for improving the BC model and suggested additional
entities that could be considered as BCs.
The terms of reference of the Working Group were:—
a. To review the experience so far of the business correspondents
(BC) model.
b. To suggest measures to enlarge the category of persons that can
act as BCs, keeping in view the regulatory and supervisory
framework and consumer protection issues with special focus on
the North Eastern Region.
c. To examine any other matter relevant to the above.
While many banks had taken some steps to adopt the BC model, only
a few of them had scaled-up beyond the pilot stage. The difficulty

29
experienced by banks in scaling up had been attributed to several factors
including credit, operational, legal and reputation risks faced by banks
in engaging a large number of BCs, low coverage by individuals acting
as BCs due to their financial and other constraints, difficulty in assessing
integrity of individuals acting as BCs, general lack of professionalism
of BCs in matters of regularity, punctuality, maintenance of various
records, delays in loan processing, disbursements, low volume of
business generated by BCs and cost associated with low volume small
value transactions.
Keeping in view the difficulties, the guidelines for engaging Business
Correspondents were reviewed and revised on September 28, 2010 by
RBI which, apart from providing for Internal Control & Monitoring and
Consumer Protection measures, also permit banks to engage Companies
registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1956 ( Except Non- Banking
financial Companies) with large and widespread outlets as BC.
It is expected that these measures would enable banks to deliver banking
services to the far lying areas of the country which are not served by
traditional bank branches.”
5.6 On the issue of measures taken by RBI to ensure that BCs do
not indulge in malpractices, the Ministry, in their post evidence submission,
stated as under:—
“Reserve Bank of India has issued Guidelines for engaging Business
Correspondents ( BCs) to all commercial banks on September 28, 2010
which inter-alia contain—
• Internal Control & Monitoring  that the banks should carry out
a detailed review of the performance of various BCs engaged by
them at least once in a year and they should monitor the activities
of BCs through Controlling Offices and also through various fora
under Lead Bank Scheme i.e. (SLBC,DLCC,BLBC). The internal
control mechanism in the bank should include visit to BCs and
interface with customers at periodical intervals.
• Consumer Protection Measures  that the banks should take all
measures to protect the interests of the customers.”

30
5.7 Asked about the Government policy for planning rural financial
architecture in coordination with the overall financial sector, the Ministry in
a written reply informed as below:—
“The SLBC plays a very important role in coordinating and supervising
developmental efforts of Government agencies and banks in the State/
Union Territory. As per the extant instructions issued by RBI, the
meetings of these committees are required to be held at quarterly
intervals and should be chaired by the Chairman & Managing Director
(CMD) of the convenor bank or additionally co-chaired by Additional
Chief Secretary or Development Commissioner of the State concerned. 
High levels of participation in SLBC/UTLBC meetings ensure an
effective and desired outcome with meaningful discussion on issues of
public policy focus of both the Government of India and Reserve Bank
of India.
The District Level Consultative Committee (DLCC), constituted in the
early seventies, marked a significant step towards co-ordination of
activities of all commercial banks and other financing agencies on the
one hand and Government departments on the other. This is conceived
to be a common forum for bankers as well as government agencies/
departments to come to a common platform to find solutions to the
problems arising hindering the smooth functioning of the various
developmental activities under the Scheme at the district-level. All the
commercial banks, co-operative banks including DCCB and SLDB,
RRBs, NABARD, etc. and various State Government departments and
allied agencies constitute the members of the DLCC.   The Lead District
Manager (LDM) of the lead bank is the convenor of DLCC.  The Lead
District Officer (LDC) of Reserve Bank is also a member of the DLCC.
The District Collector functions as the Chairman of this Committee.
RBI has reported that out of the 624 districts in the country, meetings
were held in 562 districts in December, 2010 quarter.
With a view to ensuring greater financial inclusion and increasing
outreach of Banking Sector and on the basis of the recommendations
of the High Level Committee to review Lead Bank Scheme and as
announced in Paragraph 147 of the Governor’s statement in the Second

31
Quarter Review of the Monetary Policy 2009-10, the steps initiated by
RBI are as under:
• Lead banks have been advised vide RBI Circular No.
RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.No.43/02.19.10/2009-10 dated
November 27, 2009 to constitute a Sub-Committee of the District
Consultative Committees (DCCs) to draw up a roadmap to
provide banking services through a banking outlet in every village
having a population of over 2000 by March 2011. 
• Such banking services may not necessarily be extended through
a brick and mortar branch but can be provided through any of
the various forms of ICT-based models including through BCs. 
• The target date for achievement of the above has been revised
to March 2012 in alignment with the budget announcements vide
RBI Circular No.  RPCD.CO.LBS.HLC.BC.No.21/02.19.10/2010-11
dated September 16, 2010. Accordingly, 72813 unbanked villages
having a population of more than 2000 have been identified and
allocated to various banks for provision of banking facilities in
the country. As at the end of December, 2010, banking outlets
have been opened in 8448 villages across the various States in
the country.”
5.8 When the Committee asked why Rs. 50 crore allocated for
opening bank branches in unbanked blocks remained unutilized, the Ministry,
in a post evidence submission informed as under:
“Rs. 50 crore allocated in the BE/RE 2010-11 as assistance to Public
Sector banks for opening Bank branches in unbanked blocks have not
been utilized. The Planning Commission has accorded ‘in-principle’
approval for the “Swabhimaan” scheme proposal and has also approved
that the existing allocation to support the opening of bank branches in
unbanked blocks may be discontinued and the funds available under
the Scheme may be subsumed in the new scheme. Accordingly, amount
of Rs. 50 crore was surrendered.
Out of 129 unbanked blocks identified by the SLBCs, so far
58 unbanked blocks have been provided banking services  and 71 blocks

32
are remaining out of which 70 blocks are in the North-Eastern Region
and one in Jammu & Kashmir.
RBI has devised a special scheme for opening bank branches at
agreed centres in NE Region where the RBI, as its contribution,
would bear one time capital cost and recurring cost per annum for a
limited period of five years as per the lowest bid offered by the
bank and the State Government would provide premises and security
for the branch and arrange for the rental accommodation of the staff.
A commitment to this effect is made by the concerned State
Government in the notification issued while furnishing the list of agreed
centres.
However, the banks have generally reported that State Government have
not been able to provide the promised infrastructural requirements
coupled with security concerns have hampered the rate of progress in
opening of branches. The bottlenecks, as reported by banks mainly
relate to lack of suitable premises for banking, accommodation for
employees, BSNL connectivity, electricity & water connections,
metalled road connectivity security etc.
This Department has also requested the Home Ministry to provide the
necessary premises in Government buildings preferably near the police
station for opening of bank branches in the unbanked blocks of North-
Eastern States. The Home Ministry has requested the Chief Secretaries
of the North-Eastern States to provide necessary premises, in
Government building, preferably near the police stations, for opening
bank branches in the unbanked blocks in these States.”
B. Lending to agriculture and weaker sections
6.0 Under the priority sector lending guidelines issued by RBI, target
of 18% and 10% respectively of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) or credit
equivalent amount of off balance sheet exposure (OBE), whichever is higher
has been fixed for domestic scheduled commercial banks for lending to
agriculture and weaker section respectively. Further, sub-targets for direct
and indirect agriculture lending have been fixed at 13.5% and 4.5% of ANBC
respectively.

33
6.1 The data on lending to agriculture and weaker sections by individual banks on last reporting Friday of March, 2010
is as below:
AS ON LAST REPORTING FRIDAY OF MARCH 2010 (Amount in Rs. crore)
Public Sector Banks Adjusted T otal Agricultural Direct Agri. Adv. Indirect Agri. Adv. Weaker Sections
Net Bank ad vances
Credit
(ANBC)
as on
March 31,
2009
 Amount Amount % to Amount % to Amount % to Amount % to
ANBC with ANBC ANBC ANBC
4.5 Indirect or OBE
(max.)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
S B I 461939.00 83239.00 18.02 62452.00 13.52 20787.00 4.50 56085.00 12.14
S B B J 30091.21 6038.72 20.07 5283.68 17.56 755.04 2.51 5077.32 16.87
S B HYD 44087.02 8160.31 18.51 6202.19 14.07 1958.12 4.44 5368.41 12.18

34
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
S B INDORE 21738.55 4119.76 17.78 2886.89 13.28 1232.87 5.67 2224.21 10.23
S B MYSORE 25881.00 3833.21 14.81 3135.09 12.11 698.12 2.70 2580.00 9.97
S B PATIALA 43961.00 8058.00 18.33 6079.00 13.83 1979.00 4.50 4545.00 10.34
S B TRA’CORE 33058.00 3130.00 9.47 2985.00 9.03 145.00 0.44 3447.00 10.43
ALL ‘BAD BANK 58801.76 10985.86 18.68 8339.81 14.18 2646.05 4.50 6150.00 10.46
ANDHRA BANK 44427.60 8824.80 19.86 7579.46 17.06 1245.34 2.80 5989.56 13.48
B O BARODA 1 09283.00 21617.30 16.70 13329.06 12.20 8288.24 7.58 10945.30 10.02
B O INDIA 1 12364.00 18256.00 16.25 13958.00 12.42 4298.00 3.83 12987.00 11.56
B O MAHARASHTRA 34817.28 6107.22 14.52 3489.93 10.02 2617.29 7.52 2154.27 6.19
CANARA BANK 1 35050.00 25052.00 18.55 19069.00 14.12 5983.00 4.43 14631.00 10.83
CENTRAL BANK OF 85934.83 18306.06 17.85 11468.41 13.35 6837.65 7.96 8697.12 10.12
INDIA
CORPN BANK 48512.16 6585.82 12.26 3763.15 7.76 2822.67 5.82 2877.81 5.93
DENA BANK 29185.36 4826.22 15.83 3307.50 11.33 1518.72 5.20 2049.54 7.02

35
INDIAN BANK 48812.02 9091.27 18.63 7598.00 15.57 1493.27 3.06 5205.97 10.67
I O B 67104.36 12007.81 17.89 9171.29 13.67 2836.52 4.23 6855.19 10.22
O B C 68500.37 11032.23 13.93 6457.42 9.43 4574.81 6.68 4109.79 6.00
P N B 152679.00 29820.97 19.53 23170.87 15.18 6650.10 4.36 15779.03 10.33
P & S BANK 24698.00 5063.00 18.23 3390.00 13.73 1673.00 6.77 2141.00 8.67
SYNDICATE BANK 71297.03 13135.16 18.42 9926.79 13.92 3208.37 4.50 7497.41 10.52
UNION BANK 96959.49 17701.28 15.54 10704.92 11.04 6996.36 7.22 9319.87 9.61
UNITED BANK 35727.00 4758.00 11.96 2664.00 7.46 2094.00 5.86 3750.00 10.50
UCO BANK 49774.00 13629.46 20.94 8185.20 16.44 5444.26 10.94 6350.36 12.76
VIJAYA BANK 35875.00 5221.89 14.56 3607.51 10.06 1614.38 4.50 3461.67 9.65
IDBI Ltd.
# 103914.00 12129.00 11.11 6867.00 6.61 5262.00 5.06 1936.00 1.86
T OT AL 2074472.04 370730.35 17.28 265071.17 12.78 105659.18 5.09 212214.83 10.23
# For IDBI Ltd. concessional priority sector lending and agriculture lending targets have been fixed at 34% and 14% of NBC/ANBC
respectively at the end of  the last reporting Friday of March, 2010

36
Public Sector Banks Adjusted T otal Agricultural Direct Agri. Adv. Indirect Agri. Adv. Weaker Sections
Net Bank ad vances
Credit
(ANBC)
as on
March 31,
2009
 Amount % to Amount % to Amount % to Amount % to
NBC with ANBC ANBC ANBC
4.5 Indirect or OBE
(max.)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
Bank of Rajasthan Ltd. 7780.75 1454.13 8.37 301.39 3.87 1152.74 14.82 136.72 1.76
Catholic Syrian Bank Ltd. 3719.70 669.49 18.00 502.10 13.50 167.39 4.50 453.22 12.18
City Union Bank Ltd. 5686.22 672.84 11.83 556.44 9.79 116.40 2.05 384.64 6.76
Dev. Credit Bank 34 80.05 916.78 18.02 470.47 13.52 446.31 12.82 290.81 8.36

37
Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd. 3231.61 759.35 18.31 446.33 13.81 313.22 9.69 478.36 14.80
Federal Bank Ltd. 22392.00 3333.36 14.89 2361.80 10.55 971.56 4.34 894.35 3.99
HDFC Bank 99039.30 17131.51 10.94 6376.74 6.44 10754.77 10.86 1190.50 1.20
ICICI Bank @ 122263.03 30664.79 18.67 17329.04 14.17 13335.75 10.91 5629.79 4.60
Indusind Bank 15570.64 3201.43 18.19 2131.74 13.69 1069.69 6.87 1630.33 10.47
ING Vysya Bank Ltd. 16751.00 1953.66 11.66 1263.40 7.54 690.26 4.12 448.88 2.68
Jammu & Kashmir Bank 18412.05 2291.98 12.45 1484.77 8.06 807.21 4.38 2547.38 13.84
Karnataka Bank Ltd. 12122.97 1590.27 11.56 855.64 7.06 734.63 6.06 284.68 2.35
Karur Vysya Bank Ltd. 10563.01 1592.39 15.08 1179.03 11.16 413.36 3.91 1019.67 9.65
Kotak Mahindra Bank 16959.21 3586.44 19.53 2549.79 15.03 1036.66 6.11 1395.36 8.23
Lakshmi Vilas Bank Ltd. 5319.51 980.26 18.10 723.67 13.60 256.59 4.82 569.26 10.70
Nainital Bank 1131.46 226.93 19.25 166.85 14.75 60.08 5.31 90.55 8.00

38
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
Ratnakar Bank Ltd. 699.20 110.01 14.57 70.42 10.07 39.60 5.66 25.58 3.66
SBI Commercial Bank 315.34 33.33 5.63 3.57 1.13 29.76 9.44 0.00 0.00
South Indian Bank Ltd. 12144.86 2647.10 21.80 2474.51 20.37 172.59 1.42 2133.86 17.57
Tamilnadu Merc. Bank 6666.87 1447.94 20.99 1153.99 17.31 245.42 3.68 706.15 10.59
AXIS Bank 71953.89 10536.66 14.64 7298.73 10.14 3237.93 4.50 4763.60 6.62
Yes Bank 12446.86 3968.53 23.87 2410.52 19.37 1558.01 12.52 616.34 4.95
TOTAL 468649.53 89769.18 15.62 52110.94 11.12 37609.93 8.03 25690.03 5.48
TOTAL B/f 2074472.04 370730.35 17.28 265071.17 12.78 105659.18 5.09 212214.83 10.23
GRAND TOTAL (A+B) 2543121.57 460499.53 16.97 317182.11 12.47 143269.11 5.63 237904.86 9.35
@Priority sector lending target fixed at 50 per cent of the net bank credit on the residual portion of the bank’s advances.

39
6.2 With effect from 18th October, 1994, the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) has deregulated the interest rates on advances, including advances
under Priority Sector, by all Scheduled Commercial Banks including Public
and Private Sector Banks. The Banks determine these rates themselves with
the approval of their Board. With a view to enhance transparency in lending
rates, the Banks are required to adopt Base Rate system introduced by RBI
with effect from 1st July, 2010. The actual lending rate charged by banks
includes the Base Rate and other customer specific charges as considered
appropriate. Thus the lending rates may vary from bank to bank. Under
Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) Scheme the banks including Public and
Private Sector Banks are required to provide loans to eligible borrowers at
concessional rate of interest at 4% per annum.
6.3 Asked whether public and private sector banks have achieved the
stipulated percentage of lending, the Ministry, in their written replies, stated
as under:—
“As on the last reporting Friday of March, 2010, the total agricultural
advances in respect of Public Sector Banks are 17.28% to ANBC or
OBE. Out of this the advances to direct agriculture stood at 12.78%
of ANBC and the advances to indirect agriculture at 5.09% of ANBC.
As regards Private Sector Banks, the total agricultural advances are
16.97% of ANBC. Out of these advances to direct agriculture formed
12.47% of ANBC and the advances to indirect agriculture were 5.63%
to ANBC. As per information furnished by RBI the achievement of
Public Sector Banks under lending to weaker section stood at 10.23%
of ANBC or OBE as on last reporting Friday of March, 2010. The
achievement of Private Sector Banks as on last reporting Friday of
March, 2010 was 5.48% of ANBC or OBE. However, information is
not available separately for landless labourers, unorganized sector, etc.”
6.4 Specifically asked to state reasons for poor performance of
private sector banks in lending to weaker sections, the Ministry, in their post
evidence replies stated as follows:—
“As reported by RBI, Indian Private Sector banks have greater branch
network in the urban centres and have limited number of branches in
the semi-urban and rural areas of the country.  Therefore, opportunity

40
for this category of banks to lend to weaker sections of the society,
who reside in larger numbers in the semi-urban and rural areas of the
country, are limited to that extent.
However, the trend in quantum of loans given to weaker sections of
the society by the private sector banks is rising over the last few years.
This can be seen from the following data:
Year Amount of loan As % of ANBC
(Rs. crore)
2008 7227.76 2.10
2009 15842.92 3.90
2010 25690.03 5.48
Source: RBI.”
6.5 Asked about the measures to pursue banks to achieve desired
percentage of lending to agriculture and weaker sections, the Ministry, in their
replies, stated as under:—
“The Government of India and RBI have taken several measures in
order to ensure the proper availability of credit to farmers through
banks. These include:—
• The Government of India, since 2006-07 is providing an Interest
Subvention to all Public Sector Banks, Regional Rural Banks and
Cooperative Banks for short term crop loans upto Rs. 3 lakh, so
as to ensure that short term agriculture credit is available at 7%
to farmers.  In 2010-11, an additional 2% interest subvention is
being provided to those farmers, who repay their short term crop
loans timely. Thus the short term crop credit is available to prompt
payee farmers @ 5% p.a. for loans upto Rs. 3 lakh. Similarly,
for the year 2011-12 the Interest Subvention Scheme proposes
to provide prompt repaying farmers short term crop credit
@ 4% p.a.;
• The Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme
(ADWDRS), 2008 de-clogged the lines of credit that were
clogged due to the debt burden on the farmers;

41
• Banks have been advised to dispense with the requirement of “no
due” certificate for small loans up to Rs. 50,000 to small and
marginal farmers, share-croppers and the like and instead obtain
a self-declaration from the borrower;
• Banks (including RRBs), have been advised that wherever there
are difficulties in getting certification from the local administra-
tion/panchayati raj institutions regarding the cultivation of crops,
etc., they may accept an affidavit submitted by landless labourers,
share-croppers and oral lessees giving the occupational status
(i.e., details of land tiled/crop grown) for loans up to Rs. 50,000;
and
• RBI has advised the banks to waive margin/security requirements
for agricultural loans upto Rs.1,00,000.”
Differential Rate of Interest Scheme
6.6 Under DRI Scheme, domestic Scheduled Commercial Banks
are required to lend minimum 1% of their outstanding advances as at
the end of the previous year. However, none of the scheduled commercial
banks have achieved the target. The position for the last three years is as
under:
Year Achievement  in %
2008 0.05
2009 0.04
2010 0.04
Source: RBI.
6.7 Eligibility conditions for loan availing under DRI scheme:—
 As per extant guidelines of RBI, eligibility conditions for availing loan
under the DRI Scheme are as under:
(a) The family income of the borrower from all the sources does not
exceed Rs. 24,000/-  per annum in urban and semi-urban areas
and Rs.18,000/- per annum in rural areas;

42
(b) He does not own any land or size of his holding should not exceed
one acre in case of irrigated land and 2.5 acres in case of
unirrigated land;
(c) Members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are eligible
for loan irrespective of their land holding, provided they satisfy
the other criteria;
(d) The borrower can be helped to rise above present economic level
through productive endeavour with assistance from banks, the
productive endeavour being such as would become economically
viable with in a period of, say three years;
(e) He does not incur liability to two sources of finance at the same
time; and
(f) The borrower should work largely on his own and should not
employ paid employees on a regular basis.
6.8 Categories of Eligible persons:
Persons who satisfy the income and land holding criteria and inter-alia
the following categories indicated below will be eligible for the benefits
of the Scheme:
(i) Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and other engaged in on a
very modest scale, in agriculture and/or allied agricultural
activities;
(ii) People who themselves collect or do elementary processing of
forest products and people who themselves collect fodder in
difficult areas and sell them to farmers and traders;
(iii) People physically engaged on a modest scale in the field of cottage
and rural industry and vocations;
(iv) Indigent students of merit going for higher education who do
not get scholarship/maintenance grants from Government or
educational authorities; and
(v) Physically handicapped persons pursuing a gainful occupation.

43
6.9 Asked whether all banks have achieved targets stipulated under
the scheme, the Ministry furnished following post evidence reply:
“The DRI Scheme targets the weaker sections, for whom there
are a number of Government Sponsored Schemes with
subsidy component. Therefore, the other Government Sponsored
Schemes may be deemed to be more attractive to the target group as
compared to DRI Scheme which is not backed by any subsidy
component.
Further, under the DRI Scheme, banks provide finance up to
Rs. 15,000/- at a concessional rate of interest of 4 per cent per annum
to the weaker sections of the community for engaging in productive
and gainful activities. In order to ensure that persons belonging to SCs/
STs also derive adequate benefit under Differential Rate of Interest
(DRI) scheme, banks have been advised to grant to eligible borrowers
belonging to SCs / STs such advances to the extent not less than
2/5th  (40 %)  of the DRI advances.”
C. Debt Recovery Tribunals
7.0 The Central Government has established 33 Debt Recovery
Tribunals (DRTs) and 5 Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunals (DRATs) all over
the country under the provisions of the Recovery of Debts due to Banks
and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 for expeditious adjudication and speedy
recovery of debts due to banks and financial institutions and matters
connected therewith. The amendments made in 2000 and 2003 to the above
Act and the Rules framed thereunder have strengthened the functioning of
Debt Recovery Tribunals.
7.1 DRTs are providing valuable services to the banks and financial
institutions for effective recovery of non-performing assests. The role of the
DRTs has been further enhanced after enactment of Securitization and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
(SARFAESI) Act, 2002, which provides for aggrieved parties to make appeals
before the DRTs.

44
7.2 Asked to furnish the details of total number of cases referred,
disposed and pending with DRTs, the Ministry, in one of their replies stated
as under:—
The details of cases disposed off, cases filed and cases pending during
the last five years by DRTs are as follows:—
Sl.  Year No. of Amount No. of No. of Amount
No. cases involved cases cases involved
disposed (Rs. in filed pending (Rs. in
Crores) Crores)
1. 2006-07 10481 19779.87 7902 25268 99273.92
(01.04.2006 to
31.03.2007)
2. 2007-08 10255 24693.49 10999 26712 93290.59
(01.04.2007 to
31.03.2008)
3. 2008-09 10699 18490.07 13194 29357 93263.15
(01.04.2008 to
31.03.2009)
4. 2009 9585 13028.40 1 1264 31572 95261.41
(1.04.2009 to
31.12.2009)
5. 2010 11801 21079.33 18914 37616 113081.40
(1.01.2010 to
31.12.2010)
It has been observed that although the number of cases filed in the DRTs
depict an increasing trend, there has been an increase in the number
of cases disposed off in the year 2010 and the amount involved therein
as compared to the year 2006-07.”

45
7.3 When asked about the problems noticed/ shortcomings found in
the performance of DRTs, the Ministry, in their written replies, informed as
follows:
“During a review meeting taken by Secretary (Financial Services) on
19.07.2010, the problems/shortcomings which were identified included
large number of vacancies at all levels, lack of proper training to the
Officers and staff taken on deputation by the DRTs and submission
of incomplete cases/applications by the banks and financial institutions.
In order to overcome these problems and shortcomings in the
functioning of the DRTs, following steps are being/ have been taken:
a. Concerted efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies in
Gr. ‘A’ and ‘B’ posts.  DRTs have also been advised to meet the
requirements of group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts by outsourcing, if need
be;
b. Training programmes for Registrars, Assistant Registrars and
Recovery Officers are being organized by the Government
regularly so as to improve the overall working of DRTs/DRATs;
and
c. Banks/financial institutions have been advised to send complete
original applications so as to avoid delay in adjudication.”
D. Repudiation of Insurance policies
8.0 It has been observed that in recent years number of insurance
policies repudiated by the insurance companies have increased significantly.
Asked to furnish data on such policies, the Ministry, in their post
evidence replies, stated as under:
“The IRDA does not call for this information from the insurance
companies routinely. However, on receipt of this Department’s letter
dated 18.4.2011, IRDA called for the necessary data from all the
insurance companies. The data received from the various companies
is as per the following table.  Out of the total of 47 insurance companies,
5 companies have not submitted the data.

46
ANNEXURE I
Details of Claims Repudiated by Life Insurance Companies
Sl. Name of the Company Last 5 Years Number of
No. Claims
Repudiated
12 34
1. Canara, HSBC, Oriental Bank of 2010-11 53
2009-10 15
2008-09 3
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
2. Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance 2010-11 1947
2009-10 1223
2008-09 1116
2007-08 712
2006-07 630
3. India First Life Insurance 2010-11 34
2009-10 1
2008-09 0
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
4. Max New York Life Insurance 2010-11 1339
2009-10 741
Commerce and Life Insurance
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited

47
12 3 4
2008-09 306
2007-08 221
2006-07 263 
5. Bharti AXA Life Insurance 2010-11 104
2009-10 116
2008-09 96
2007-08 12
2006-07 0
6. Sahara India life Insurance 2010-11 50
2009-10  50
2008-09  54
2007-08 9
2006-07  4
7. DLF Pramerica Life Insurance 2010-11 16
Company Limited (unaudited)
2009-10 1
2008-09 0
2007-08 Company not
in existence
2006-07 Company not
in existence
8. Shriram Life Insurance 2010-11 407
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited

48
12 3 4
2009-10 230
2008-09 192
2007-08 76
2006-07 1
9. Aviva Life Insurance Company 2010-11 278
2009-10 183
2008-09 278
2007-08 121
2006-07 53
10. AEGON Religare Life Company 2010-11 88
2009-10 22
2008-09 5
2007-08 Company not
in existence
2006-07 Company not
in existence
11. Birla Sun Life Insurance 2010-11 497
2009-10 640
2008-09 288
2007-08 117
2006-07 111
12. Tata AIG Life Insurance 2010-11 972
Company Limited
India Limited
Limited
Company Limited

49
12 3 4
2009-10 646
2008-09 399
2007-08 252
2006-07 230
13. SBI Life Insurance Company Limited 2010-11 2497
2009-10 1877
2008-09 1561
2007-08 1018
2006-07 1089
14. Kotak Mahindra Old Mutual Life 2010-11 110
2009-10 108
2008-09 125
2007-08 198
2006-07 70
15. Star Union Dai-ichi Life Insurance 2010-11 7
2009-10 3
2008-09 0
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
16. HDFC Standard Life Insurance 2010-11 189
2009-10 165
2008-09 156
Company Limited
Company Limited
Insurance Co. Limited

50
12 3 4
2007-08 281
2006-07 284
17. Reliance Life Insurance Company 2010-11 1429
2009-10 623
2008-09 200
2007-08 83
2006-07 1429
18. Life Insurance Corporation of India 2010-11 7899
2009-10 8227
2008-09 7846
2007-08 6222
2006-07 8767
19. ING Vysya Life Insurance 2010-11 55
2009-10 56
2008-09 49
2007-08 14
2006-07 51
20. IDBI Federal Life Insurance 2010-11 160
2009-10 80
2008-09 13
2007-08 0
2006-07 Company not
in existence
 
Company Limited
Company Limited
Limited

51
12 3 4
21. ICICI Prudential Life Insurance 2010-11 996
2009-10 772
2008-09 801
2007-08 468
2006-07 220
22. Metlife India Insurance 2010-11 157
2009-10 105
2008-09 187
2007-08 139
2006-07 84
Data not submitted by the following Companies
1. Future Generali India Life Insurance Company Limited
Details of Claims Repudiated by Non-Life Insurance Companies
Sl. Name of the Company Last 5 Years Number of
No. Claims
Repudiated
12 3 4
1. Apollo Munich Health Insurance 2010-11 4113
2009-10 2209
2008-09 706
2007-08 19
2006-07 0
 
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited

52
12 3 4
2. Bajaj Allianz General Insurance 2010-11 19711
2009-10 13851
2008-09  41364
2007-08  27035
2006-07 23609
3. Bharti AXA General Insurance 2010-11 1332
2009-10 639
2008-09 45
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
4. Future Generali India Insurance 2010-11 0
2009-10 0
2008-09 0
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
5. HDFC ERGO General Insurance 2010-11 1320
2009-10 505
2008-09 3843
2007-08 5025
2006-07 1652
6. ICICI Lombard General Insurance 2010-11 223070
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited

53
12 3 4
2009-10 143301
2008-09 86242
2007-08 1 1968
2006-07 17722
7. Max Bupa Health Insurance 2010-11 92
2009-10 0
2008-09 Company not
in existence
2007-08 Company not
in existence
2006-07 Company not
in existence
8. The Oriental Insurance Company 2010-1 1  56530
2009-10  60955
2008-09  48560
2007-08 34670
2006-07 38150
9. Raheja QBE General Insurance 2010-11 0
2009-10 0
2008-09 0
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited

54
12 3 4
10. Reliance General Insurance 2010-11 14617
2009-10 18319
2008-09 9190
2007-08 8245
2006-07 4934
11. Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance 2010-11 10841
2009-10 1 1609
2008-09 10542
2007-08 1 1269
2006-07 8603
12. SBI General Insurance Company 2010-11 1
2009-10 0
2008-09 0
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
13. Shriram General Insurance Company 2010-11 791
2009-10 379
2008-09 60
2007-08 Company not
in existence
2006-07 Company not
in existence
Company Limited
Company Limited
Limited
Limited

55
12 3 4
14. Star Health and Allied Insurance 2010-11 76984
2009-10 15216
2008-09 6635
2007-08 1192
2006-07 192
15. Tata AIG General Insurance 2010-11 4738
2009-10 3168
2008-09 2846
2007-08 3103
2006-07 3115
16. Universal Sompo General Insurance 2010-11 1736
2009-10 283
2008-09 26
2007-08 0
2006-07 0
17. Cholamandalam MS General Insurance 2010-11 17323
2009-10 26821
2008-09 15470
2007-08 9792
2006-07 6223
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited
Company Limited

56
12 3 4
18. IFFCO Tokio General Insurance 2010-1 1 11993
2009-10 13722
2008-09 10431
2007-08 9011
2006-07 7823
Data not submitted by the following Companies
1. Agriculture Insurance Company of India Limited
2. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Limited
3. The New India Assurance Company Limited
4. United India Insurance Company Limited
5. National Insurance Company Limited
6. L&T General Insurance Company Limited
Company Limited

57
CHAPTER IV
DEPARTMENT OF DISINVESTMENT
Disinvestment policy
9.0 On 5th November 2009, Government approved the following
action plan for disinvestment in profit making Government companies:
(i) Already listed profitable CPSEs (not meeting mandatory
shareholding of 10%) are to be made compliant by ‘Offer for Sale’
by Government or by the CPSEs through issue of fresh shares
or a combination of both.
(ii) Unlisted CPSEs with no accumulated losses and having earned
net profit in three preceding consecutive years are to be listed.
(iii) Follow-on public offers would be considered taking into
consideration the needs for capital investment of CPSE, on a case
by case basis, and Government could simultaneously or
independently offer a portion of its equity shareholding.
(iv) In all cases of disinvestment, the Government would retain at least
51% equity and the management control of the CPSE.
(v) All cases of disinvestment are to be decided on a case to case
basis.
(vi) The Department of Disinvestment is to identify CPSEs in
consultation with respective administrative Ministries and submit
proposal to Government in cases requiring Offer for Sale of
Government equity
9.1 The target fixed by the Government, for disinvestment during the
year 2010-11 was Rs. 40,000 crore.  When asked as to why only Rs. 22,144
crore of disinvestment proceeds were received, the Ministry, in a written
submission stated as under:
“Finance Minister had mentioned in his Budget Speech on
28th February, 2011, a higher than anticipated realization in non-tax

58
revenues has led the Government to reschedule some of the
disinvestment Issues planned for the current year.  Accordingly, the
Revised Estimates were scaled down to Rs. 22,144.79 crore.
The following disinvestment transactions earlier scheduled for
2010-11 are now to be completed in 2011-12:
(i) The disinvestment of 5 per cent paid-up equity capital of Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) out of Government
shareholding through a further public offering in domestic market.
(ii) Disinvestment of 5 per cent  paid-up equity capital of Steel
Authority of India Limited (SAIL)  out of Government
shareholding in conjunction with issue of fresh equity of equal
size by the Company through a further public offering in domestic
market.
(iii) Disinvestment of 10 per cent  paid-up equity capital of Hindustan
Copper Limited (HCL) out of Government shareholding in
conjunction with issue of fresh equity of equal size by the
Company through a further public offering in domestic market.”
9.2 Asked whether the Government will be able to fulfill the
disinvestment target for the current year, the Ministry furnished following
written reply:
“Some of the Issues expected to be completed in 2010-11, e.g. Oil and
Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC), Steel Authority of India
Limited (SAIL) and Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL), have been
rescheduled for 2011-12. The disinvestment in Power Finance
Corporation Limited (PFC) is also expected to be completed during
2011-12. Other Initial Public Offerings and Further Public Offerings
are expected to be added to this pipeline of public offerings for
2011-12 in the course of the next few months.
The Department has a streamlined system of appointment of merchant
bankers which is transparent and competitive, based on a two-envelope
system. Technical bids are evaluated first and the financial bids of only
those bankers who meet the minimum technical benchmark are opened.

While the Department has been able to attract the best of the merchant
bankers, these bankers have been quoting low or near zero fees.  This
is perhaps due to the intense competition among them to win the
mandates of the Government.  The Department keeps a close watch
on the performance of these bankers, who are also graded in the
selection process on their past performance with the Department.
The Department has also taken active measures to remain in constant
touch with the investor community, both retail and institutional by
meeting brokers and SEBI registered investors associations across the
country.  In addition, the Department has held meetings with domestic
institutional investors.  A similar exercise has been undertaken for
foreign institutional investors by holding “non-deal” road shows abroad.
In the above background, the Government expects to get Rs. 40,000 crore
from disinvestment proceeds during the year 2011-12.”
9.3 When asked, why there is no plan for loss making PSUs, the
Ministry, in their post evidence reply, stated as under:
“The disinvestment policy envisages disinvestment in profit making
CPSEs by way of initial public offering and further public offering as
loss making CPSEs are not likely to evoke investor interest.
So far as loss making CPSEs are concerned, it may be mentioned that
the Government constituted Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector
Enterprises (BRPSE) in December 2004 for revival of loss making
CPSEs. All loss making CPSEs stand referred to BRPSE for
revival. The BRPSE is functioning under the Department of Public
Enterprises.”
59

PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
Underutilisation of funds under major State Plan Schemes
1. A provision of Rs. 1,30,365.23 crore has been made in Budget
2011-12 for the major State Plan Schemes.  It is a matter of serious
concern for the Committee that huge amounts of shortfall vis-à-vis
the Budget Estimates have been reported for the years 2009-10 and
2010-11 (Rs. 6580.21 crore and Rs. 8392.77 crore respectively) in
respect of grants transferred to States and UTs under these major Plan
Schemes such as Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme, National
Social Assistance Programme, Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission, Sub-Mission on Basic Services to Urban Poor and
Integrated Housing and Slum Development Scheme.  Similarly, large
shortfalls have also been reported – Rs. 1841.47 crore in 2007-08,
Rs. 4456.57 crore in 2008-09, Rs. 2624.93 crore in 2009-10 and 339.23 crore
in 2010-11 – in respect of major non-Plan Schemes as well.  According
to the Ministry, such shortfall occur when the line Ministries are unable
to recommend releases to the full extent of available funds on account
of non-fulfillment of requirements by States.  The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Finance should urgently take up this matter with
the line Ministries with a view to reviewing these unutilized grants
instead of providing for them year after year routinely without any
reference to its utilization. The Committee would not like a situation
where grants remain confined to the budget document without showing
visible results on the ground. The Ministry of Finance should,
therefore, set up an internal monitoring mechanism, whereby
quarterly review meetings may be convened involving both the line
Ministries and the State Governments so as to keep close vigil and to
ensure a much better utilization of funds. In this context, the
60

Committee would also like to draw the attention of the Government
to a contrasting situation being witnessed with regard to central funds
which are shown as fully utilised for budgetary purposes without any
visible outcomes on the ground. The Committee would thus recommend
that the Ministry of Finance should sensitize the line Ministries in this
regard so that the proposals formulated by them are more sharply
focused on the results. They should also avoid expending major chunk
of allocations towards the end of the year while ensuring spreading of
expenditure evenly through the year.
Inflation
2. From the submissions of the Chief Economic Advisor, it is
found that while in April 2010, the WPI index was 11 per cent, it came
down to 8.31 per cent in April this year. However, the Ministry, in their
replies have admitted that this fall has been managed by changing the
base year.  Nevertheless, the food index which was at 6.45 per cent in
April, 2011 continues to be a major component of overall inflation.
Although the Ministry have stated that food index in CPI-IW and in
WPI are guiding factors in formulation of Government policy and
management of food economy, the Committee are surprised to note
that the approach of the Government in redefining these indices has
been piecemeal in as much as while base year for WPI has been
changed to year 2004-05, year 2001 is still used as base year for CPI-
IW.  This clearly shows that contradictory scenarios emerging from
these indices are being used for policy formulation, which obviously
cannot thus be expected to yield the desired results of curbing inflation.
Since it is not the wholesale prices, but retail prices represented by
CPI which is more affecting the common man, the Committee would
recommend the Government to formulate a more representative CPI
on an urgent basis, which will reflect more accurately the prevailing
inflationary trend.
3. Further, from the submissions of the Chief Economic Advisor,
the Committee observe that the Government “accepts additional
61

two per cent of inflation as corollary of economic growth”. Though the
Government has taken measures to bring down prices, their
inadequacy is well reflected in  RBI’s outlook on inflation, which shows
that there are several upside risks to inflation such as risk of persistent
high food inflation spilling over to the general inflation including the
manufacturing sector.  The Committee would like to caution that there
is thus no room for complacency to treat the issue of rising prices as
simply growth related and arising out of increasing per capita incomes.
Specific policy measures coupled with strong enforcement action is thus
urgently called for to tackle inflation, which if left unattended, will
leave an adverse impact on the economy in all its dimensions including
a negative impact on growth.
Budgetary Reforms
4. The Committee note that the Government have initiated
budgetary reforms by making expenditure corresponding to outcome.
While comparison with actual expenditure during budgeting/planning
of future expenses is a necessary input, the Committee note that there
are still several areas which require reforms to bring more
transparency in the  budgetary process and for fixing accountability,
such as classification of expenditure, uniformity in expenditure
allocations throughout the year, delineation of savings resulting from
economic use of resources or due to inaction on the part of parent
Ministry/Department in not implementing/delaying Projects/Schemes,
distinction of ‘savings’ from ‘surrenders’ made etc.
5. From the submissions of the Finance Secretary, the
Committee find that classification of revenue and capital expenditure
is not properly reflected in the Union Government accounts as grants
given to States for onward incurring of capital expenditure  are shown
as revenue expenses in the account of Government of India. The
Committee believe that such accounting creates only avoidable
confusion and is not reflective of actual budgeting. Therefore,
Government must initiate measures to review the existing
62

classification of expenditure to better project the expenditure and
reflect the policies accurately.  Further, the Committee are surprised
to find that there is no accurate system to capture the savings/
surrenders which result from non-implementation of intended Plans/
Schemes.  The existing system of reflecting savings is very vague and
does not fix accountability of the delinquent Ministry/Department.  In
view of the Committee, savings is a misnomer as most of it relates
to inefficient planning and ineffective monitoring. Thus, it would be
more appropriate if the three heads, namely, savings, under/non-
utilization and surrender of funds are clearly segregated in the budget.
This would also help the Government in more efficient re-allocation
of available funds.
Rate of Interest on General Provident Fund
6. The Committee note that the rate of interest on Employees
Provident Fund has been increased to 9.5 per cent.  The Committee
desire that rate of interest on General Provident Fund (GPF), which
is pegged at 8 per cent, may also be reviewed so that government
employees are not put to any disadvantage more so now when the
interest rate for bank deposits have also been raised.
Expanding Banking Services
7. The Committee note that for extending banking services to
approximately 73000 habitations, by March, 2012, the Government is
relying on use of Banking Correspondents/Facilitators (BCs/BFs) to a
great extent to enable reach of branchless banking.  As in March 2011,
banks had 26,123 BCs/BFs.  It is seen that out of 129 unbanked blocks,
58 blocks so far, have been provided banking services.  So there are
still 71 unbanked blocks, majority of which (70 blocks) are in the North-
Eastern region and one in Jammu and Kashmir.  Therefore, extending
banking services in these areas is heavily centered on providing
branchless banking, which can be through the use of technology and
BCs/BFs. However, the experience of some banks in expanding banking
63

network through the use of this model has not been very encouraging.
The Committee find that the Working Group appointed by RBI to study
the experience of this model highlighted some of the problems of banks
in using this channel extensively viz. cost of credit and volume of credit,
operational, legal and reputation risks faced by banks in employing
larger number of BCs, low coverage by individual BCs, difficulty in
assessing integrity of individuals acting as BCs, lack of professionalism,
delay in loan processing, disbursements, low volume of business
generated by BCs etc.  Consequently RBI issued revised guidelines for
engaging BCs on September 28, 2010, providing for internal central
monitoring and consumer protection measures and enlarging the scope
of entities for acting as BCs.  The Committee believe that although
RBI has initiated measures to strengthen BC/BF model, the efficacy
of this model, so far, in extending banking facilities is still doubtful.
Therefore, the Committee would urge the Government/RBI to critically
review the performance of BCs/BFs to develop them as a viable source
of expanding banking network in remote and inaccessible areas.  In
this regard, the Committee would like to point out that banks should
not look at BCs as a mere ‘cost centre’ but should look beyond and
treat them as a ‘service centre’.
The Committee also desire that banks should have a sub-division
of lending targets for different categories of weaker sections under
priority sector lending,  so that all sections/categories are evenly
covered in financial inclusion.  Such a sub-category should also include
the extent of coverage of the economically disadvantaged among
minorities.  Similarly, time-bound targets should also be fixed for the
village adoption scheme of banks.
8. The Committee observe that in expanding banking services
and achievement of financial inclusion, District Level Consultative
Committee (DLCC) has a crucial role.  The DLCC has members from
all commercial banks, co-operative banks, RRBs, NABARD, RBI and
various State Government departments and agencies.  This Committee
64

is chaired by District Collector.  They note that the High Level
Committee to review Lead Bank Scheme appointed by RBI has
recommended to constitute a sub committee of DLCC with a view to
drawing up a roadmap to provide banking services through a banking
outlet in every village having a population of over 2000 by March 2011.
In this regard, Committee are of the opinion that DLCC needs to
function more effectively to become the main instrument of
implementing policies and planning.  The Committee would therefore,
recommend review of the functioning of DLCC and its re-constitution
and make the MP of the area to head the same.
Lending to agriculture and weaker sections
9. The Committee note with concern the fact that both public
and private sector banks have failed to achieve the targeted percentage
of agricultural lending.  Out of 17.28% of total agricultural lending
by public sector banks, in March 2010, 12.78% of adjusted net bank
credit (ANBC) was provided for direct lending and 5.09% was given as
indirect lending as against the stipulated 13.5% and 4.5% respectively.
On the other hand, private sector banks made total agricultural lending
of 16.97% of which 12.47% was given as direct credit and 5.63% was
given as indirect credit. The Committee further observe from the data
for individual banks that as many as 15 public sector and 11 private
sector banks have made less than 18% of total agricultural lending.
It is further seen that 12 public sector and 13 private sector banks have
made indirect agricultural lending in excess of the prescribed 4.5%.
Thus it is clear that while banks are still short of achieving required
agricultural lending, many of them have shown greater propensity to
disburse indirect agricultural credit.  Though the Government have
stated to have taken several measures to increase agricultural lending,
they have still failed to persuade banks to achieve the desired
percentage of lending.
10. In case of lending to weaker sections, the performance of
private sector banks is very poor.  In March, 2010, these banks achieved
65

only 5.48% of weaker section lending vis-à-vis the required 10 percent.
The principal reason for such performance is stated to be less number
of branches of these banks in semi-urban and rural areas.  The
Committee would expect the RBI to ensure that private sector banks
also fulfil their social mandate.
11. Besides, the Committee find that the performance of banks
under Differential Rate of Interest Scheme (DRI Scheme), intended
for weaker sections, to be not very encouraging.  As against the
stipulated 1 percent lending under the scheme, the banks have
achieved only 0.05%, 0.04% and 0.04% in the last three years.  The
reason for low disbursement is stated to be the availability of other
more attractive Government sponsored schemes.  The Committee
would thus recommend that this scheme should be reviewed to make
it more attractive for availing loan by intended groups under this
scheme.
Debt Recovery Tribunals
12. Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) were established with a view
to ensuring fast adjudication and recovery of non-performing assets.
However from the data furnished to the Committee, it is found that
these tribunals have not been very effective in speedy disposal of cases.
Since the year 2006-07 to year 2010, the number of cases pending with
DRTs has grown from 25268 to 37616 cases.  However the Ministry are
merely deriving satisfaction that in the year 2010, the number of cases
disposed of by DRTs have increased as against the year 2006-2007.  The
Committee further note that DRTs are facing several problems such
as acute shortage of personnel, lack of proper training of officers and
staff taken on deputation and submission of incomplete cases/
applications by banks and financial institutions etc.  The Committee
are inclined to believe that the Government has become apathetic to
the functioning of the DRTs.  The Committee would therefore,
recommend that the government should immediately conduct a
66

thorough review of the functioning of the DRTs with a view to making
them more vibrant and purposeful.  The Committee should be apprised
of the steps taken in this regard within one month.
Repudiation of insurance policies
13. The Committee observe that the number of insurance policies
repudiated have increased in the last three years as seen in the data
furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee are surprised to note that
IRDA does not maintain information on this aspect which is vital for
protection of policyholder’s interest.  The Committee would like to
know the reasons for the rising number of repudiated policies in recent
years.  They would recommend that IRDA should carry out an analysis
of such policies to establish the reasons and take remedial measures
to reduce the instances of policy repudiation.
Disinvestment policy
14. The Committee note that the Government has been announc-
ing disinvestment of profit making PSUs to generate revenue and to
finance a part of its social expenditure programme.  They find that last
year, a target of Rs. 40,000 crore was fixed to be procured through
disinvestment.  However, subsequently this target was revised, as
additional resources were raised through other avenues.  The
Committee find that this year, the Government has rescheduled its
target and again a target of Rs. 40,000 crore has been fixed to be
received as disinvestment proceeds.
15. The Committee observe that the disinvestment policy of the
Government is principally governed by the motive of revenue
generation instead of a rational policy to offload Government stake in
public sector undertakings.  This shows adhocism in Government policy
towards disinvestment.
16. Further, while the policy direction for profit making PSUs is
to offload Government stake, no concrete policy has been formulated
67

with respect to loss making PSUs.  They have been simply referred to
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE)
functioning under Department of Public Enterprises for revival.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should formulate
Disinvestment policy with clear direction and vision encompassing all
categories of public sector undertakings.
   N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
20 June , 2011 Chairman,
30 Jaishtha , 1933  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
68

APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-11)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th April, 2011 from 1100 hrs to
1630 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
9. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Piyush Goyal
14. Shri Moinul Hassan
15. Shri Mahendra Mohan
16. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
17. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
69

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
Part I
(1100 to 1330 hours)
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(i) Department of Expenditure
1. Smt. Sushma Nath, Finance Secretary
2. Shri C.R. Sundermurti, Controller General of Accounts
3. Smt. Vilasini Ramachandran, Additional Secretary
4. Shri H. Pradeep Rao, Joint Secretary & FA
5. Smt. Madhulika P. Sukul, Joint Secretary (Personnel)
6. Smt. Anjuli Chib Duggal, Joint Secretary (PF-I & FCD)
7. Smt. Meena Aggarwal, Joint Secretary (PF-II)
(ii) Department of Economic Affairs
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Secretary
2. Dr. Kaushik Basu, Chief Economic Adviser (Secretary Level
Officer)
3. Shri Dipak Dasgupta, Principal Economic Adviser
4. Shri Shaktikanta Das, Additional Secretary (Budget)
5. Shri Bimal Julka, Additional Secretary & DG (DOC)
6. Ms. S. Bhavani, Senior Economic Adviser
7. Dr. H.A.C. Prasad, Senior Economic Adviser
8. Dr. Alok Sheel, Joint Secretary (MR)
70

19. Shri Rajesh Khullar, Joint Secretary (I&I)
10. Shri Prabodh Saxena, Joint Secretary (ABC)
11. Shri Venu Rajamony, Joint Secretary (MI)
(iii) Department of Financial Services
1. Shri Shashi Kant Sharma, Secretary (FS)
2. Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary (FS)
3. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary (BO)
4. Smt. Ravneet Kaur, Joint Secretary (IF)
5. Shri V .P. Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary (VPB)
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
Dr. K. Ramakrishnan, Chief Executive, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
NABARD
Shri S.K. Mitra, Executive Director, NABARD
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
Shri C.D. Srinivasan, CGM, RBI
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA)
Shri Puskal Upadhyay, GM, Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority (PFRDA)
(iv) Department of Disinvestment
1. Shri Sumit Bose, Secretary
2. Shri Sidhartha Pradhan, Additional Secretary
3. Smt. Kalpana Mittal Baruah, Joint Secretary
4. Shri H.P. Rao, JS & FA
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment) in connection with the examination of
71

the Demands for Grants (2011-12). Major issues discussed included problem
of inflation, particularly food inflation, need to invoke Essential Commodities
Act, removing leakages in public distribution system, direct cash transfer to
the intended group of people rather than direct subsidy, stipulation of targets
for adoption of villages by banks, poor performance of banks with regard
to lending to agriculture and weaker sections, State-wise identification of
unbanked locations/habitations etc. The Chairman directed the representatives
of the Department to furnish written replies on the points raised by Members
at an early date.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
Part-II
(1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
3.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 1630 hours.
72
   *** *** *** ***

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-11)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 25th May, 2011 from 1100 hrs
to 1730 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Manicka Tagore
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
14. Shri Piyush Goyal
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
16. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
17. Shri Mahendra Mohan
73

18. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
19. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
Part I
(1100 to 1400 hours)
2.  The Committee took up the draft report on Demands for Grants
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Financial Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment) for consideration and
adoption. The Committee adopted the draft report with some modifications/
changes as suggested by Members. The Committee authorised the Chairman
to present this Report to Parliament.
W
ITNESSES
3.  *** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
(1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs.)
WITNESSES
4.  *** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
74
   *** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***

5. The Committee then took up the following draft reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Planning; and
(iii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
6. The Committee adopted the draft reports relating to the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) and Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation without any modifications/amendments. The
Committee adopted the draft report relating to the Ministry of Planning with
some changes as suggested by Members. The Committee authorised the
Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned at 1730 hours.
75

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”