 1 
32 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
(2010-11) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Planning 
 
 
 
 
APPRAISAL OF BPL CRITERIA 
 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)


 2 
 
THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
Ministry of Planning 
 
APPRAISAL OF BPL CRITERIA 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 March, 2011 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 March, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
March, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 


 3 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                           Page No 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE           (iii) 
INTRODUCTION         (v) 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
Sl.No Subject  
A. Introduction 
(i) Definition of Poverty Line 
(ii) Estimation of Poverty 
(iii) Identification of Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
(iv) Unit of ‗Household‘ in BPL Census 
(v) Poverty Alleviation Programmes – Role of BPL 
Criteria 
 
1 
1 
6 
12 
14 
16 
B. BPL Identification – Criteria  
(i) Evolution of BPL Criteria 
(ii) Conducting next BPL Census  
(iii) Proposed Food Security Act 
 
17 
17 
26 
28 
C. Divergence between estimated and identified population 
Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
 
(i) Estimation of BPL 
(ii) Other Estimates of Poverty 
(iii) BPL Population identified by the State 
Governments vis-à-vis estimates of the Planning 
Commission 
 
29 
 
29 
29 
31 
D. Implementation of Welfare Schemes for the Poor  
(i) Welfare Schemes for rural poor 
(ii) Welfare Schemes for urban poor 
(iii) Public Distribution System 
35 
36 
41 
42 

 4 
(iv) Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
(v) National Rural Health Mission 
(vi) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 
(vii) Monitoring of Welfare Schemes 
 
45 
46 
47 
 
48 
 
 
Part II 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee………………………………  51 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I Percentage of population below poverty line by States                               
II Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 31 May, 14 July,  
29 September, 2010 and 15 March, 2011 

 5 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2010-2011     
 
  Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
                                           MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri C.M. Chang 
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
12. Smt. Jaya Prada  Nahata 
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
16. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara 
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
18. Shri Manicka Tagore 
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav 
21. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
23.   Shri Raashid Alvi 
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
25.   Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan 
27.   Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
28.   Shri Mahendra Mohan 
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
31.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2.      Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan -  Deputy Secretary 
 
*      Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 28.01.2011 vice Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, ceased 
to be a member of the Committee on his resignation from Lok Sabha 

 6 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the  Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by the 
Committee, present this Thirty-Second Report on ‘Appraisal of BPL Criteria‘. 
 2. The Committee obtained Background note and written information on the subject 
from the Ministry of Planning, Mini stry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation , Ministry of Rural 
Development (Department of Rural Development) , Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and various States and Union Territories. 
3. Written views/memoranda were received from Prof. M.H. Suryanarayana, IGIDR, 
Mumbai, Dr. Himanshu, JNU, Delhi,  Dr. Suranjan Sengupta, Kolkata and  Prof. Indrani Gupta, IEG, 
Delhi.   
 4.   The Committee, at their sitting held on 31 May, 2010 took evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Planning and Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development).  
On 14 July, 2010, the Committee heard the views of Dr. Shubhasis Gangopadhyay, Prof. M.R. Saluja 
and Prof. Indrani Gupta on the subject.  They also took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
5. The Committee took further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Planning and Ministry of Rural Development  (Department of Rural Development)  on 29 September, 
2010.   
6. The Committee,  considered and adopted the draft report at their sitting held on 15 
March, 2011. 
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Planning, Ministry Rural Development (Department of Rural Development), Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Poverty Alleviation for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material 
and information which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.  
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to Prof. M.H. Suryan arayana, 
IGIDR, Mumbai, Dr. Himanshu, JNU, Delhi,  Dr. Suranjan Sengupta, Kolkata,  Prof. Indrani Gupta, 
IEG, Delhi.  Dr. Shubhasis Gangopadhyay, IDF, Gurgaon and  Prof. M.R. Saluja, IDF, Gurgaon , for 
placing before them the requisite material and their consi dered views in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                             YASHWANT SINHA 
15 March, 2011                                                                                  Chairman, 
24  Phalguna, 1932(Saka)                                                             Standing Committee on Finance.  

 7 
                                                   Report 
Part I 
Background Analysis 
A. Introduction 
 
1.0 Poverty alleviation programmes have been the cornerstone of 
economic policy and planning since independence. Reliable estimation of poverty is 
the first step towards eradication of poverty as they provide the basic input for 
design, implementation and monitoring of anti poverty programmes. Crucial input for 
measurement of poverty is defining a poverty line. 
(i) Definition of Poverty Line 
1.1 Defining a poverty line is the first step in measurement of poverty 
which divides the poor from the non-poor. 
(a) Task Force on Projection of Minimum needs and Effective 
Consumption Demand  
 
 Planning Commission set up a Task Force on Projection of Minimum 
needs and Effective Consumption Demand under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y. K. 
Alagh in 1979 to determine poverty line. It defined the poverty line as per capita 
consumption expenditur e level which meets the average per capita daily calorie 
requirement of 2435 kcal (say 2400 kcal) in the rural areas and 2095 kcal (say 2100 
kcal) in urban areas along with the associated quantum of expenditure on non -food 
items such as clothing, shelter, transport, education, health care etc. The Task Force 
calculated the average calorie requirements from the age, sex and activity 
distribution of the population and associated calorie norm recommended by the 
nutrition experts of the Indian Council of Medical Research.  
1.2 Accordingly, the poverty line for rural areas was fixed at per capita 
monthly consumption expenditure of Rs. 49.09 and for urban areas at Rs. 56.6. 
These poverty line expenditures conform to a consumption basket which also meets 
a minimum of non-food requirements like clothing, shelter, transport, education and 
health care etc.  
(b) Expert Group on Estimation of Proportion and Number of Poor 
 
1.3 The Planning Commission, in 1989, constituted the Expert Group on 
Estimation of Proportion and Number of Poor (Lakdawala Committee) to look into 

 8 
the methodology for estimation of poverty and to redefine the poverty line, if 
necessary. The Expert Group recommended that Task Force Poverty line which 
quantified at the national level separately in rural  and urban areas be adopted. 
Further, the Expert Group disaggregated the National Poverty lines separately in 
rural and urban areas into States specific poverty lines in order to reflect the inter 
state price differentials.  
1.4 Major recommendations of the Expert Group are as follows: 
(a) ―The Poverty Line recommended by the Task Force on projection of 
minimum needs and effective consumption demand, namely a monthly per 
capita total expenditure of Rs.49.09 (rural) and Rs.56.64(urban) rounded 
respectively to Rs.49 and Rs.57 at all India level at 1973 -74 prices be 
adopted as the base line. This was anchored in the recommended per 
capita daily intake of 2400 calories in rural areas and 2100 calories in 
urban areas with reference to the consumption pattern as obtained in 
1973-74. The Group recommends that these norms may be adopted 
uniformly for all State. 
(b) Given that much systematic work has already been done with the base 
1973-74, the Group is in favour of continuing it as the base year for 
estimating the poverty line. 
(c) State-specific poverty line should be estimated as follows. The 
standardised commodity basket corresponding to the poverty line at the 
national level should be valued at the prices prevailing in each State in the 
base year, i.e., 1973 -74. For updating pov erty line to the current prices in 
a given year, a State -specific consumer price -index needs to be formed. 
For this purpose, the observed all -India consumption pattern of the 20 to 
30 per cent of the population around the poverty line in 1973 -74 should 
constitute the State -specific weighting diagram. This diagram should be 
used in the construction of State -specific price index over the years using 
the disaggregated commodity indices from the consumer price - index for 
the agricultural labourers (rural) and c onsumer price index for the 
industrial workers and non- manual employees (urban). 
(d) After considering various possible choices for the deflator, the Group 
came to the conclusion that it would be most suitable to rely on the 
disaggregated commodity indices fr om Consumer Price Index for 
Agricultural Labourers (CPIAL) to update the rural poverty line and a 
simple average of suitably weighted commodity indices of consumer price 
index for industrial workers (CPIIW) and consumer price index of non -
manual employees (CPINM) for updating the urban poverty line. 
(e) Given the updated State-specific poverty lines and the corresponding size 
distribution of per capita consumption expenditure (PCTE) of National 
Sample Survey (NSS), the number of poor as a percentage of total 
population or the poverty ratio should be calculated separately for rural 
and urban areas for each State. The absolute number of poor in each 
State in rural and urban areas should be calculated by applying the 

 9 
poverty ratio to the estimated population as given by the Registrar General 
of Census. The all-India (rural or urban) poverty ratio should be derived as 
a ratio of the aggregate number of State -wise poor persons to the total all- 
India (rural and urban) population. The implicit all -India poverty line ma y 
be worked out, given the all - India poverty ratio and the all - India 
distribution of population by expenditure classes obtained from the same 
NSS survey. 
(f) (i) The poverty -ratio of Assam has been adopted for Sikkim and the 
North-eastern States namely, Arun achal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Manipur, Nagaland, and Tripura. In case of Manipur, the population 
distribution by expenditure classes and the price indices, both are 
available. But the use of such information for estimating the incidence of 
poverty in Manipur gave poverty ratios which were completely out of line 
with the poverty ratios in the other North -Eastern States and also the 
numbers and the ratios were not very consistent over the years. This 
happened because of the sample size. Hence the Group p referred to 
adopt the poverty-ratio of Assam for Manipur also. 
(ii)  For Goa, Daman and Diu, the poverty line of Maharashtra and  the 
population distribution by expenditure classes for Goa was used.  
(iii)  Among the Union Territories, for Andaman and Nico bar Islands, the 
poverty -ratio of Tamil Nadu, for Lakshdweep the poverty ratio of Kerala, 
for Dadra and Nagar Haveli the poverty -ratio of Goa, and for Pondicherry 
the poverty ratio of Tamil Nadu was used. For rural and urban Chandigarh 
the Group used the urban poverty-ratio of Punjab‖. 
 
1.5 The estimates of the proportion and number of poor based on the 
methodology recommended by this Group are as given below: 
Year Rural % of persons Urban % of 
persons 
Combined % of 
persons 
1973-74 56.44 49.23 54.93 
1977-78 53.07 47.40 51.81 
1983 45.61 42.15 44.76 
1987-88 39.06 40.12 39.36 
 
1.6 The Group also suggested certain priority areas for research and data 
improvement for improving poverty estimates in future.  These are as follows: 
(a)―Non -availability of appr opriate State -specific cost of living 
indices is an important gap in data availability for making 
State-specific estimates of poverty. This Group 
recommends taking immediate steps to construct the price 
indices representing changes in consumer prices of th e 
poor at relevant disaggregated levels. 
(b) The estimates of the poverty -ratio derived from the NSS 

 10 
provide a composite picture of the number of people whose 
per capita consumption expenditure is below the level 
corresponding to the basket of commodities cons tituting the 
desired minimum. It does not, however, provide a complete 
picture of the State of well -being of the population.  
Therefore, the estimates of the proportion and number of 
poor needs to be supplemented with the assessment of the 
following aspect s in order to capture a fuller picture of the 
living conditions and well being of the poor: 
(i)   The composition of the poor population in terms of dominant 
characteristics, i.e., their distribution by region, social group, 
family characteristics (e.g., s ize, education, age, sex of 
household head, dependency ratio) and the way this is 
changing over time. Much of this can be done by appropriate 
tabulation of NSS employment and consumption survey 
data. 
(ii)  Nutritional status of the population : levels of in take of 
principal nutrients, incidence of malnourishment, 
anthropometric measurements and activity patterns by age, 
sex and socio-economic categories. This can be done by the 
National Institute of Nutrition. 
(iii)  Health status : mortality (overall, infant  and child, 
maternal); morbidity; access to and use of health services 
(public and private) and costs. The quinquennial surveys of 
public consumption as well as the mortality indicators based 
on the Sample Registration System and the morbidity 
surveys of N SS need to be put on a systematic and 
continuing basis. 
(iv)  Educational status: school enrolment by region, sex and 
age group and by economic -social class; reach and quality 
of public education services and costs. Here again 
information from the NSS soci al consumption enquiries and 
the all -India Education Survey suitably restructured would 
provide the basic data.  
(v)  Living Environment: distribution by density of settlement; 
living space per head; type of houses; access to safe 
drinking water and sanita tion; access to amenities (post 
office, telephones, railway, pucca road, markets, etc). 
© In some aspects like nutrition where basic issues concerning 
the concept of under -nourishment and minimum 
requirements for healthy active individuals are under 
controversy, further research is necessary to improve our 
understanding. Besides encouraging improvements in the 
range and quality of survey data, the Planning Commission 
should also support research on some of these basic issues.  
The poverty line is also used for the operational identification 
of poor households in order to determine their eligibility for 
benefits under targeted anti-poverty schemes notably the 

 11 
IRDP. We believe that, in principle, the improved estimates 
we have recommended will make them more u sable for this 
purpose. In practice, however, it is difficult to estimate or 
verify incomes or consumption expenditure at the level of 
individual households. In these circumstances, the "first 
information' indicator provided by the poverty-ratio under this 
methodology needs to be supplemented and corrected with 
other indicators  - which may also be more readily verifiable 
than income or consumption expenditure. This is important 
in order to refine targeting so that the ineligible are excluded 
from, and the eligible are fully covered in, the intended 
benefits from targetted anti-poverty programmes. 
(d) At present, the agencies concerned with the implementation 
of poverty-alleviation programmes resort to special surveys 
to identify the eligible households. Suc h surveys, besides 
being expensive, cannot really give a correct picture 
because they may suffer from the reporting bias which arises 
when it is known to form the basis for identifying 
beneficiaries of Government assistance. Analysis of data 
relating to sa mple households obtained form the NSS can 
give us an idea of certain easily identifiable characteristics of 
poor households. Such analyses have already been 
attempted on a limited scale and they show that the ranks of 
the poor tend to have a relatively hig h concentration of 
households with large household size, high -dependency-
ratio and female heads, rural households which do not 
cultivate any land, and households belonging to scheduled 
castes and scheduled tribes. It should be possible from the 
NSS data to  estimate,by State and region, separately for 
rural and urban areas, the probability of a household being 
poor for various values of each of these characteristics taken 
individually and in combination. Once this is done, it should 
be possible to give guide lines for identifying the poor 
households in a given locality of the region in terms of the 
value of specified characteristics, information on which is 
already available in the population census or can be 
collected without much expense. We would urge the 
Planning Commission to take the initiative in exploring these 
possibilities.‖ 
 
1.7 Based on the Expert Group methodology, the poverty lines in 2004 -05 
at all India level has been calculated by Planning Commission as Rs. 356.30 per 
capita per month for rural  areas and Rs. 538.60 per capita per month for urban 
areas. The State specific rural poverty lines calculated by the Expert Group in 1973 -
74 are updated by using state specific Consumer Price Indices of Agricultural 

 12 
Labourers (CPI-AL). Similarly the state specific urban poverty lines are updated by 
state specific Consumer Price Indices of Industrial Workers (CPI-IW).  
(ii) Estimation of Poverty 
1.8 Incidence of poverty is estimated by the Planning Commission on the 
basis of the large sample surveys on house hold consumer expenditure conducted 
by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) on a quinquennial basis.  
 
Household Consumer Expenditure (HCE) surveys conducted by National Sample 
Survey Organisation (NSSO) 
1.9 One of the most important data require ments for assessment of 
inequality and deprivation is that relating to levels of income of the people and 
corresponding expenditure by them for meeting their various needs.  Since, such 
data are generally not available through any other data sources of the  statistical 
system, direct data collection through large scale sample surveys on the subject 
‗Household Consumer Expenditure‘ (HCE) becomes an important statistical 
exercise.  A Comprehensive survey of household consumer expenditure (HCE) is a 
valuable tool for studies of poverty and nutrition, for analysis of consumer demand, 
and for assessment of the impact of specific socio -economic policies on level and 
pattern of consumption.  Based on the NSS HCE, the Planning Commission arrives 
at the poverty line and the people living below poverty line. 
Salient features of the NSS HCE surveys  
 1.10 NSS HCE surveys are conducted as part of the socio -economic 
surveys of NSSO.  A sample of villages and urban blocks is selected from the list of 
Census villages and the  list of urban blocks drawn up so as to cover practically the 
entire geographical area of the country.  Field investigators visit the selected villages 
and urban blocks, list the households therein, and select the households to be 
surveyed.  Different samp les of households are selected for the enquiry on 
consumer expenditure and the other subject of enquiry such as employment, 
unemployment etc. which are covered in the same round.  The survey work is 
spread over the entire survey year partitioned into four sub-rounds of 3 months 
each, to neutralize the effect of seasonality of consumption in the estimates.   
Profile of Information in NSS HCE 

 13 
 1.11 The information collected from each surveyed household has four 
parts: 
(a) household characteristics other than cons umption data such as 
number of members, principal household industry and occupation , 
social group, land possessed etc.; 
(b) member characteristics such as age, sex, educational level, etc., 
collected separately for each members; 
(c) data on item wise consumption b y household (Total 341 items, 142 
food items and 199 non food items); and 
(d) possession by the household of certain specified durable goods on the 
date of survey. 
 
1.12 Of these, consumption data is the most important and elaborate and 
consists of quantity and value of consumption by the household as a whole during a 
specified period (reference period) for each of a large number of items which 
together cover the entire range of consumer goods and services.  No attempt is 
made to ascertain person -wise consumption for any item.  To reduce recall errors, 
and also to take account of heterogeneity in consumption over different parts of th e 
country and different income levels, the schedule uses a very detailed item break -
up. 
Existing methodology of poverty calculation 
 1.13 For the calculation of income poverty, one need (a) distribution of 
households by size of per capita total expenditure that is generated by quinquennial 
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES) conducted by NSSO; (b) exogenously 
specified poverty line; an d (c) price deflator to update the poverty line to the 
prevailing prices in the survey period(s) of CES.  The distribution of households by 
size of per capita total expenditure is obtained from NSS Consumer Expenditure 
Survey (CES).  The current poverty es timates are based on 61 st round (2004 -05) 
CES data.  However, in 2004 -05 distribution of two Monthly Per Capita Consumer 
Expenditure (MPCEs), viz., MPCE (URP – Uniform recall period) and MPCE (MRP –
Mixed recall period) were generated by NSS.  Hence two pov erty ratios, one using 

 14 
MPCE (URP) and other using MPCE (MRP) were computed for each state and 
sector combination and presented by Planning Commission.   
 1.14  Accordingly the estimates of poverty were worked out by the Planning 
Commission for the years  1 973-74, 1977-78, 1983, 1987-88, 1993-94 and 2004-05. 
On the basis of the poverty line of  Rs. 356.30 for rural areas and Rs. 538.60 for 
urban areas in the year 2004 -05, the percent of population below poverty line for 
rural, urban and all India during 2004-05 was estimated at 28.3%, 25.7% and 27.5%. 
However these estimates came in for sharp criticism as the poverty line did not allow 
the consumption of required calorie norms and the periodic price corrections, carried 
out to update the poverty lines were fo und to be inadequate and inappropriate. 
Therefore the Planning Commission constituted an Expert Group under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar in 2005 to review the methodology for 
estimation of poverty.  
 
Expert Group to Review the Methodology for Estimation of Poverty 
 1.15 Major highlights of the recommendations of the Expert Group are as 
follows: 
1. ―While acknowledging the multidimensional nature of poverty, the 
estimates of poverty will continue to be based on private household 
consumer expend iture of Indian households as collected by the 
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO).   
2. The expert group has also taken a conscious decision to move 
away from anchoring the poverty lines to a calorie intake norm in 
view of the fact that calorie consum ption calculated by converting 
the consumed quantities in the last 30 days as collected by NSS 
has not been found to be well correlated with the nutritional 
outcomes observed from other specialized surveys either over time 
or across space (i.e. between states or rural and urban areas).   
3. The quinquennial National Sample Surveys of household consumer 
expenditure surveys carried out by the NSSO provide the basic 
data set for official poverty calculations. For canvassing household 
expenditure on a recall basis , the NSSO has decided to shift to 
Mixed Reference Period (MRP) for all its consumption surveys in 
future, namely, 365 days for low frequency items (clothing, 
footwear, durables, education and institutional health expenditure) 
and 30 days for all the remai ning items.  This change captures the 
household consumption expenditure of the poor households on low 
frequency items of purchase more satisfactorily than the earlier 30 
day recall period.   The Expert Group decided to adopt the MRP 

 15 
based estimates of consumption expenditure as the basis for future 
poverty lines as against the prev ious practice of using Uniform 
Reference Period estimates of consumption expenditure.    
4. Underlying consumption poverty line is the reference poverty line 
basket (PLB) of household goods and services consumed by those 
households at the borderline separating the poor from the non 
poor. In the interest of continuity as well as in view of the 
consistency with broad external validity checks with respect to 
nutritional, educational and h ealth outcomes, it was decided to 
recommend MRP equivalent of urban PLB corresponding to 25.7 
per cent urban headcount ratio as the new reference PLB to be 
provided to rural as well as urban population in all the states after 
adjusting it for within state urban relative to rural and rural and 
urban state relative to all India price differentials.     
5. It may be noted that while the new poverty lines have been arrived 
at after assessing the adequacy of private household expenditure 
on education and health, th e earlier calorie  anchored poverty lines 
did not explicitly account for these. The proposed poverty lines are 
in that sense broader in scope.   
6. It may be noted that although those near the poverty line in urban 
areas continue to afford the original calorie norm of 2100 per capita 
per day, their actual observed calorie intake from 61 st Round of 
NSS is 1776 calories per capita. This actual intake is very close to 
the revised calorie intake norm of 1770 per capita per day currently 
recommended for India by the  Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO). Actual observed calorie intake of those near the new 
poverty line in rural areas (1999 calories per capita) is higher than 
the FAO norm. 
7. The proposed reference PLB is situated also in the latest available 
data on t he observed consumption patterns from the household 
consumer expenditure survey of NSS for the year 2004 -05 and 
takes into account all items of consumption (except transport and 
conveyance) for construction of price indices. Separate allowance 
for private expenditure on transport and conveyance has been 
made in the recommended poverty lines.    
8. The proposed price indices are based on the household level unit 
values (approximated price data) obtained from the 61st round 
(July 2004 to June 2005) of NSS on hou sehold consumer 
expenditure survey for food, fuel and light, clothing and footwear at 
the most detailed level of disaggregation and hence much closer to 
the actual prices paid by the consumers in rural and urban areas. 
Price indices for health and educatio n were also obtained from unit 
level data from related National Sample Surveys.   The 
recommended price indices take care of most of the criticisms of 
the earlier population segment specific consumer price indices with 
outdated base used for updating povert y lines.    An added and a 
significant advantage is that the recommended procedure permits 
the derivation of new poverty lines and the corresponding 

 16 
headcount ratios for all the states including the north eastern 
states.   In the judgment of the Expert Grou p, these advantages 
outweigh the problem of ignoring the quality differences in 
consumption of commodities across households that is involved in 
equating unit values with approximated prices.    
9. The new poverty lines seek to enable rural as well as urban 
population in all the states to afford the recommended all -India 
urban PLB after taking due account of within -state rural-urban and 
inter-state differentials (rural and urban) incorporating observed 
consumer behaviour both at the all India and state levels.     
10. The new poverty lines have been generated for all the states 
including the north eastern states. However, in the absence of 
adequate data, the expert group has suggested use of poverty line 
of the neighbouring states for union territories‖.     
  
1.16 The all-India rural headcount ratio using the recommended procedure 
is 41.8 per cent in comparison with 28.3 per cent.   The expert group re -estimated 
poverty for states and all India for 2004 -05.  A preliminary exercise for 1993 -94 has 
been carried out by  the Expert Group to facilitate a broad two point comparison of 
changes in headcount ratios.   By this exercise, poverty at all India level in 1993 -94 
was 50.1% in rural areas, 31.8% in urban areas and 45.3% in the country as a whole 
as compared to the 1993 -94 official estimates of 37.2 per cent rural, 32.6 per cent 
urban and 36.0 per cent combined. 
1.17 On the basis of above methodology, the all -India rural poverty 
headcount ratio for 2004-05 is estimated at 41.8 %, urban poverty headcount ratio at 
25.7% and all India level at 37.2%. Tendulkar Committee’s estimates are, however, 
not strictly comparable to the present official poverty estimates because of different 
methodologies. The divergent estimates for 1993-94 and 2004-05 are given below.  
 
Poverty Ratios 
 1993-94 2004-05 
Year Rural Urban Total Rural Urban Total 
Planning 
Commission (URP) 
37.3 32.4 36.0 28.3 25.7 27.5 
Tendulkar 
Estimates (2004 -
05) (MRP) 
50.1  31.8 45.3 41.8 25.7 
 
37.2 

 17 
 
N.B.: 1. URP = URP consumption = Uniform Recall Period consumption in which the consumer 
expenditure data for all the items are collected from 30-day recall period. 
2. MRP = MRP consumption = Mixed Recall Period consumption in which the consumer expenditure 
data for five non -food items, namely, clothing, footwear, durable  goods, education and institutional 
medical expenses are collected from 365 -day recall period and the consumption data for the 
remaining items are collected from 30-day recall period. 
1.18 Following major departures were suggested by the Expert group from 
the earlier methodology followed by Lakdawala Committee:  
i. Moved away from calorie anchor but included the adequacy of actual 
food expenditure near the poverty line to ensure certain aggregates 
like nutritional outcomes. 
ii. No discrimination between the rural and the urban population and 
recommended to provide a uniform Poverty Line Basket (PLB) based 
in the latest available observed household consumption data to both 
the rural and urban populations. 
iii. Recommended a price adjustment procedure that is predominantl y 
based in the same data set that underlines the poverty estimation. This 
has been proposed to correct for the problems associated with 
externally generated population segment specific price indices with 
outdated price and weight base used so far in the of ficial poverty 
estimations. 
iv. Recommended to incorporate an explicit provision in price indices for 
private expenditure on health and education which has been rising 
over time and test for their adequacy to ensure certain desirable 
educational and health outcomes. 
 
1.19 The report of the Expert Group has been accepted by the Government. 
Planning Commission is going to issue a press note on identification of the poor.   
1.20 In a post evidence submission, the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation have apprised the Committee about their comments on findings 
of urban poverty by Expert Group headed by Tendulkar, which were forwarded to 
Planning Commission which are stated as below: 
―The report submitted by the Tendulkar Committee accepts the urban 
poverty ratio at 25.7 per cent, while it increases the figure for rural 

 18 
poverty to 41.8 per cent on the basis of a uniform Poverty Line Basket 
(PLB)… the figures for rural poverty have mainly increased due to the 
adjustment process that basically takes car e of the expenditure on 
health, education and other non -food items by the poor due to the fact 
that public provision on these accounts in rural areas have not kept 
pace.  Similar adjustment, however, has not been done for urban areas 
because the urban pove rty figures have been taken on ―as is given 
basis‖ as reference for computation of rural poverty… urban poverty 
also needs redefinition and adjustment, especially if we accept the 
Tendulkar Committees‘ own argument that ―the composition of the 
minimal bask et of human needs that the society would expect every 
citizen to satisfy may be expected to keep expanding with economic 
and social progress in society‖.  We do know from simple everyday 
knowledge that there have been changes in the consumption 
behaviour and consumption patterns of residents in cities, with housing 
shortages and high level of house rents, especially for EWS and LIG 
categories and with shrinking access to free health, education and 
rising transportation costs.  Expenditure on account of educ ation, 
health, housing and transport that the urban people are required to 
spend are proportionately much more as compared to their rural 
counterparts.  Therefore, the assumption that urban poverty figure of 
25.7 per cent is acceptable while observing that  for the same reasons 
rural poverty figures need readjustment requires a thorough re -
examination…  Further, in case of housing, transport, conveyance, rent 
etc. adjustments have been done by the Tendulkar committee by 
taking into account data from NSSO on actual expenditures.  However, 
whether these actual expenditures are adequate to meet the minimum 
basic needs on these counts have not been examined…  Another 
issue is whether abandoning the calorie norm is a wise step.  It is true 
that calorie intakes wer e poorly correlated with nutritional outcomes.  
However, abandoning the calorie norm altogether appears to be a 
controversial proposition.  It is unclear whether there is any robust 
basis, theoretical or empirical, for this relationship to hold at all  in the 
years to come.‖ 
 
(iii) Identification of Below Poverty Line (BPL) households 
1.21 While Planning Commission estimates the poverty, actual identification 
of the BPL households in rural areas is done by the Ministry of Rural Development 
(MORD) which condu cts BPL census for this purpose.    As the identification of the 
poor is generally done at the beginning of the Five Year Plan through door -to-door 
survey with hundred per cent coverage of rural households, the MORD has been 
conducting the BPL Census for t his purpose.  It provides financial and technical 
support to States/UTs for conducting BPL Census. For identification of BPL families 

 19 
in urban areas, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation is the nodal 
agency which issues guidelines for carr ying out house to house survey  by the 
States/Union Territories on the basis of State specific poverty lines indicated by 
Planning Commission.  
 
BPL Census in rural areas 
1.22 The Ministry of Rural Development has so far conducted BPL Census 
in 1992 for 8 th Five Year Plan, in 1997 for 9 th Five Year Plan and in 2002 for 10 th 
Five Year Plan.  
1.23 The BPL census of 1992 used an income criterion to determine 
poverty and the annual income cut -off was fixed at Rs. 11,000 per household. The 
BPL Census of 1997 was conducted in two stages. First, some families were 
excluded on the basis of certain criteria. In the second stage, each remaining 
household was interviewed to determine its total consumer expenditure, and was 
identified as a BPL household if its per capita  consumer expenditure was below the 
poverty line set by the planning Commission. BPL Census conducted in 2002 for the 
10th Five Year Plan was based on the methodology of Score Based Ranking of rural 
households for which 13 socio -economic parameters were us ed, each parameter 
having a score between 0-4.  
 
Expert Group to advise the Ministry of Rural Development on the methodology for 
conducting the BPL Census for 11th Five Year Plan 
1.24 For conducting the BPL Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the 
Ministry, on 12th August, 2008, constituted an Expert Group, which could advise it on 
the suitable methodology. The Expert Group submitted its report on 21 st August 
2009 under chairmanship of Dr. N. C. Saxena.  This Group suggested automatic 
exclusion and inclusion criteria on the basis of which families will be selected which 
will be again ranked on the basis of points given for such characteristics as caste, 
tribal groups, employment and health status etc. 
1.25 The report of the Expert Group has been circulate d by the Ministry of 
Rural Development to the State Governments/UTs and the concerned Central 
Ministries for their comments.  

 20 
 
 
(iv) Unit of „Household‟ used in BPL Census   
1.26 As per the instructions issued by the Ministry of Rural Development for 
BPL C ensus 2002, a household is defined as a group of persons who commonly 
reside together and would take their meals from a common kitchen, unless the 
exigencies of work prevented any of them doing so. The household may comprise of 
persons related by blood or of unrelated persons or combination of both. 
1.27 As an effort to make the system of identifying the BPL families in the 
rural areas more accurate, methodology for conducting the BPL Census is examined 
and reviewed from time to time.  
1.28 The Expert Group headed by N.C.Saxena had also recommended the 
following definition of household for the BPL Census:  
 A joint family comprising all adults and children who eat from a common 
hearth and reside under a common roof. 
 However for the purpose of inclusion and su rvey (but not exclusion), within 
households which may even share a kitchen and roof, the following will be 
treated as separate households: 
o a single woman;  
o old individuals or couples in which one or both are beyond the age of 60   
years 
o every adult with TB , leprosy, disability, mental illness or HIV AIDS with 
spouse and children; and 
o bonded labourers with spouse and children.  
 In case a minor has these afflictions, his/her parents and siblings will 
constitute the household. This logic will also apply to bonded child workers. 
1.29 The Ministry has consulted with experts and States and it has been 
decided to conduct a pilot survey to arrive on the methodology for the forthcoming 
BPL Census which will also include definition of households. 
BPL Census for urban areas  
1.30 In respect of BPL in urban areas, the guidelines issued by Ministry of 
Housing and Poverty Alleviation (HUPA) for identification of BPL families in urban 
areas are relevant.  These stipulate that house to house survey is to be carried out 

 21 
by th e States/UTs. for identification of genuine beneficiaries on the basis of State 
specific poverty lines indicated by Planning Commission from time to time. During 
door to door survey focus has to be on slums and low income settlements. The 
model formats & g eneral guidelines for conducting slum survey, household survey 
and livelihood survey are issued by Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation 
(HUPA). In addition to economic criteria of urban Poverty Line, non - economic 
parameters are also suggested t o be applied for identification of urban poor. The 
States and UTs have the flexibility to use the parameters of their choice to identify 
urban poor for providing assistance under poverty alleviation programmes on priority 
basis.  
1.31 Keeping in view the n eed to review and revisit the methodology for 
identification of urban poor, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
(HUPA) had requested the Planning Commission to initiate efforts. Accordingly, the 
Planning Commission has constituted an Expe rt Group recently to recommend 
suitable methodology for identification of BPL families in urban areas under the 
chairmanship of Prof. S.R. Hashim, Ex -Member, Planning Commission vide 
notification dated 13th May 2010. The Terms of Reference of the Expert Group are: 
(i) To recommend appropriate detailed methodology with simple, transparent 
and objectively measurable indicators to identify Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
households in Urban Areas for providing assistance under various schemes 
targeted at the urban poor. 
(ii) To recommend periodicity for the conduct of BPL Survey in Urban Areas or 
the mechanisms to review such BPL list;  
(iii) To recommend suitable institutional mechanism for the conduct of BPL 
survey, survey questionnaire, processing of data, training, validation an d 
approval of urban BPL list at various levels; 
(iv) To recommend suitable institutional mechanism to address grievances of 
public on exclusion/ inclusion in the urban BPL list. 
(v) Any other suggestions/recommendations to make the exercise of Urban BPL 
survey simple, transparent and acceptable. 

 22 
1.32 Initially the Group was given four months period for submitting the 
report, which has now been extended and the Group is expected to submit its report 
by 12 January, 2011. 
 
 
(v) Poverty Alleviation Programme – Role of BPL Criteria 
1.33 The poverty alleviation programmes so far have been based on two 
approaches viz. universal and targeted approach. While under universal 
programmes beneficiaries are self selected, targeted programmes are based on 
inclusion or targeting of beneficiaries, based on the criteria of Below Poverty Line 
(BPL). The concept and method of estimating poverty has come in for criticism in 
recent years in the context of (a) economic policy reforms based on targeted policy 
interventions; and (b) the findi ngs on economic growth involving a decline in poverty 
along with an increase in calorie deprivation. 
1.34 The issue of BPL criteria and identification of people below the poverty 
line assumes great significance in view of its crucial role in identification  of 
beneficiaries of targeted poverty alleviation programmes and various welfare 
schemes of the Government. The BPL survey is primarily used for PDS.  Only two 
programmes of Ministry of Rural Development use BPL i.e. Indira Awas Yojana and 
Swarnajayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana.  But State Governments use it for various 
purposes.   Despite all the instructions for automatic inclusion and exclusion there is 
vagueness in implementation of criteria giving rise to serious problems of errors in 
exclusion and inclus ion with corruption playing an important role in wrong 
identification of people under the below poverty line. 
1.35 In the light of above the Committee decided to examine the subject, 
Appraisal of BPL Criteria. They invited suggestions and heard the views of experts in 
the field to understand the issues involved. They received memoranda from various 
States and Union Territories regarding total number of BPL population and card 
holders etc. They also took evidence of the various Ministries which are directly or 
indirectly related to address the problem of poverty and implementation of various 
welfare schemes for the poor. 

 23 
1.36 Major shortcomings/problems which were highlighted during the 
examination of this subject included multiple indicators/criteria used fo r identification 
of poor, divergence of official estimates of poverty ratio with the actual incidence of 
poverty, use of different methodologies for estimation and identification of poverty, 
restricting the identification of poor in States to the cap fixed  by the Planning 
Commission, lack of proper implementation of various welfare schemes directed to 
poor etc. The Committee have examined these issues in detail  in subsequent  
sections. 
 
B. BPL identification - Criteria 
 
(i) Evolution of BPL Criteria 
 
2.0 The Int egrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP) was the first 
programme targeted to rural poor and aimed at providing self employment to the 
poor through acquisition of productive assets or appropriate scheme which would 
generate additional income on a sustained basis to enable them to cross the poverty 
line. It was launched  in 1980 in all the blocks of the country. Rural families having 
annual income below Rs. 4800 were to be assisted under IRDP.  But families with 
an annual income upto Rs. 3500 were to be ass isted first.  Thus the focus was 
centred on poorest of the poor.  However, no census or survey was carried out to 
identify poor families.  It was found later that a large number of ineligible people got 
benefits of this programme. Therefore the issue of de vising criteria to identify poor 
assumed great significance. With the objective of identifying poor, the Ministry of 
Rural Development has conducted three BPL Census in rural areas since 1992.  It 
also provides technical assistance, in shape of methodology  and guidelines, survey 
instrument, training etc. to the States and UTs to conduct the BPL Census. 
2.1 The BPL survey of 1992 used income criterion to determine poverty. 
This survey determined the poor using the family based income level of Rs. 11000 
per year. However this criterion could not reflect the true picture of poverty. In the 
next BPL census of 1997 consumption criteria was adopted to identify poor. Also 
exclusion criteria was used to rule out ineligible families in the first place. This 
Census was also criticized for the use of exclusion criteria. 

 24 
2.2 For the BPL census of 2002, the Ministry of Rural Development 
adopted a methodology of score - based ranking of household, as suggested by an 
Expert Group, headed by Dr. P. L. Sanjeev Reddy. Thirteen socio economic 
indicators were used to identify the poor families. These were: 
1. Land holding 
2. Type of House 
3. Availability of Clothing 
4. Food Security 
5. Sanitation 
6. Ownership of consumer durables 
7. Literacy status of highest literate 
8. Status of Household Labour 
9. Means of Livelihood 
10. Status of Children 
11. Type of indebtedness 
12. Reason for migration 
13. Preference for Assistance 
2.3 For each of these thirteen indicators, the households are awarded 
scores in a five -point scale from 0 to 4. The scores are inversely related to the 
poverty and deprivation of the household. A low score indicates a higher level of 
poverty and deprivation and vice -versa. For each household, the scores from these 
13 indicators are summed up to get the aggregate score of the household. The 
aggregate score of a household can range from a minimum of zero to a maximum of 
52. The households are arranged in ascending order to get BPL List with the State 
wise upper limits defined by the poverty ratios released by the Planning 
Commission.  
2.4 However, using this cr iterion, errors of inclusion and exclusion far 
exceeded the acceptable limits. One of the important feature of the guidelines issued 
for BPL census 2002 was to put the ceiling on the number of BPL households to be 
identified in conformity with the poverty estimates of Planning Commission . The 
State Governments were asked to select the poorest households such that the total 
percentage of such families did not cross the limit fixed by Planning Commission. 

 25 
However several States selected more than this limit a nd many of them objected to 
the cap imposed by the Planning Commission.  
2.5 During the examination of the Demands for Grants (2010 -11), the 
Ministry of Planning explained the reasons for divergence in variation in the 
estimates of BPL population as brough t by the State Governments, Ministry of Rural 
Development and the Planning Commission, as under:- 
―It may be clarified that Planning Commission is the nodal agency to 
estimate poverty in the country. The Ministry of Rural Development 
undertakes an exercise through the States and UTs to identify the BPL 
families in the rural areas for targeting them under its various 
programmes which is different from estimation of poverty. For BPL 
census 2002 conducted by the Ministry of Rural  Development, the 
States were p rovided enough flexibility to identify the number of BPL 
households in rural areas. The States were given the option to identify 
the number of BPL families equal to the poverty estimates of 1999 -
2000 or the adjusted share worked out by the Planning Commiss ion, 
whichever is higher. Further, additional 10% was allowed to account 
for the transient poor‖. 
 
2.6 Apprising the Committee about serious inconsistencies found in 
poverty data,  as ascertained on the basis of the socio economic indicators and the 
reasons for delay in conducting next BPL census, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural 
Development, stated following during the evidence held on 31.05.2010: 
―Of course, the bigger problem was that there were several analyses 
and there were a large number of complaint s that a part of the BPL 
population had been missed out. It had later transpired from these 
reports that for instance 86 per cent of the APL population had the 
ration cards, which were meant for the BPL. It also transpired from 
some studies that almost 17 per cent of the richest quintile of the rural 
population was found not in place in the BPL and they had BPL cards. 
Some studies are also there to indicate that about 28 per cent of the 
BPL population is placed in the APL groups. In the meantime, there 
was a court case, namely, PUCL Vs. the Union of India, and in that 
court case the final verdict was given in 2006 and that is how the 
survey which should have been conducted in 2007 got delayed and it 
is getting conducted now.‖ 
 
2.7 The Ministry of Rural Devel opment, on 12 th August, 2008, constituted 
an Expert Group, which could advise it on the suitable methodology for conducting 
the BPL Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Expert Group submitted its 

 26 
report on 21 st August 2009 under chairmanship of Dr. N. C. Saxena. This group 
suggested a higher percentage of poverty, as stated below: 
―The percentage of rural population that is poor, and is not able to 
satisfy the minimum required calorie needs, nor is able to consume the 
minimum cereal required for heal thy living, is far greater than the 
present cut-off line of 28.3%. The Committee would therefore strongly 
recommend that the percentage of people entitled to BPL status 
should be drastically revised upwards to at least 50%, though the 
calorie norm of 2400 would demand this figure to be about 80%.”  
 
2.8 This Group suggested identification of poor families according to the 
criteria as listed below: 
 
Automatic exclusion 
The households which fulfill any one of the following conditions will not be 
surveyed for BPL status: 
a) Families who own double the land of the district average of the agricultural 
land per agricultural household if partially or wholly irrigated (3 times if 
completely un-irrigated).  
b) Families who have three or four wheeled motorized vehicles, suc h as jeeps, 
SUVs etc.  
c) Families who have at least one mechanized farm equipment, such as 
tractor, power tiller, thresher, harvester, etc. 
d) Families who have any person who is drawing a salary of over Rs. 10,000 
per month in non -government/ private organizat ions or is employed in 
government (including para -statals) on a regular basis with pension or 
equivalent benefits.  
e) Income tax payers. 
 
Automatic inclusion 
The following would be compulsorily included in the BPL list: 
a) Designated Primitive Tribal Group 
b) Designated most discriminated against SC groups, called ‗Maha Dalit 
Groups‘, if so identified by the state  

 27 
c) Single women headed households 
d) Households with disabled persons as bread-earner 
e) Household headed by a minor 
f) Destitute households which are dependent pre dominantly on alms for 
survival  
g) Homeless households 
 
Survey of the remaining rural households by scoring 
2.9 The survey will rank remaining families according to the scale and 
weight-ages given below. The proposed scoring for the ranking on a scale of ten  
is as follows: 
a)  SC/ST: 3 points 
b)  De-notified Tribes, and Designated ‗Most Backward Castes‘: 2 points; 
Muslim/OBC : 1 point 
c)  Landless agricultural worker: 4 points; agricultural labourer (with some 
land): 3 points; casual workers: 2 points; self -employed artisans or self -
employed fisher folk (including those employed by others in such 
professions): 2 points 
d)  No adult (above thirty years of age) has studied up to class 5 in the 
household: 1 point 
e)  Any member of the household has TB, leprosy, d isability, mental illness or 
HIV AIDS : 1 point 
f)  Household headed by an old person of age 60 and above: 1 point 
  
2.10 An expert, Prof. Indrani Gupta, in her note submitted to the Committee 
stated that at present there are two approaches for identificat ion of poor; one 
suggested by Shri N.C. Saxena and other suggested by Jean Dreze and Reetika 
Khera.  The approach of Dreze and khera has been stated as follows: 
 
―It includes among priority groups SC/ST households, landless 
households with no adult educate d beyond class five, households led 
by single women and households with one adult working as agricultural 
labour. For the purpose of identifying the poorer among the selected, it 

 28 
suggests binary s coring, which is giving a single mark to each of the 
five indicators. Anyone with even one score gets a BPL card and two 
scores get an Antyodaya card.  The experts also suggest an option of 
exclusion based on three other criteria; one, possession of car, 
refrigerator, colour TV, scooters, and landline phone; second , having 
piped water, power and flush toilet; and thirdly, ownership of multi -
room house or multi-storied house.‖ 
2.11 It is found that identification of BPL remains the most important 
problem in addressing poverty. Speaking on the persistent problem of in clusion and 
exclusion error, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission, stated the following 
during the course of oral evidence held on 31st May and 29th September, 2010: 
 
―I would like to mention that in April, 2008 when we began the 
distribution of smart  cards for health insurance, we began with BPL 
although we were not happy about confining it to BPL. The inclusion in 
the BPL list is as much an expression of power as exclusion is an 
expression of lack of power. That is a fact on the ground. 
We would agre e with you and the Honorable Committee that certainly 
the expected results are not there. I also agree that inclusion in the 
BPL list is the desire of every person in the village because our effort is 
to direct the spending from both Consolidated Fund of I ndia and the 
State Consolidated Fund which is actually focused on those who are in 
the official below poverty line. 
We do accept the fact and I personally feel that people can slip back 
and forth into the poverty line. One illness in the family or one disa ster 
can put the family into destitution even though they may have been 
actually above the poverty line, basically quite stable as a family and 
they would get nothing because they are not included at the time when 
the Census is done. So the dynamism of the  rural society and people 
slippages back and forth are not actually part of the way we are doing 
things.‖ 
 
2.12 While suggesting introduction of ―coupon system‖ for delivery of 
subsidized grains through public distribution system, the Economic Survey 2009 -10, 
states following on the issue of identification of BPL: 
―For the full success of this ―coupons system‖ what is needed is an 
effective method of identifying the poor. This is where the Unique 
Identification (UID) System, an initiative already launched b y the 
present Government, under the Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) comes into play. Since the UID System will come into effect in 
2012 and the roster of individuals registered in it will gradually move 
towards completion, it is possible t o plan on a switch to a coupons 
system by 2012 and also let it achieve full maturity as the UID 

 29 
registration moves to completion. Since the Unique Identification will 
not, in itself, have information on people‘s poverty status, these kinds 
of tailoring of information will need to be added on to the UID System. 
Further, since households do move in and out of BPL status there has 
to be provision for updating on information. However, it is not 
necessary to wait for the entire UID System to be in place to begin  the 
switch to the coupons system. This is because even our current 
method of rations relies on ration shops having with them lists of BPL 
customers whom they are meant to serve. So some identification of 
BPL citizens is already available and this can be u sed to hand over 
coupons to these individuals.‖  
 
2.13 In her memorandum submitted by Prof. Gupta, following additional 
criteria (in addition to those suggested by N.C. Saxena and Dreze and Khera) have 
been suggested for identification of poor: 
“Health exp enditure: The Expert Group set by the Planning 
Commission to review the methodology for estimation of poverty under 
the chairmanship of Prof. Suresh Tendulkar also looked at the links 
between health and poverty.  It will be possible to collect information 
on the number of illnesses of household members in the last one 
month, which would certainly indicate to a certain extent the possible 
economic burden on households from poor health outcomes. 
 
Indebtedness: Evidence indicates that h ouseholds go into debt f or a 
variety of reasons, in addition to illness, like weddings, education etc.   
NSS Report No. 503 on ―Household Assets Holding, Indebtedness, 
Current Borrowings and Repayments of Social Groups in India (as on 
30.06.2002)‖ based on the All -India Debt and Investment Survey 
(AIDIS) indicate for example, that about 27 percent of the rural 
households were indebted while only 18 per cent of the urban 
households were indebted.  The proportion of indebted households or 
incidence of indebtedness was highest for OB C households in both 
rural and urban areas, and was 29 per cent for rural and 21 per cent 
for urban households.  For ST households, the incidence was 18 per 
cent in the rural areas and 12 per cent in the urban areas.  For SC 
households, this was 27 per cen t in the rural areas and 19 per cent in 
the urban areas.  
 
Thus, the extent of indebtedness is an important variable that should 
find its way in the list of indicators for identification. 
 
Ownership and type of residence:  This is almost always a good 
indicator of the status of households, and a simple 3 -way stratification 
like kuccha, semi-pukka and pukka would be sufficient. 
 

 30 
Ratio of total household members to the total working members:  While 
the inclusion criteria of landless household with no adult educ ated 
beyond class V is useful, it may not be sufficient if the same household 
members happen to be engaged in some economically productive 
occupation or are self -employed.  Instead, the criterion could look at 
the ratio of total household members to the to tal working members in 
the household.  For example, if the household size is 8 and there are 
only 2 working members, this ratio would be 4, i.e. 4 members to be 
supported by each working member.  
 
Number of children working :  This is an important indicator  of the 
economic status of households.  Clearly, this will not be an easy 
variable to get response on; however, schooling status in conjunction 
with other probing questions may yield some information. 
 
Dependency ratio : (a) the number of children and (b) t he number of 
elderly per earning household member, which would indicate the 
economic strain on a household. These are also useful indicators 
because these would in turn determine to a certain extent the 
additional burden emanating from schooling of children and ill health of 
children but especially the elderly, the latter due to chronic conditions.  
In fact the demographic composition of the household along with 
information on work status is going to remain a key variable for 
identification of vulnerable households.  
 
Asset sale in recent past : Instead of a direct asset question, a more 
easily answerable question will be on sale of assets in the last one 
year.  Any household that has been forced to sell major assets may 
very well qualify as vulnerable in conjunction with other variables. 
 
Operational methodology 
 
The identification of the poor must be based on a multidimensional 
approach and should include the criteria that can be easily observable:  
the following criteria are directly or easily observable: 
a. Type & ownership of housing 
b. Education of head of household 
c. Whether female headed 
For the remaining parameters, simple probing would suffice: 
d. Total household size 
i. Number of school going children below age 15 
ii. Number of non-working elderly (62 & above) 
iii. Others 
e. Number of employed household members 
f. Employment status (the exact definition may be subsequently 
decided) 
g. Land holding 

 31 
 Whether household has any large debts (a cut off for the 
amount may be decided) 
 Whether sold one or more of the following in the last one year: 
o Land 
o House 
o Farm animals 
o Agricultural implements 
o Jewellery 
 
Like implied in the two earlier approaches, a matrix of vulnerability 
can be built up and households ranked accordingly.   It is also 
possible to use different weights for different response s: for 
example, homeless can take a value of 3, kuccha 2 and semi -
pukka 1.  The idea is that a higher total indicates a higher 
vulnerability and, therefore, is an indication of poverty.   However, 
the weighting will have to be done carefully and is a later  exercise.  
Like the previous approaches, there can be a set of exclusion 
criteria as well, and in conjunction with the inclusion criteria will give 
a comprehensive picture of those who can be labeled poor, 
including the very poor, depending on a scoring matrix.‖ 
 
 
2.14 A memorandum submitted to the Committee by an expert in the field, 
Dr.Himanshu, highlights the crux of the problem of identifying BPL according to the 
existing methodology, and suggests alternative ways available to capture the 
genuine BPL, as stated below: 
 
―The methodologies suggested by N C Saxena Committee and Dreze 
use characteristics which are difficult to verify and need to be clearly 
defined and are possibly disincentives. For example, agricultural 
labour, artisan and so on which need  to be clearly defined. Also 
operated land or owned land need to be defined. Even other 
characteristics such as ownership of durables and incomes are difficult 
to verify. Some of these durables could also lead to disincentive 
effects. 
The methodology for i dentification of BPL should have following 
characteristics: 
 Should be a good proxy of poverty (for example, agricultural 
labour households, SCST households, households with illiterate 
head of households and so on) 
 Should be easily identifiable and measurab le and clearly 
defined (rules out characteristics which can not be measured, 
such as perceptions on food availability etc.) 

 32 
 Should not be a disincentive (rules out indicators such as child 
labour, availability of toilets etc.) 
 Should be stable in the mediu m run if not in the long run 
(ownership of durables) 
 It should be verifiable using secondary data such as land, using 
visual inspection such as housing characteristics, using 
community institutions such as Gram Sabha or Panchayats‖ 
 
2.15 Further the Member  Secretary, Planning Commission, while deposing 
before the Committee, emphasized the role of local Governments in identification of 
poor also, as follows: 
―One more thing I would like to submit is about the role of the local 
Governments. It has not yet bee n fully internalised. In fact, we find that 
wherever local Governments have been empowered, even the 
identification of those who deserve all the help, it is much better. 
Therefore, there is a connection between these two, that is, empowerment 
of local Gove rnments – the Panchayats – and also making sure that the 
municipalities play their constitutionally mandated role for identification of 
poor. We have done that in Kerala. I think the efforts that are being made 
by Kutumb Shri in Kerala perhaps act as a model.‖ 
 
(ii) Conducting next BPL Census 
2.16 The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development informed that the Report 
of the Expert Group by Shri N.C. Saxena had been discussed by a smaller Expert 
Group and it was recommended that there should be a pre testing. Duri ng the BPL 
Census conducted earlier in 1992, 1997 and 2002 no study on the feasibility aspect 
of the implementation of criteria was carried out. However, for the forthcoming BPL 
Census, the Ministry of Rural Development has decided to conduct a pilot study  to 
arrive on the methodology. The Ministry of Rural Development propose to address 
the problem of errors in inclusion/exclusion of poor in the estimation of below the 
poverty line category by conducting a pilot to test the methodology for the 
forthcoming BPL Census. Pilot survey followed by Participation Rural Appraisal 
(PRA) exercise would help in deciding most suitable parameters/methodology for 
capturing poverty and thereby minimizing errors. 
 
2.17 In the pilot  survey, the Ministry would take recommenda tions of Dr. 
N.C. Saxena led Expert Group as reference point and various other parameters 
suggested by States/U Ts and experts to arrive at most suitable methodology. The 

 33 
pilot would be conducted in around 260 villages, selected from list of sample villages  
of NSSO for 66 th round, of almost all the States. A PRA exercise to corroborate the 
results of pilot survey will also be carried out. 
 
2.18 When the Committee pointed out that there was delay in conducting 
next BPL Census, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural  Development, while tendering 
evidence on 31.5.2010, stated as below: 
―We will start the BPL census in the year 2011, that is, as soon as the 
main census 2011 is concluded. One novel feature in this is that we have 
tied up with the Unique Identity Authorit y, and we are also having a 
census together with them so that the exercise is not repeated and every 
BPL person in the rural area is able to have a UID number straightaway. 
Another feature in it is that we propose to use the households listed by the 
census operations, so that we do not have to repeat the exercise. 
However, there is a debate going on as to what should be the definition of 
the household that should be taken, namely, whether it should be the 
census household or whether it should be a further nuclear household. We 
will be able to conclude it only when we have seen the results of the pre -
testing. This is in summary the measures that we have taken, and we are 
open to guidance from this hon. Committee.‖   
 
2.19 The Chief Economic Adviser, Departmen t of Rural Development, 
informed the Committee further about the initiative taken to start the process of BPL 
census for the Eleventh five year plan during the evidence held on 29 September, 
2010: 
 
―The BPL pilot survey is at a very advanced stage right no w. It has 
already been completed in most of the States. We hope that by the 
end of next week or so, most of the States would have completed the 
survey. There is a different methodology now. It is called the Rural 
People‘s Participation Appraisal. So, that is the alternative method 
which has evolved very recently, particularly for doing this kind of a 
survey. That is very useful. So, we want to corroborate whatever the 
findings are there on the basis of the survey by this methodology.‖ 
 
2.20 In response to a  query of the Committee that whether the identified 
number of families after BPL census could be at variance with that of the estimate 
given by Tendulkar Committee, a representative of the Department of Rural 
Development, stated following, during the course of oral evidence: 

 34 
―You are absolutely right that this 37.2 per cent is somewhat applicable 
and not applicable, but the Ministry of Rural Development is saying 
that because Tendulkar was requested to suggest the methodology 
based on the consumption patter n and they have come up with the 
figure of 37.2 per cent for 2004 -05. Right now, the Ministry of Rural 
Development is trying to do for 2010. You are absolutely right that the 
figure that they would come up with after the pilot survey could be 
different.‖ 
 
(iii) Proposed Food Security Act 
 
2.21 Asked about the status of proposed Food Security Act and target 
group, the Planning Commission, in their written submission, informed as under: 
―The issue of proposed legislation on Food Security has been 
referred to the Em powered Group of Ministers (EgoM) which has 
discussed it during its meetings. The National Advisory Council 
(NAC) is also examining the matter and final view will emerge after 
the consultation process is completed. The decision on the 
magnitude of populati on to be covered under the proposed 
legislation has been one of the issues discussed by the EgoM. 
There may be different approaches such as adopting a targeted 
approach, or universalizing the food security keeping in view the 
impact of food subsidy, availa bility of food grains stocks and 
efficient public distribution system etc. For identification of targeted 
beneficiaries under the proposed legislation, the Ministry of Rural 
Development is working on finalizing the methodology for 
identification of BPL hou seholds for the rural areas and the 
Planning Commission has constituted an Expert Group under the 
chairmanship of Prof S.R. Hashim for the urban areas. The Ministry 
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution has already 
circulated a concept note on the proposed legislation and also held 
consultations with the State governments.‖  
 
2.22 When the Committee invited attention of the Planning Commission to 
the possible fallout of bringing Food Security Act based on a faulty criteria of 
identification, the Ministry, in their post evidence replies shifted the responsibility to 
the Department of Food and Public Distribution, stated as below: 
―The food security law is not yet finalized. As and when it is firmed up, 
the Government in the Department of Food and Public Distribution are 
expected to address the issues of errors of inclusion and exclusion, to 
avoid anomalies.‖ 
 
 
 

 35 
C. Divergence between estimated and identified population Below 
Poverty Line (BPL)  
 
(i) Estimation of BPL  
3.0 The Planning Commission‘s estimates of the poverty line are based on 
monthly per capita consumption expenditure as the criterion, to determine the 
persons living below the poverty line (BPL). The Commission has been following the 
methodology suggested by the Expert Group on ‗Estimation of Number and 
Proportion of Poor‘ (known as Lakdawala Committee Report) since 1997 and 
worked out poverty estimates for the years 1973 -74, 1977-78, 1983, 1987-88, 1993-
94, 2004-05. 
  
3.1 The poverty ratio at the national level for the year 1993-94 and 2004-
05 are as given below: 
Percentage and Number of Poor 
 Poverty Ratio (%) Number of Poor (million) 
Year Rural Urban Total Rural Urban Total 
1973-74 56.4 49.0 54.9 261.3 60.0 321.3 
1977-78 53.1 45.2 51.3 264.3 64.6 328.9 
1983 45.7 40.8 44.5 252.0 70.9 322.9 
1987-88 39.1 38.2 38.9 231.9 75.2 307.1 
1993-94 37.3 32.4 36.0 244.0 76.3 320.3 
2004-05  28.3 25.7 27.5 220.9 80.8 301.7 
 
(ii) Other Estimates of Poverty 
3.2 Various agencies/ Committees have also indicated different estimates 
of poverty based on differ ent assumptions, perceptions and context.  The National 
Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) referred to as Arjun 
Sengupta Committee brought out a report on Conditions of Work and Promotion of 
Livelihoods in the Unorganised Sector. I n this report, it was brought out that 77% of 
the population was with a per capita daily consumption of upto Rs 20 in 2004 -05. 
This section of the people was called poor and vulnerable. However, the Economic 

 36 
Survey 2008-09, brought out that based on the ca lculations on data on household 
consumption expenditure for 2004-05 (NSS 61st round-2004-05), the population with 
less than Rs 20 per day per capita consumption expenditure was 60.5% only. In any 
case, the above observation in the report of National Commis sion for Enterprises in 
the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) is based on the criterion which is different from 
the poverty line adopted by the Planning Commission. The Saxena Committee  
which was constituted to recommend a suitable methodology for identification of 
rural poor suggested assuming poverty ratio at national level as 50% merely relying 
on the criteria of calorie intake. There has been a consistent decrease in the calorie 
intake among all the sections of the society over the years. Therefore, merely rel ying 
on the criteria of calorie intake for defining a poverty line is a debatable issue.  The 
World Bank poverty estimates  of 41.6% are based on the world poverty line of $ 
1.25 per capita per day income at 2005 prices. The Tendulkar Committee which was 
constituted by the Planning Commission to look into all these issues has 
recommended to adopt a new Poverty Line Basket (PLB) and thus, redefined the 
poverty line which gives the poverty ratio of 37.2% in 2004-05.  
 
3.3 Commenting on the different estimates of poverty ratio suggested by 
the Expert Group headed by Prof. Tendulkar, the Economic Survey, 2009 -10 states 
as below: 
―It is, however, worth clarifying that the higher poverty estimates that 
Tendulkar reports, compared to existing estimates of the Planni ng 
Commission based on NSS data, do not reflect an increase in poverty, 
but merely a changed definition of what constitutes poverty. As 
calculations in a later chapter show, if we use the Tendulkar method to 
calculate poverty in earlier years those rates g o up as well compared 
to standard estimates based on NSS data. Nevertheless, whether we 
take India‘s poverty rate to be 37.2 per cent or 27.5 per cent (as is  
implied by the 61 st round of NSS data of 2004 -05), it is easy to argue 
that it is too high for a nation growing as rapidly as India, and that 
special initiatives are needed to combat it.‖ 
 
3.4 Queried as to how different measurements of poverty were arrived at 
by different institutions and reasons for lack of uniformity in estimates, the Ministry of 
Planning, in their written reply, submitted as under:  
 

 37 
―Planning Commission is the nodal agency in the Government of India 
to release the Official Poverty Estimates. A time series estimates of 
poverty since 1973 -74 have been released by the Planning 
Commission. The other agencies/Committees have indicated different 
numbers based on different assumptions, perceptions and context.  Till 
now the official estimates released by Planning Commission have 
been based on the methodology recommended by the Expert Grou p 
(Lakdawala Committee). Now the Tendulkar Committee has given its 
recommendations and once a decision is taken, there will be a uniform 
methodology for estimation of poverty and there are no contradictions.‖ 
  
(iii) BPL population identified by the State Govern ments vis -à-vis 
estimates of the Planning Commission 
3.5 State Governments and Union Territories, who have furnished the 
details of the total number of BPL population identified in the States/Union 
Territories, in the last BPL census of 2002, vis -à-vis the  Planning Commission 
estimates, as shown in the table given below: 
   
   
   
         States 
Total BPL population in the 
State as on 1.3.2000 based 
on 1993 -94 poverty 
estimates of Planning 
Commission and population 
estimates of Registrar 
General of India as  on 
1.3.2000 (in lakh) 
Total BPL population 
identified in the State in the 
BPL suryey conducted in 
the year 2002 (in lakh) 
Jammu and Kashmir 7.36 37.78 
Himachal Pradesh 5.14 23.54 
Karnataka 31.29 98.41 
Rajasthan 17.36 21.21 
Madhya Pradesh 41.25 68.89* 
Arunachal Pradesh 0.99 40.08 
Bihar 65.23 113.41$ 
Kerala 10.25 20.50 
Chattisgarh 18.75 34.50 
Bihar 66.32 125.55 
*The figures pertain to BPL survey carried out by State in 2001. 
$ As furnished by the Ministry of Rural Development.  
 

 38 
3.6 The above tabl e shows wide divergence in the total number of BPL 
population from the estimates of Planning Commission. In reply to a query of the 
Committee on reasons for divergence of estimates of Planning Commission and 
those of State Governments, the Ministry of Plan ning, in their post evidence written 
submission, stated as under: 
―While the estimation of poverty is done by the Planning Commission 
based on the poverty line defined by the Expert Group (Lakdawala 
Committee), the Ministry of Rural Development identifies the BPL 
households in the rural areas through the state governments and UT 
administrations. The last BPL census to identify the rural BPL households 
was conducted in 2002 and it is reported that the states and UTs have 
identified 5.51 crore households as B PL in the rural areas. The estimation 
of poverty and identification of BPL households are two separate 
exercises‖.  
 
3.7 The Planning Commission uses the poverty ratio of Assam for 
estimating poverty in Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipu r, 
Nagaland and Tripura. Poverty line of Maharashtra and expenditure distribution of 
Goa is used to estimate poverty ratio of Goa. Poverty ratio of Tamil Nadu is used for 
Pondicherry and Andaman and Nicobar island. Urban Poverty ratio of Punjab has 
been us ed for both rural and urban poverty of Chandigarh. Poverty line of 
Maharashtra and expenditure distribution of Dadra and Nagar Haveli is used to 
estimate poverty ratio of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Poverty ratio of Goa is used for 
Daman and Diu. Poverty ratio  of Kerala is used for Lakshadweep.  Annexure –I 
shows the poverty ratio of various States estimated by the Planning Commission in 
2004-05. 
3.8 When the Committee pointed out the variation in estimates of poverty 
in North Eastern States and desired to know  the reasons for estimation done on the 
basis of sample data of Assam, the Member Secretary, Planning Commission, 
deposed before the Committee as follows: 
―I will come to the point about Tripura and about other North Eastern 
States depending on the data fr om Assam. The point about the 
inadequacy and veracity or the correctness of statistics in our country 
continues to be a tremendous problem.  
Sir, as regards the North Eastern States, I have actually checked up 
with my officers. They have to rely on Assam d ata because either the 
data is not available or the sample size of the NSSO is so small as to 

 39 
be virtually unusable. It is not statistically significant, and it is here I 
want to start at the last issue about the applicability of Assam data to 
eight States. Sir, in fact to any reasonable person‘s mind, this is not the 
really correct thing to do.‖ 
 
3.9 While questioning the authenticity of poverty estimates of Planning 
Commission in some of the States, Expert Group headed by Shri N.C. Saxena have 
also made following observation: 
 
―Planning Commission‘s poverty estimates for Assam, Andhra Pradesh 
and J&K seem to be lower than what their figures are on other related 
indicators, such as malnutrition, Body Mass Index (BMI) and per capita 
Net State Domestic Produc t (NSDP), whereas poverty estimates for 
Uttarakhand seem to be on the higher side. For instance, per capita 
NSDP for Uttarakhand in 2004 -05 was Rs. 23,069, which was higher 
than for West Bengal at Rs. 22,675. As incomes are better distributed 
in Uttarakhand than in West Bengal, it is difficult to believe that poverty 
there would be higher by eleven percentage points.‖ 
 
3.10 Asked to comment on the above, the Ministry of Planning, in their 
written submission before the Committee, stated as under: 
 
―It may be pointed out that the poverty line approach has its limitations. 
Even the report of the Expert Group (Lakdawala) accepts it and 
acknowledged that the poverty line is not a true indicator of 
malnourishment which it might be mistaken for. It also acknowledge s 
that the poverty line may not capture important aspects of poverty such 
as ill health, low educational attainments, geographical isolation, 
powerlessness in civil society, caste or gender based disadvantages 
and so on. Furthermore, the per capita NSDP ma y not truly represent 
the incidence of poverty in a state.‖ 
 
3.11 In a memorandum, submitted by Dr. Himanshu, the problem of 
divergence in poverty estimates has been explained as under: 
 
―Large number of secondary data analysis suggests huge errors of 
inclusion (wrong beneficiaries included) and errors of exclusion 
(genuine beneficiaries excluded) in the BPL population ascertained as 
per the existing methodology.  
The discrepancy is because poverty estimates of Planning 
Commission are used by converting int o households. Due to 
conversion of percentage of population to percentage of households, 
loss of households occur. The difference is largely because of the 

 40 
interpretation of household which is different in the case of secondary 
data but is different for operational purposes. 
Cross check with secondary data (National Sample Survey/National 
Family Health Survey/District Level Household and Facility Survey) 
suggest that majority of exclusion/inclusion errors are attributable to 
implementation problems and not so much because of design 
problems. However there are some design problems which need to be 
improved.‖ 
 
3.12  When asked whether economic census will be more effective in better 
projection of poverty in the Country, the Ministry, in their written submissio n, stated 
as under: 
 
―Poverty is generally considered a multi dimensional problem as the 
poor suffer from a variety of deprivations. However, consumption 
expenditure is considered a better indicator to capture poverty as 
compared to income or other criteri a primarily because consumption 
expenditure data reflects accurately people‘s level of living whereas 
income data are more concerned with people‘s potential level of living. 
Moreover, the expenditure data are considered more reliable than 
income data.‖ 
 
 
 
 
 

 41 
D. Implementation of Welfare Schemes for the Poor 
 
 
4.0 At present 139 Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) with a total outlay 
of Rs. 157051.40 crore are being operated, out of which three schemes are being 
operated by the Ministry of Rural Development for directly benefiting the BPL in rural 
areas. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation administers one 
scheme, namely Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) for improving the 
condition of urban BPL. The performance of these programmes si nce 2007-08 is as 
given below: 
PERFORMANCE OF MAJOR PROGRAMMES 
(Rs. in Crores) 
 Swaranjayanti 
Gram 
Swarozgar 
Yojana 
(SGSY) – 
Ministry of 
Rural 
Development 
 
Indira Awaas 
Yojana (IAY) 
– Ministry of 
Rural 
Development 
 
National 
Social 
Assistance 
Programme 
(NSAP) – 
Ministry of 
Rural 
Development 
 
Swarna 
Jayanti 
Shahari 
Rozgar 
Yojana 
(SJSRY) – 
Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban 
Poverty 
Alleviation  
Eleven 
Plan  
Project 
(06-07) 15740.53 23767.92 15691.00 1547.26 
(Current 17803.00 26882.21 17746.98 1750.00 
2007-08 
 
BE 1800.00 4040.00 2407.00 344.00 
Actuals  3882.00 2851.37* 341.00 
2008-09 
 
BE 2150.00 5400.00 3500.00 515.00 
Actuals  8348.34 4442.24* 545.00 
2009-10 
 
BE 2350.00 8800.00 5200.00 515.00 
Actuals 2350.00 8800.00 5109.24 428.69 
2010-11 
 
BE 2985.00 10000.00 5762.00 564.60 
* For Andaman only 

 42 
(i) Welfare Schemes for Rural Poor 
4.1 The Ministry of Rural Development implements three programme for 
the benefit of BPL Households. These are Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana 
(SGSY) which is a self employment  programme, Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) 
providing assistance to BPL households for housing and National Social Assistance 
Programme (NSAP). 
 
Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) 
 
4.2 The Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY) is a major self 
employment scheme launched in April, 1999 after restructuring and combining the 
IRDP with allied programmes i.e. TRYSEM, DWCRA, SITRA, GKY, MWS. It was 
designed as a holistic self employment scheme aimed at providing sustainable 
income to rural BPL families throu gh income generating assets / economic activities 
so as to bring them out of the poverty line. It is a process oriented scheme involving 
processes like organization of the rural poor (BPL) into Self -Help Groups (SHGs) 
through social mobilization, capacity building & training, provision of revolving fund, 
making available credit and subsidy, technology, infrastructure & marketing. Each 
process has a bearing on the successive process.  
4.3 SGSY aims at bringing the assisted poor families (swarozgaries) 
above poverty line by providing them income generating – assets through a mix of 
bank credit and government subsidy. Subsidy under the SGSY is given at the 
uniform rate of 30% of the project cost, subject to a maximum of Rs.7500.  In 
respect of SC/STs and disabl ed however, these will be 50% and Rs.10,000/ 
respectively.  For Groups of Swarozgaris (SHGs), the subsidy would be at 50% of 
the cost of the scheme or per capita subsidy of Rs.10,000/ - or Rs.1.25 lakh, 
whichever is less.  There will be no monetary limit on  subsidy for irrigation projects. 
Subsidy is back ended. The SGSY seeks to promote multiple credits rather than a 
one – time credit injection. 15% outlay under SGSY is set apart for Special Projects 
to field test and validate alternative strategies for liv elihood opportunities and 
enhancement of livelihood support for rural poor. Each Special Project is expected to 
be executed in a time -bound manner for bringing a specific number of BPL families 
above the poverty line through a projectised approach with the  funding requirement 

 43 
to be shared between centre and state, except for north eastern states, in the ratio of 
75:25. The ratio of sharing of funds between Centre and north eastern states 
including Sikkim is 90:10.  
 
New initiatives proposed and future plans for strengthening of SGSY: 
 
 4.4 SGSY is being restructured as National Rural Livelihoods Mission 
(NRLM) to implement it in a mission mode for targeted and time bound delivery of 
results. NRLM recognizes that the poor people have the potential to come out  of 
poverty with proper landholding, training and capacity building and credit linkage. 
NRLM also recognizes that poor people have multiple livelihoods – wage 
employment and self employment. It will stabilize and enhance incomes from both 
the livelihoods. It will also promote diversification of livelihoods. NRLM will have 
special focus on the poorest households, who are currently dependant on 
MSNREGA. The main features of NRLM are as follows: 
 Universal social mobilisation through formation of SHGs under  NRLM.   To 
bring each and every BPL household under the SHG network.  
 To take the social mobilization process to the next stage of maturity SHG 
federations will be set up at the levels of villages, cluster of villages, blocks & 
districts.  
 The goal of universal financial inclusion will be furthered by enabling SHGs to 
be linked to banks and to access credit from them.  
 Under NRLM it is proposed that upto Rs. 7500 per beneficiary would be 
provided for capacity building & training in place of the present provisi on of 
Rs. 5000 per beneficiary.  
 In order to ensure institutional arrangement for skill development for self 
employment and wage employment, dedicated training institute for rural BPL 
youth i.e Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) are being set up 
with the aim of having at least one such institution  in each district of the 
country.  
 Under NRLM, interest subsidy will be provided to SHGs for prompt repayment 
of loans to banks. The difference between 7% and Prime Lending Rates 

 44 
(PLR), will be pro vided to the poor households for every loan accessed from 
the banks, up to a limit of Rs 1 lakh per household.    
 It is proposed to provide flexibility to the States for formulating their own 
poverty alleviation plans on the basis of available resources and skills.   
 It is now proposed to make special projects as a subset of NRLM and 
earmarking 20% of allocation for special projects.  
 Presently evaluation of SGSY is done by commissioning studies through 
NIRD and other reputed organizations and the programme  is monitored 
through online Monthly Progress Report, regular meetings of the Performance 
Review Committee, visit by Area Officers and the mechanism of DLMs 
(District Level Monitors), NLMs (National Level Monitors) etc.  In addition to 
these, NRLM will put  in place a (i) a comprehensive MIS encompassing 
database of SHG profiles, federations, training institutions and activities, 
placements of trained beneficiaries, marketing of products etc., (ii), concurrent 
and mid-term evaluations, (iii) social accountab ility practices like social audits 
etc. to facilitate monitoring & bring in transparency in program 
implementation.  
  A mission approach will enable time bound achievement of the goals of 
N.R.L.M.  
 NRLM will have partnerships with: 
a) Civil Society Organizations 
b) Industries  
c) Educational Institutions 
d) Other resource organizations.  
 
Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) 
 
4.5 With a view to meeting the housing needs of the rural poor, Indira 
Awaas Yojana (IAY) was launched in May 1985 as a sub -scheme of Jawahar 
Rozgar Yojana. It is being implemented as an independent scheme since 1 January 
1996. The Indira Awaas Yojana aims at helping rural people below the poverty -line 
belonging to SCs/STs, freed bonded laboureres and non -SC/ST categories in 

 45 
construction of dwelling units and  up gradation of existing unserviceable kutch 
houses by providing grant-in-aid.  
 Under IAY, a rural Below Poverty Line(BPL) family is given grant of Rs. 45000/ - 
in plain areas and Rs.48,500/ - in hilly/difficult areas for construction of a house.  
IAY houses have also been included under the Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) 
scheme for lending by Nationalized Banks  upto Rs.20,000/ - per unit at an 
interest rate of 4% in addition to financial assistance provided under IAY. 
 The criteria for allocation of IAY  funds to the States & UTs involves assigning 
75% weightage to housing shortage and 25% to poverty ratio.  The allocation 
amongst districts is based on 75% weightage to housing shortage and 25% 
weightage to SC/ST component.   
 In order to introduce transpar ency in selection of beneficiaries permanent IAY 
waitlists have to be prepared gram panchayat wise by the States/UTs.  These 
lists contain the name of deserving BPL families who need IAY houses in order 
of their poverty status based on the BPL list 2002.  
 Necessary instructions have been issued to all the DRDAs regarding 
Convergence of various Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) with IAY. IAY 
beneficiaries can get the benefits available under Rajiv Gandhi Grameen 
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC), Janshree and 
Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana and Differential Rate of Interest (DRI) Scheme etc.  
 
Homestead Site Scheme:  
4.6 As per Ministry‘s estimates, there are 7.7. million rural BPL households 
who do not have a house site in the country. For t he poorest of the poor who are 
landless and do not have house -sites, the Government has approved a scheme as 
part  of IAY for providing homestead sites to those rural BPL households whose 
names are included in the Permanent IAY Waitlists but do not have a house site.  
Rs.10,000/- per homestead site is being provided under the Scheme and the funding 
of which is shared by the Centre and the States in the ratio of 50:50.  Funds 
amounting to Rs. 157.47 crores have since been released to five States namely, 
Kerala, Karnataka, Rajasthan , Sikkim, and Bihar.  As an incentive, Rs. 43.51 crore 

 46 
have been released to the Govt. of Gujarat for construction of additional 33154 
houses under IAY. 
 
National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) 
 
4.7 National Social Assistance P rogramme (NSAP) was introduced in 
1995 as a Centrally Sponsored Programme but was subsequently transferred to 
State Plan w.e.f. 2002 -03. NSAP aims at ensuring minimum national standards in 
addition to the benefits that the States are providing or would provide in future.  
4.8 At present, NSAP consists of five schemes namely Indira Gandhi 
National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS), Indira Gandhi National Widow 
Pension Scheme (IGNWPS), Indira Gandhi National  Disability Pension Scheme 
(IGNDPS), National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS) and Annapurna. 
4.9 The funds for NSAP are allocated by Planning Commission and are 
released as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by the Ministry of Finance in a 
combined manner for all the five schemes under NSAP together, on the 
recommendation of the Ministry of Rural Development.  
Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS) 
4.10 Pension under IGNOAPS is provided to a person of 65 years or higher 
and belonging to a household living below the poverty line according to the  criteria 
prescribed by the Government of India. The number of beneficiaries covered at 
present are 163 lakhs. Central Assistance of Rs.200 per month per beneficiary is 
being provided and States have been requested to contribute another Rs.200 from 
their o wn resources so that a destitute pensioner could get at least Rs.400 per 
month. Presently 18 States are contributing on their own Rs.200 or more per person 
per month, 11 States are contributing less than Rs.200.  
Introduction of IGNWPS and IGNDPS  
4.11 NSAP was expanded in February 2009 by addition of two new pension 
schemes for BPL Widows (40 -64 yrs) and persons with severe or multiple disability 
(18-64 yrs). 45 lakh beneficiaries are estimated to be covered under IGNWPS and 
15 lakh beneficiaries are estim ated to be covered under IGNDPS. States have 
reported coverage of 31 lakh under IGNWPS and 7 lakh beneficiaries under 
IGNDPS till date.  

 47 
 
National Family Benefit Scheme (NFBS) 
 4.12 Under NBFS a grant of Rs. 10,000 in case of death of ―Primary 
breadwinner‖ is provided to the bereaved household. The primary breadwinner as 
specified in the scheme, whether male or female, had to be a member of the 
household whose earning contributed substantially to the total household income.  
The death of such a primary brea dwinner occurring whilst he or she was in the age 
group of 18 to 64 years i.e., more than 18 years of age and less than 65 years of 
age, made the family eligible to receive grants under the scheme.  
Annapurna Scheme  
 4.13 Annapurna Scheme was introduced i n April 2000 for persons not 
covered under Old Age Pension Scheme.  Under Annapurna Scheme 10 Kg. of food 
grains per month is provided free of cost. The total number of Annapurna 
beneficiaries was estimated as  20% of the persons eligible to receive old ag e 
pension under the then National Old Age Pension Scheme ( NOAPS).  
(ii) Welfare Scheme for Urban poor 
 
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) 
 
4.14 The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation is implementing 
an employment oriented urban pove rty alleviation centrally sponsored scheme 
named Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) since 1.12.1997. The 
scheme aims to provide gainful employment to the urban poor by assisting them to 
set up individual/group enterprises as well as utilising the ir labour for the 
construction of socially useful public assets. The scheme has been comprehensively 
revamped by the Government, with effect from 1st April 2009. The revamped SJSRY 
has following components: 
(i). Urban Self Employment Programme (USEP) - targets individual urban 
poor for setting up of micro-enterprises.  
(ii). Urban Women Self -help Programme (UWSP) - targets urban poor 
women self -help groups for setting up of group -enterprises and 

 48 
providing them assistance through a revolving fund for thrift & credit 
activities. 
(iii). Skill Training for Employment Promotion amongst Urban Poor (STEP -
UP)-targets urban poor for imparting quality training so as to enhance 
their employability for self-employment or better salaried employment.  
(iv). Urban Wage Employment Programme (UWEP)- seeks to assist 
urban poor living in towns having population less than 5 lakhs as per 
1991 census, by utilizing their labour for the construction of socially 
and economically useful public assets. 
(v). Urban Community Development Network (UCDN) - seeks to assist 
the urban poor in organizing themselves in self - managed community 
structures so as to gain collective strength to address the poverty 
related issues facing them and to participate in the effective 
implementation of urban poverty alleviation programmes.   
  
(iii) Public Distribution System (PDS) 
4.15 As stated earlier BPL surveys are primarily used for public Distribution 
System.  P DS evolved as  a major instrument of the Government‘s economic policy 
for ensuring availability of foodgrains to the public at affordable prices as well as for 
enhancing the food security for the poor. It is an important constituent of the strategy 
for poverty eradication and is intended to serve as a safety net for the poor whose 
number is more tha n 330 million and are nutritionally at risk.  PDS with a network of 
about 4.99 lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS) is perhaps the largest distribution network of 
its type in the world. PDS, with its focus on distribution of food grains in urban 
scarcity areas, had emanated from the critical food shortages of 1960.  PDS had 
substantially contributed to the containment of rise in food grains prices and ensured 
access of food to urban consumers.  As the national agricultural production had 
grown in the aftermath of Green  Revolution, the outreach of PDS was extended to 
tribal blocks and areas of high incidence of poverty in the 1970s and 1980s. 
 
        4.16 PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central and the 
State Governments. The Central Government has taken the responsibility for 

 49 
procurement, storage, transportation and bulk allocation of foodgrains, etc. The 
responsibility for distributing the same to the consumers through the network of Fair 
Price Shops (FPSs) rests with the State Governments. The ope rational 
responsibilities including allocation within the State, identification of families below 
poverty line, issue of ration cards, supervision and monitoring the functioning of 
FPSs rest with the State Governments. 
4.17 Under the PDS, presently the com modities namely wheat, rice, sugar 
and kerosene, are being allocated to the States/UTs for distribution.  Some 
States/UTs also distribute additional items of mass consumption through the PDS 
outlets such as cloth, exercise books, pulses, salt and tea, etc. 
 
4.18 PDS, till 1992, was a general entitlement scheme for all consumers 
without any specific target. Revamped Public Distribution System (RPDS) was 
launched in June 1992 in 1775 blocks throughout the country.  The Targeted Public 
Distribution System (TPDS) was introduced with effect from June 1997. 
  
4.18 The scheme, when introduced, was intended to benefit about 6 crore 
poor families for whom a quantity of about 72 lakh tonnes of food grains was 
earmarked annually. The identification of the poor under the scheme is done by the 
States as per State -wise poverty estimates of the Planning    Commission for 1993 -
94 based on the methodology of the ―Expert Group on estimation of proportion and 
number of poor‖ chaired by Late Prof Lakdawala. The allocation of food grains to the 
States/UTs was made on the basis of average   consumption in the past i.e. average 
annual off-take of food grains under the PDS during the past ten years at the time of 
introduction of TPDS.  
  
4.20 The quantum of food grains in excess of the requirement of BPL 
families was provided to the State as ‗transitory allocation‘ for which a quantum of 
103 lakh tonnes of food grains was earmarked annually.   Over and above the TPDS 
allocation, additional allocation to States was also given.  The transit ory allocation 
was intended for continuation of benefit of subsidized food grains to the population 
Above the Poverty Line (APL) as any sudden withdrawal of benefits existing under 

 50 
PDS from them was not considered desirable.  The transitory allocation was i ssued 
at prices, which were subsidized but were higher than the prices for the BPL quota 
of food grains. 
  4.21 While discussing the main challenges of poverty, Economic Survey, 
2009-10 has offered good exposition of the problems in Public Distribution Sys tem 
and also suggested ways to tackle them so as to better target the subsidies, as 
given below: 
―Through a vast network of public distribution system (PDS) outlets across 
the nation, we try to deliver some minimal supplies of heavily subsidized 
grain to o ur below poverty line (BPL) households and also some to our 
above poverty line (APL) households. The PDS stores are first given this 
subsidized grain and then instructed to deliver it at below market price to 
these specified households. It is believed many  of these storekeepers (i) 
sell off this subsidized grain on the open market, and (ii) then adulterate 
the remaining grain and sell the diluted product to the BPL and APL 
households, who have no choice in the matter. We may harangue about 
the dishonesty of  PDS store -keepers and all those entrusted with 
delivering the subsidies. It is indeed true that personal integrity, honesty 
and trustworthiness in the citizenry are vital ingredients for a nation‘s 
economic progress—there is enough cross country evidence of this. But 
when crafting policy, there is need to be realistic about the system within 
which we work. To assume that all those entrusted with the task of 
administering the programme will do so flawlessly and then to blame them 
when the system fails, is n ot the mark of a good policy strategist. For 
effective policy, what is needed is to take people to be the way they are 
and then craft incentive-compatible interventions.  
This paragraph outlines an altered system that, once in place, will be no 
more costly  to run than the existing one and is likely to be much more 
effective. The plan suggested here is not novel and has been suggested 
on occasion by Indian policymakers and even in Budget documents. 
However, it has never been fully spelled out. The two planks  of this 
system are (i) the subsidy should be handed over directly to the 
households, instead of giving it to the PDS store -keeper in the form of 
cheap grain and then have him deliver it to the needy households and (ii) 
the household should be given the fr eedom to choose which store it buys 
the food from. Suppose the BPL household gets a net subsidy of Rs x for 
wheat each month. Instead of giving this by charging the household less 
than the market price for wheat, it should be given coupons worth Rs x, 
which can be used at PDS stores in lieu of money when buying wheat. 
Under this new system no grain will be given at a subsidized rate to the 
PDS stores and they will be free to charge the market price when selling 
grain irrespective of who the customer is. The only change is that the PDS 
stores are now allowed to accept these coupons which they can then take 
to the local bank and change to money, and the banks, in turn, can go to 

 51 
the government and have them changed to money. Further, households 
that get these coupons should be allowed to go to any PDS store of their 
choice.‖ 
(iv) Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) 
4.22 In order to make Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) more 
focused and targeted towards this category of population, the ―Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana‖ (AAY) was launched in December, 2000 for one crore poorest of the poor 
families. AAY contemplates identification of one crore poorest of the poor families 
from amongst the BPL families covered under TPDS within the States and providing 
them foodgrains at a highly subsidized rate of Rs.2/ per kg. for wheat and Rs. 3/ per 
kg for rice. The States/UTs are required to bear the distribution cost, including 
margin to dealers and retailers as well as the transportation cost. Thus the entire 
food subsidy is being passed on to the consumers under the scheme. 
4.23 The scale of issue that was initially 25 kg per family per month has 
been increased to 35 kg per family per month with effect from 1st April, 2002. The 
AAY Scheme has been expanded in 2003 -2004 by adding anot her 50 lakh 
households from amongst the BPL families. The Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) has 
further been expanded with effect from 1st August, 2004 by another 50 lakh BPL 
families by including, inter-alia, all households at the risk of hunger. 
Identification Of Antyodaya Families And Allocation of Foodgrains: 
 
  4.24 The identification of the Antyodaya families and issuing of distinctive 
Ration Cards to these families is the responsibility of the concerned State 
Governments. Detailed guidelines were issued to  the States/UTs for identification of 
the Antyodaya families under the AAY and additional Antyodaya families under the 
expanded AAY, which are stated below: 
 Landless agriculture labourers, marginal farmers, rural artisans/craftsmen 
such as potters, tanners , weavers, blacksmiths, carpenters, slum dwellers, 
and persons earning their livelihood on daily basis in the informal sector like 
porters, coolies, rickshaw pullers, hand cart pullers, fruit and flower sellers, 

 52 
snake charmers, rag pickers, cobblers, destitutes and other similar categories 
in both rural and urban areas.  
 Households headed by widows or terminally ill persons/disabled 
persons/persons aged 60 years or more with no assured means of 
subsistence or societal support.  
 Widows or terminally ill pers ons or disabled persons or persons aged 60 
years or more or single women or single men with no family or societal 
support or assured means of subsistence.  
 All primitive tribal households.  
4.25 Allocation of food grains under the scheme is being released to the 
States/UTs on the basis of issue of distinctive AAY Ration Cards to the identified 
Antyodaya families.  The present monthly allocation of food grains under AAY is 
around 8.50 lakh tons per month. As announced in the Union Budget 2005 -06, the 
AAY has further been expanded to cover another 50 lakh BPL households thus 
increasing its overage to 2.5 crore households. 
 
(v) National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) 
 4.26 The NRHM was launched in 2005 to provide accessible, affordable 
and accountable quality healt h services to rural areas with emphasis on poor 
persons and remote areas. It is being operationalized throughout the country, with 
special focus on 18 states, which include eight Empowered Action Group States 
(Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh , Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
Orissa and Rajasthan), the eight north -eastern States, Himachal Pradesh and 
Jammu & Kashmir. Among major innovations of the NRHM are the creation of a 
cadre of Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) and improved hospital ca re, 
decentralization at district level to improve intra and inter -sectoral convergence and 
effective utilization of resources through PRIs, NGOs and the community in general. 
The Mission, in a sector -wide approach addressing sanitation and hygiene, nutriti on 
and safe drinking water as basic determinants of good health seeks greater 
convergence among the related social-sector departments, i.e. AYUSH, Women and 
Child Development, Sanitation, Elementary Education, Panchayati Raj and Rural 

 53 
Development.  The pro gramme has been able to put in place about 8.10 lakh 
community health workers i.e. ASHAs at village level, across the country. They have 
contributed in a major way to improve utilisation of health facilities and increase 
health awareness. Large number of m edical and paramedical staff has been taken 
on contract to meet the human resources shortages. During the year 2009 -10, about 
2475 MBBS doctors, 160 specialists, 7136 ANMs, 2847 staff nurses, 2368 AYUSH 
doctors and 2184 AYUSH paramedics were appointed. Further, out of 1,45,894 Sub-
centres functioning across the country, 1,38,119 are having at least one ANM. 
40,730 sub-centres are having second ANM also. 8341 Primary health Centres are 
functioning 24 X 7 basis as on 30 th June 2010 as against 1263 Primary hea lth 
Centres at the initial year of the NRHM (2005). 
4.27 The CAG report had examined the implementation of NRHM during the 
period from 2005 -06 to 2007 -08. CAG looked into the various aspects of the 
programme viz. planning, implementation, monitoring and ev aluation procedures 
from village level to Centre level, community participation in planning, convergence 
with other departments, health spending, capacity building and strengthening of 
physical and human infrastructure, procurement and supply of equipments , drugs 
and services, health awareness issues through Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities and performance indicators for reproductive and 
child healthcare and disease control programmes. Besides recommendations to 
overcome the shortco mings in implementing NRHM, CAG Report had also brought 
out some positive findings in terms of completion of district as well as block level 
computerization of health facilities in 13 States/UTs, Rogi Kalyan Samitis formed at 
every health centre in 10 Stat es, constitution of Village Health and Sanitation 
Committees in all villages of 5 states, the increased patient in flow at PHCs and 
CHCs and improved institutional deliveries and immunisation efforts. 
(vi) Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee  Act 
(MGNREGA) 
4.28 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) is meant for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households 
in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed 

 54 
wage employment in  every financial year to every rural household whose adult 
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The vision of MGNREGA is that no 
vulnerable household in rural India goes hungry due to lack of income earning 
opportunities. One of the basic entitle ments under MGNREGA is employment within 
15 days of application by anyone who demands employment (at any time of the 
year), failing which s/he is eligible for an unemployment allowance. Therefore, under 
the extant provisions of the Act, Planning Commission  cannot put the condition to 
the State Governments to implement MGNREGA during non agricultural season. 
However, Section 27(1) of the Act provides that the Central Government may give 
such directions as it may consider necessary to the State Governments fo r effective 
implementation of the provisions of the Act. 
(vii) Monitoring of Welfare Schemes 
4.29 Asked, as to whether any survey/study/evaluation of the welfare 
schemes have been done to assess their impact, the Ministry of Planning, in their 
written replies, stated as under: 
―During the course of the implementation of the scheme of Swarna Jayanti 
Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), an independent evaluation of the 
scheme in 9 representative States/UTs was carried out in 2006 -2007, by 
an independent agency name d M/s Access Development Services 
Limited, New Delhi. Based on the outcome of the evaluation study as well 
as suggestions received from the States/UTs and other stakeholders, the 
scheme of SJSRY was comprehensively revised with effect from 2009 -
2010.  
The study by M/s Access Development Services Ltd. did not 
address the issue of how many BPL were upgraded to APL. It focused on 
the scheme parameters and problems faced in the implementation of the 
scheme. However, the following conclusions of the evaluation s tudy are 
worth noting: 
(i). In order to have better impact of the programme, a ―Mission 
Mode‖ should be followed for SJSRY rather than a centrally 
sponsored scheme. 
(ii). More stringent beneficiary identification system for optimum 
allocation of resources under the scheme. 
(iii). Capacity building of local governmental bodies is recommended 
for processes like monitoring and reporting of the scheme. 
(iv). Focus should be on self-employment component of the scheme.  
 
Similarly, the Ministry of Rural Developme nt (MoRD) also conducts 
evaluation studies of all the rural development programmes periodically 
through independent Research Organizations located in various parts of 

 55 
the country. As per the MoRD, a view to assess the Impact of 
Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY) on rural poor, Concurrent 
Evaluation was conducted during 2001 -02. One of the findings of the 
study indicated that among the total Swarojgaris (individuals and Groups) 
who reported income generated from their SGSY activities, at the National 
Level 37.24 % of individual Swarojgaris and 15.09 % members of the Self 
Help Groups (SHGs) crossed the poverty line through the assistance 
provided to them in the form of subsidy and institutional credit.‖ 
 
4.30 On the issue of effective implementation of the Schemes to enable 
their benefits reach the poor, the Ministry of Planning, in their post evidence written 
submission, informed the Committee as under: 
―The Planning Commission and also the Ministry of Panchayati Raj has 
been emphasizing the need to emp ower the local bodies for effective 
implementation of schemes including the Central and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes.  As per the provisions of the Constitution, the decision for the 
extent of empowerment of the local bodies is to be taken by the State 
Governments. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj is making all the necessary 
efforts to persuade the State Governments to take necessary action in this 
regard.‖ 
  
 
4.31 Besides shortcomings of the existing criteria for identification of poor, 
certain implementation problems have been highlighted in the written memorandum 
submitted by Dr. Himanshu, stated as below: 
 
 ―Implementation is done by State Government using village level 
Officials  
 Since the criteria is known it introduces a bias among the 
respondents 
 But eve n otherwise, due to local situations, it is prone to elite 
capture 
 The victim/loser in most cases are the poor 
 Weak redressal mechanism 
 Implementing agencies vary in their capacity from state to state. 
 Gram sabhas and panchayats are weak 
 Implementation als o depends on the design of delivery 
programmes which depend on the capacity of line departments and 
-state governments‖ 
 
4.32 Member Secretary, Planning Commission, while deposing before the 
Committee, also highlighted the problem of under utilization of f unds of various 
schemes, stated as below: 

 56 
―The focus on allocations of money on the funds which are going, I crave 
your indulgence to say that what is going is not getting spent well and 
sometimes it not reaching also. It is not that it is getting embezzle d on the 
way, but it is getting blocked up on the way. Either the money is given 
from the Centre to the State or from State it goes to the District and then 
from District to the Intermediate Panchayats and Village Panchayats wait 
to get the allocations. There is some delay in that.  The Budget year is the 
end loss. The next year, the release is dwindled because the opening 
balance is very large or the money which is received only in the last week 
of March is not spent.  So, there are certain flow problems w hich can be 
handled. These are not policy issues, but these are issues of mechanism 
of ensuring that money reaches.‖   
 
Poverty alleviation Programme in Brazil 
4.33 Ensuring that every rupee reaches the person it is meant for, as 
Brazil's popular cash -transfer scheme Bolsa Famila Programme (BFP) shows, can 
strengthen India's fight against poverty. BFP transfers cash via banks to poor 
Brazilian families on the condition that their children attend school and are 
vaccinated. According to a World Bank study, BF P, which reaches 12.7 million 
families, helped lift 20 million people out of poverty between 2003 and 2009. In that 
time, poverty - based on a purchasing power parity of less than $2 a day - fell from 
22% of Brazil's population to 7%. The income of Brazil' s poor grew seven times 
faster than that of the rich, and three times the national average. Inequality in the 
country is now at a 30 -year low.  Brazil has 12.71 bank branches per 1,000 adults; 
India has 10.11.  
Study Tour of the Committee  
 4.34 During the recent study tour of the Committee to Mumbai discussions 
were held with the representatives of the Life Insurance Corporation of India and 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on the subject ‗Social 
Insurance‘ on 31st January, 2011. In their deliberations the Committee found to their 
dismay that the coverage of BPL households under social insurance schemes such 
as Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana (AABY) was quite negligible and far from achieving the 
BPL target.   

 57 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
1. Despite six decades of planning, a plethora of schemes and 
various measures initiated by successive Governments, it remains a stark 
reality that large number of our people are forced to live in abject poverty.  It is 
disconcerting that we still have no t yet arrived at a flawless and acceptable 
poverty estimation formula, which has predictably resulted in large variations 
of poverty estimates between the Planning Commission/Central Government 
on the one hand and the States on the other, which again, may be at variance 
with the actual incidence of poverty.  Several States have questioned the 
inconsistency in the criteria determined by the Planning Commission and 
have termed it absurd, as it seeks to pre -determine state -wise poverty 
according to  certain no rmative criteria super imposed on the States.  Such 
mis-match and contradictions have inevitably resulted in wrong targeting of 
different welfare schemes and consequent failure to achieve the objectives 
envisaged.  In the year 2008 -09 alone, the actual exp enditure incurred in 
respect of centrally sponsored flagship schemes was to the tune of Rs. 
126848.32 crore.  It is obvious that the huge amount of anti -poverty funds 
spent over the years have not yielded the desired and tangible results.  This 
obviously raises issues inter-alia about the role, mandate and functioning of 
the Planning Commission and the efficacy of the planning process per se.  
While not attempting a critique on the planning process as a whole at this 
point, the Committee would like to empha sise in this Report, the key concern 
areas relating to estimation of poverty, targeting of poverty alleviation 

 58 
schemes and suggest ways to overcome the discrepancies, mis -match and 
distortions that have crept in the system over the years. 
2. Presently, inc idence of poverty is estimated by the Planning 
Commission on the basis of sample surveys of household consumer 
expenditure conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) 
on a quinquennial basis.  Accordingly, the estimates of poverty were work ed 
out for the years 1973-74, 1977-78, 1983, 1987-88, 1993-94, 1999-2000 and 2004-
05.  The latest poverty estimates have been made for the year 2004 -05 based 
on the poverty line adopted at all -India level as Rs. 356.30 per capita per 
month at 2004 -05 prices for rural areas; and Rs. 538.60 per capita per month 
for urban areas.  On this basis, the percentage of population below poverty 
line for rural, urban and all India during 2004-05 was estimated at 28.3%, 25.7% 
and 27.5% respectively.  While the estimation of poverty in the country is done 
by the Planning Commission, the Ministry of Rural Development conducts the 
Below Poverty Line (BPL) census to identify the BPL households in rural areas 
which could be targeted under its various programmes.  The Ministry  of Rural 
Development has thus been conducting BPL census every five years since 
1992 to identify the BPL households in the rural areas.  In the latest BPL 
census conducted in 2002 by the Ministry of Rural Development, the States 
were given the option to i dentify the number of BPL families equal to the 
poverty estimates of 1999 -2000 or the adjusted share worked out by the 
Planning Commission, whichever was higher; an additional 10% was allowed 
to account for the transient poor.  However, no such census/surv ey has been 
conducted by the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation for the 

 59 
urban areas on the plea that it is very costly and that the size of urban poverty 
alleviation programme handled by the Ministry had hitherto been very small. 
3. During the  course of examination of the subject by the 
Committee, significant lacunae came into sharp focus such as multiple 
indicators/criteria used for identification of the poor, divergence of official 
estimates of poverty ratio with the actual incidence of pover ty, no poverty 
census in urban areas, use of different methodologies for estimation and 
identification of BPL households, restricting the identification of poor in 
States to the cap fixed by the Planning Commission, variation in estimates, 
wrong-targeting of beneficiaries of welfare schemes etc. The Committee have 
sought to address these issues in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4. The issue of BPL criteria and identification of people „below the 
poverty line‟ assumes significance in view of its crucial role in the efficacy and 
functioning of the Public Distribution System (PDS) as also the identification 
of beneficiaries of targeted poverty alleviation programmes and different 
welfare schemes of the Government.  The BPL Survey done by the Ministry of 
Rural Devel opment in 1992 used the income criterion to determine poverty.  
This survey determined the poor using the family based income level of Rs. 
11000 per year.  However, the Committee note that in the next BPL census of 
1997, the consumption criterion was adopted to identify the poor.  Also, for the 
first time, exclusion criterion was used to rule out ineligible families in the first 
place.  For the BPL census of 2002, the Ministry of Rural Development adopted 
a methodology of score -based ranking of household, a s suggested by an 
Expert Group.  In this process, thirteen socio -economic indicators were used 

 60 
to identify the poor families.  The Committee, however, find that while using 
this criterion, errors of inclusion and exclusion in the BPL list far exceeded 
acceptable limits.  Serious discrepancies also came to the fore as a result of 
the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Rural Development for the BPL Survey 
of 2002 which stipulated a ceiling on the number of BPL households to be 
identified, in order to be in conformity with the poverty estimates of the 
Planning Commission.  The Committee find it strange that the State 
Governments were asked to select the poor households so that the total 
percentage of such families did not exceed the limit already fixed by the  
Planning Commission.  Paradoxically, this was like “the feet being made to fit 
the shoe”.  As was to be expected, several States fixed their BPL number in 
excess of the Planning Commission limit, while objecting to the cap imposed 
by the Planning Commission.  The fact that a large number of complaints were 
received on this mis -match in poverty estimates and also that “a part of the 
BPL population had been missed out” was conceded by the Secretary (Rural 
Development) in his deposition before the Committee.  In this connection, the 
Committee were astonished to learn from the Secretary that there have been 
specific findings that 86% of the APL population ended up in the BPL and 
almost 17% of the richest quintile of the rural population were provided BPL 
cards.  The Committee are alarmed that such glaring inconsistencies, 
distortions and irregularities have plagued the BPL enumeration process.  It is 
axiomatic that the criteria and estimates formulated by the Planning 
Commission have proved to be inadequate, unrealistic and thus eluded proper 
implementation at the State level.  The Committee do not consider it prudent, 

 61 
practical and fair that the Planning Commission should impose a ceiling or 
limit on poverty to be strictly adhered to by the States.  Such a top -down 
approach can only yield the kind of distorted results evidenced so far.   
5.   With a view to ascertaining the extent of divergence in the BPL 
estimates drawn by the Planning Commission with those identified by the 
State Governments, the Committee requ ested the State Governments/UTs to 
furnish the total number of BPL population identified in the States/UTs in the 
last BPL Census of 2002.  The Committee note with surprise that there is a 
wide divergence between the aggregate estimates made by the Plannin g 
Commission and those submitted by the State Governments.  The divergence 
is all the more glaring in respect of States like Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Arunachal Pradesh.  The 
Committee are thus constrained to o bserve that the estimation of poverty and 
the consequential identification of BPL households, which have been stated 
as two separate exercises by the Planning Commission, do not seem to have 
worked in tandem at the ground level.  This has thus resulted in unacceptably 
high level of divergence in many States, thereby defeating the very purpose of 
estimation by the Planning Commission .  The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend that the Planning Commission should only confine itself to 
formulating the indicat ive criteria for determination of BPL population, while 
leaving the estimation and enumeration to a better- equipped machinery.   
6. The Committee are given to understand that the Planning 
Commission uses the poverty ratio of Assam (estimated at 19.73% in 2004-05) 
for estimating poverty in seven States, namely, Sikkim (20.06% in 2004 -05), 

 62 
Arunachal Pradesh (17.60% in 2004 -05), Meghalaya (18.52% in 2004 -05), 
Mizoram (12.62% in 2004 -05), Manipur (17.34% in 2004 -05), Nagaland (19.05% 
in 2004 -05) and Tripura (1 8.94% in 2004 -05).  According to the Member 
Secretary, Planning Commission, they have to rely on Assam data because 
the data for other States is either not available or the sample size of the NSSO 
is so small as to be virtually unusable.  The Committee fin d such a situation 
unsatisfactory where accurate poverty estimates for North -eastern States are 
not available at all.  This raises serious questions about the adequacy and 
veracity of poverty related statistics in the country.  The Committee are 
astonished that loose estimation is being done without undertaking proper 
household survey.  When the Ministry of Rural Development is conducting 
household survey, there does not appear to be any need on the part of 
Planning Commission to go for mere estimates, resu lting in wastage of 
resources.  In the opinion of the Committee, such duplication of exercise, 
added with the issues of divergence in approach and mis -match in 
determining the incidence of poverty and the poor households are problem 
areas that need to be a ddressed.  The Committee would thus recommend that 
a joint mechanism may be instituted for this purpose, comprising of all the 
concerned Central Departments viz., Planning Commission, Ministry of Rural 
Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty All eviation, NSSO under 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Registrar General of 
Census under the Ministry of Home Affairs, Unique Identification Authority of 
India (UIDAI) etc, the concerned state Government Departments including the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions,  for a joint and comprehensive poverty survey.  

 63 
Since different wings of Government cannot be allowed to function at cross -
purposes and jeopardise the goal of poverty eradication, the proposed survey 
in 2011 should thus be undertaken on a joint basis.   
7. The Committee note that various Expert Groups/ agencies have 
indicated different estimates of poverty based on different assumptions and 
context.  The Expert Group headed by Prof. Tendulkar, which was constituted 
by the Planning C ommission to review the methodology for poverty 
estimation, suggested moving away from anchoring the poverty lines to the 
calorie intake norm and incorporating the changing consumption patterns of 
the people which would reflect more accurately their nutritional status.  On the 
basis of their proposed methodology, the all -India rural poverty head count 
ratio for 2004 -05 was estimated at 41.8%, urban poverty head count ratio at 
25.7% and all India level at 37.2%.  The Ministry of Rural Development 
constituted an Expert Group in 2008 under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. 
Saxena to advise them on the suitable methodology for conducting the BPL 
Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  This Expert Group suggested that 
„the percentage of people entitled to BPL status should be drastically revised 
upwards to at least 50%, though the existing calorie norm of 2400 would 
warrant this figure to be about 80%‟.  This Group also suggested identification 
of poor families according to „automatic exclusion and inclusion criteria‟ .  The 
remaining households will be surveyed according to specified weightages.  
The Economic Survey, 2008-09 had brought out that based on the calculations 
of data on household consumption expenditure for 2004 -05 (NSS 61 st round 
2004-05), the population w ith less than Rs. 20 per day per capita consumption 

 64 
expenditure was 60.5%.  The National Commission for Enterprises in the 
Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) under the Chairmanship of Late Shri Arjun 
Sengupta in their report on „conditions of work and promotion of  livelihood in 
the Unorganised Sector‟ estimated that 77% of the population had a per capita 
daily consumption of upto Rs. 20 in 2004 -05, which could be considered as 
„poor and vulnerable‟.  The proposed Survey/Census to be conducted by the 
Ministry of Rur al Development in 2011 may further produce different results.  
The Committee are confounded at such a wide  variation in the estimates of 
poverty made by Expert Groups constituted by the Government based on 
different sets of criteria.  These facts only add credence to the emphasis 
placed by the Committee on the need for harmonising the criteria for 
identifying and enumerating the poor through a joint mechanism of the 
concerned central, state and local agencies.   
8. The Committee would also like to point out  that the existing 
poverty line approach has its inherent limitations and may not capture 
important aspects of the real living conditions of the people.  This is also 
abundantly evident from the fact that though States like Assam, Andhra 
Pradesh and J&K ha ve a high malnourishment ratio, the poverty estimates of 
these States, as per the Planning Commission‟s figures are much lower.  This 
leads us to the key question of appropriate criteria to estimate poverty and its 
various facets.  While economic growth an d Government welfare programmes 
have made some impact on the living standards of the people, conditions 
relating to basic health, nutrition, education and social security have not 
improved to the desired extent.  The Committee cannot help expressing regret  

 65 
over the fact that the criteria / approach recommended by various expert 
groups set up from time to time for defining and determining „poverty‟ or 
„poverty line‟ thus far have only left question marks and have failed in 
capturing the actual incidence of p overty in the country.  Important aspects 
such as ill health, low educational attainments, geographical isolation, 
powerlessness or dis -empowerment in civil society, caste or gender based 
inherent disadvantages etc. remain to be conclusively captured in id entifying 
and enumerating the poor.  The wide variation in determining the population of 
the poor is illustrated by the fact that as per one of the expert groups 
appointed recently, the BPL population in the country would be as much as 
80% as per the exist ing calorie norm of 2,400, while as per another norm it is 
only 37.2%.     
9. The Committee are sanguine that the poverty ratio needs to be 
estimated objectively and realistically and the criteria therefor should stretch 
beyond the current norm which lays emphasis on calorific value and reflect  
faithfully the changing nutritional profile and living status of the masses.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the operational methodology for 
identification of the poor should be based inter -alia on collecti ble information 
covering aspects relating to access to primary health including the number of 
illnesses of household members in a period of about a month which would 
give an indicative account on the extent of economic burden of households 
owing to poor he alth outcomes; level of indebtedness which often leads 
households into destitution and the reasons therefor;  ownership and type of 
residence like kuccha, semi -pukka and pukka; proportion of total household 

 66 
members to the total members engaged in economica lly productive 
occupation or are self employed; schooling status of children along -with  
number of  working children in a household; and proportion of dependent  
children and the elderly, which would indicate the extent of economic strain 
on a household. A spects relating to access to basic education, banking 
channels and micro credit should be suitably factored in operationalising the 
criteria for identification of the poor. The criteria  may also provide for 
automatic exclusion of specified categories like those (a) possessing irrigated 
land double that of district average, (b) possessing two/four wheel 
mechanised transport vehicle, (c) income tax payees, (d) residence in a pucca 
house more than specified covered area, say 1,000 sq. ft., (e) house -holds with 
at least one person holding pensionable job etc.  Keeping in view such a 
broader approach, the Committee feel that there need not be any specific 
„automatic inclusion criteria‟.  In the view of the Committee, it would thus be in 
order to have a more compr ehensive and multi -dimensional approach to 
determine poverty, which will also take into account dynamic aspects like 
slipping back and forth across the poverty line as also issues relating to 
empowerment of masses. 
10. The Committee believe that poverty ca nnot be eliminated by 
under-stating the figures or simply wishing away the problem.  Government 
programmes can be more effectively delivered if the multiple dimensions of 
poverty are recognized and the criteria nuanced accordingly.  The proposed 
criteria for poverty estimation should thus be easily defined and measurable, 

 67 
stable in the medium term and should also not become a disincentive for 
progress.   
11. As the special category of the „poorest of the poor‟ comprise a 
vast chunk of the people, the Commit tee are of the view that we can make a 
real dent on poverty only by paying special attention to this category by 
devising and implementing focussed and exclusive schemes/programmes for 
them.  The Committee would, therefore, emphasise that a set of exclusiv e 
criteria may be specially considered to identify „the poorest of the poor‟, so 
that Government schemes and programmes particularly aimed at them 
including the PDS are targeted in a fail -safe manner.  Such a strategy 
distinguishing the “poorest of the poor” from the general BPL will help ensure 
that this particularly vulnerable category does not get marginalized in the 
scheme of things.  It will also help the Government devise and implement 
exclusive programmes to address problems of endemic hunger, starva tion, 
acute malnourishment and agrarian distress.  The Committee would therefore 
recommend that schemes such as Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) with suitable 
modifications, should be made universal for the „poorest of the poor‟, while 
schemes such as NREGA should try to cover the BPL segment as well.   
12. With a view to avoiding a rat race to be identified under BPL 
category for availing benefits of Government schemes and programmes 
including the PDS, the Committee would like the Government to encourage 
more community-based schemes, whose benefits will accrue to the identified 
communities/hamlets/villages as a whole.  The mutual compatibilities amongst 
the related schemes/ programmes, aimed at a common pool of beneficiaries, 

 68 
will go a long way in minimizing their mis-use, while imparting credibility and 
sustainability to the BPL identification process.  The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that separate criteria may be formulated for community-
centric programmes focusing on villages having more than two -third BPL 
population.   
13. With a view to ensuring that every rupee reaches the person it is 
meant for, the Committee would like the Government to examine direct cash -
transfer scheme as tried out successfully in large countries like Brazil.  The 
Committee gathe r that under their Bolsa Famila Programme (BFP) cash 
transfers via banks to poor Brazilian families are made on the condition that 
their children attend school and are vaccinated.  According to a World Bank 
Study, the BFP in Brazil helped lift 20 million p eople out of poverty between 
2003 and 2009, as the income of Brazil‟s poor grew seven times faster than 
that of the rich, and three times the national average.  There are also 
experiments such as that in Indonesia where even the entire village is 
identified as „poor‟ for targeted action and the people are incentivised to come 
out of the „poverty trap‟.  The Committee desire that the Government should 
evaluate such popular programmes successfully tried out in countries 
similarly placed like ours with a large population of poor and the marginalized.  
In this context, the Committee would like to emphasise that direct cash 
transfers to bank accounts of beneficiaries will also facilitate the process of 
„financial‟ inclusion‟ being attempted by the banking sector.   Such a scheme 
may also be integrated with the „Aadhar‟ project of the Unique Identification 
(UID) programme to be implemented on a national scale, which will go a long 

 69 
way in plugging the rampant leakages in the dissemination of benefits to the 
poor.     
14. The Committee would like to avail this opportunity to extend the 
discourse and suggest that the plethora of schemes and programmes 
obtaining now should be streamlined and rationalised to manageable 
proportions.  There is no reason why there should be a scheme seeking to 
touch every aspect of human or livestock life.  Such proliferation of schemes 
eventually leads to slipping of „plan‟ expenditure to „non -plan‟ segment, 
thereby slowing down the process of creation of capital infrastructure or 
durable as sets in rural areas.  The Committee suggest that the Central 
Government Schemes should focus on areas such as (i) rural roads (ii) 
drinking water (iii) electricity (iv) irrigation (v) housing (vi) employment (vii) 
health (viii) education (ix) agriculture and (x) small and cottage industries.  It is 
also necessary that the variety of schemes should be harmonized and 
integrated within the ambit of a region -specific plan.  This approach thus 
requires that very detailed or schematic programmes should not be sup er-
imposed on the States and levels below.  Such a decentralized yet holistic 
approach will also ensure better utilization of earmarked funds under the 
centrally sponsored programmes.   In this context, the Committee would also 
recommend multi -disciplinary monitoring of schemes simultaneously with  
their implementation as well as post-facto. 
15. During the course of their discussions with the representatives of 
Life Insurance Corporation at Mumbai, the Committee found to their dismay 
that the coverage of BPL households under social insurance schemes such as 

 70 
Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana (AABY) was quite negligible and far from achieving the BPL 
target.  Considering the absolute number of poor in the country, social insurance 
products/schemes of the Government seem to  be now only „scratching at the 
surface‟.  The Committee would therefore recommend that schemes such as AABY 
should be made universal so as to cover the entire BPL population within a pre -
stipulated period. 
16. Keeping in view the need to revisit the metho dology for identification of 
urban poor, the Committee learn that the Planning Commission has constituted an 
Expert Group recently to recommend suitable methodology for identification of BPL 
families in urban areas under the Chairmanship of Prof. S.R. Hash im.  While 
estimating urban poverty, since it is necessary that incidence of rural-urban migration 
is taken into account, the Committee would urge the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to include this aspect in t he terms 
of reference of the Expert Group, so that the rural -urban continuum is adequately 
captured in the estimates. 
17. The Committee regret that no survey has so far been conducted for 
establishing head count of urban poor.  This has thus rendered infru ctuous  
formulation and implementation of urban poverty schemes, which are being operated 
without any scientific basis.  This has obviously resulted in low urban poverty ratio 
and has also led to inconsistencies such as Jharkhand having only about 20 perce nt 
urban poor as compared to a much higher ratio for a State like Bihar.  While 
deprecating the Government for delay and laxity  in this matter, the Committee 
would recommend that a household survey should also be conducted to 
determine the extent of urban poverty.   
 

 71 
18. The Committee are also concerned about the efficacy of the 
proposed Food Security Bill when the criteria of identification of the poor 
remains nebulous.  When this was pointed out to the Planning Commission, 
they sought to shift the onus to  the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution, who are now expected to „address the issues of errors of 
inclusion and exclusion to avoid anomalies‟.  The Committee would thus urge 
the Government to thrash out all the issues relating to poverty criteria, 
estimation, identification and targeting before finalizing the Food Security Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                      YASHWANT SINHA 
15 March, 2011                                                           Chairman, 
24  Phalguna, 1932(Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
 
 

 72 
Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 31st May, 2010 from 1100 hrs. to 1720 hrs. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri C.M. Chang 
3.   Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
4.   Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.   Shri Khagen Das  
6.   Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8.  Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
10.  Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Shri Raashid Alvi 
13.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
15.   Shri Moinul Hassan  
16.   Shri S. Anbalagan  
17.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh         - Joint Secretary 
 2.   Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar        - Additional Director 
 3.   Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   - Deputy Secretary 
 4.   Smt. B. Visala          - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Part I 
(1100 to 1230 hrs.) 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 

 73 
Part II 
(1245 to 1400 hrs.) 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
      Part III 
(1430 to 1720 hrs.) 
 
        WITNESSES 
Ministry of Planning  
 
1.  Ms. Sudha Pillai, Member Secretary (Planning Commission) 
2.  Shri R.C. Srinivasan, Pr. Adviser 
3.  Shri B.D. Virdi, Adviser 
4.  Smt. Sibani Swain, Director 
 
Ministry of Rural Development  
 
1. Shri B.K. Sinha, Secretary (Rural Development) 
2. Shri Manjula Krishnan, Chief Economic Adviser 
3. Dr. N.K. Sahu, Director (Monitoring) 
 
4.   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Planni ng 
and Ministry of Rural Development in connection with the examination of the subject, 
‗Appraisal of BPL Criteria‘.  Major issues discussed with the representatives included, 
BPL criteria and practical problems in identification of people below the povert y line, 
Expert Committees constituted on estimation of poverty and BPL households and the 
methodologies recommended, variation in the estimates of poverty made by Planning 
Commission (27.5%), Prof. Tendulkar Committee (37.2%), World Bank (42%), N.C. 
Saxena Committee (50%), Arjun Sen Gupta Commission (77%) and the State 
Governments, rationale of using the poverty ratio of a particular State for assessing the 
poverty ratio of the adjoining States, particularly in the North Eastern region, necessity of 
adopting uniform methodology on deriving the poverty estimates and estimating BPL 
households, reliability of statistical data, etc. The Chairman directed the representatives 
of the Ministries to furnish written replies to the queries raised by Members at an early  

 74 
date.  The Committee also decided to call for information relevant to the examination of 
the subject from the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept. 
              The Committee adjourned at 1720 hours. 

 75 
Minutes of the Twenty Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 14th July, 2010 from 1100 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS      
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3.   Shri C.M. Chang 
4.   Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
6.   Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7. Shri Bhatruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9.   Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Shri Manicka Tagore 
11.  Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Shri Raashid Alvi 
13.  Shri S. S. Ahluwalia    
14.  Shri Moinul Hassan  
15.  Shri Mahendra Mohan  
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar              - Additional Director 
 3.   Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary 
 4.   Smt. B. Visala       - Deputy Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1100 to 1200 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
Experts 
 
1. Dr. Shubhasis Gangopadhyay, Research Director, India Development Foundation 
2. Prof. M.R. Saluja, India Development Foundation 

 76 
3. Prof. Indrani Gupta, Instititute of Economic Growth 
 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Experts on the subject ‗Appraisal of 
BPL Criteria‘.  The major issues discussed, rela ted to poverty line, fixation of calorie 
norms, limitations of Head Count Ratio (HCR) for measurement of poverty, imperfect 
targeted programmes for poverty elimination due to theoretical and statistical issues, use 
of additional indicators of indebtedness,  ill health, sale of assets, demorgraphic and 
economic compostion of households etc. for identification of poor, problem of temporary 
migration of population, collection of reliable data etc.  The Chairman directed the Experts 
to furnish written replies to the queries raised by Members within 10 days. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept. 
 
Part II 
(1300 to 1405 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation 
 
 
1. Ms. Diran Dhingra, Secretary 
2. Dr. P.K. Mohanty, Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Deepti Gaur Mukherjee, Director 
4. Shri Mukul Chaturvedi, Director 
 
The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Housing 
& Urban Poverty Alleviation in connection with examination of the subject ‗Appraisal of 
BPL Criteria‘.   The major issues discussed with the representatives included, need for 
enumeration of BPL in urban areas as a part of National Food Security Programme, 
setting up of Hashim committee in May 2010 to identify urban poor, terms of reference  of 
this Committee, definition of ‗urban‘, Ministry‘s role in assessment of urban poor etc.  The 
Chairman directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the queries raised by 
Members within a week. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept. 

 77 
 
Part III 
(1500 to 1630 hrs.) 
 
     XX       XX       XX       XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 78 
           Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the 29 September, 2010 from 1400 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. 
PRESENT 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3.   Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4.   Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6.   Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
7. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
8. Shri Manicka Tagore 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia 
11. Shri Raashid Alvi 
12. Shri Moinul Hassan 
13. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
14. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao    
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
1. Ms. Sudha Pillai, Member Secretary, Planning Commission 
2. Shri R.C. Srinivasan, Pr. Adviser, Planning Commission 
3. Ms. Amita Sharma, Joint Secretary, (Deptt. of Rural Development) 
4. Shri P.K. Padhy, Chief Economic Adviser, (Deptt. of Rural Development) 
 
 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Planning in 
connection with the examination of the subject ‗Appraisal of BPL Criteria and Impact of Planning 
Process on the Common Man‘.  Major issues which came up for discussion included reduction in 
plan expenditure vis -à-vis increase in non plan expenditure over the years, underutilization of 

 79 
funds provided through Centrally Sponsored Scheme, need for creation of mo re blocks and 
panchayat samities, divergence in estimated number of BPL population and identified BPL 
households in many States, public investment in agriculture, issue of migration of people from 
rural areas etc.  The Chairman directed the representatives  to furnish written replies to the 
queries raised by Members within a few days. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
. 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept 

 80 
 
Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th March, 2011 from 1530 hrs to 1600 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
 
    Shri Yashwant Sinha – Chairman  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
3.   Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
4.   Shri Khagen Das 
5.   Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
6.   Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.   Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
8.   Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
9.   Shri G.M. Siddeshwara  
  
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri Raashid Alvi  
11.  Shri Piyush Goyal  
12.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
13.  Shri Mahendra Mohan 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad  
      15. Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar    –  Additional Director  
3.   Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2.     The Committee took up the draft Report on the ‗Appraisal of BPL Criteria‘ for 
consideration and adoption.  
3.    The Committee deliberated upon the draft report and adopted the same with 
minor modifications.  The Committee also authorized the Chairman to p resent the same 
to Parliament in the current session.     
 
      The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours. 