STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2011-12)
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)]
FORTY-FIFTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011 / Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)
45

FORTY-FIFTH  REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)

COF No. 45
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2011 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-2012) ......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations that have been
accepted by the Government ......................................... 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations wh ich the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ....................................................... 34
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ............................................................. 35
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final reply of the Government are still awaited ......... 40
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
19 December, 2011 ........................................................... 41
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) ................................. 43

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi Chanabasappa
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri R aashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V.P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Forty-fifth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Thirty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to the
Hon’ble Speaker on 11 July, 2011 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 2 August, 2011. Replies indicating action taken on all the
recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the
Government on 27 September, 2011.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 19 December, 2011.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee is given in the
Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
29 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action
taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
their Thirty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2011-2012) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) which
was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd August, 2011.
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 15 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analyzed and categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
and 15
(Chapter II) (Total 12)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. NIL
(Chapter III) (Total NIL)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 2, 4 and 5
(Chapter IV) (Total 3)
(iv) Reco mmendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies by the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. NIL
(Chapter V) (Total NIL)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Analysis of Expenditure Trend in Grant No. 42 – Direct Taxes
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
5. While observing that out of BE of Rs. 275 crore, sanctioned under
the Head ‘Information Technology’, the expenditure till December, 2010
is Rs. 96.16 crore only, the Committee had recommended that the
existing system of budget formulation for computerization projects
and follow up/monitoring of the projects leave much to be desired,
warranting a comprehensive review and reappraisal of the projects for
their timely completion and gainful utilisation of funds for the intended
purposes.
6. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:—
“The recommendations and observations of the Committee have
been noted for future compliance. Every effort is being made to
ensure even pacing of expenditure and meeting the monthly/
quarterly targets by holding periodic reviews so that financial
discipline is followed.”
7. The Committee are constrained to note that the reply of the
Ministry is silent or evasive on the main concern expressed by the
Committee on the need for comprehensive review and reappraisal of
the projects under the Head ‘Information Technology’ for their timely
completion. The reply of the Ministry also does not specify the present
position of completion of projects. The Committee take a serious view
of the matter as the Ministry should have furnished complete reply
to all the specific points raised in their recommendation. As information
technology is an area which can provide impetus to the technology
upgradation in the department, the Committee, while reiterating
their earlier recommendation, desire that the expenditure on IT projects
may be closely monitored by the Ministry, while ensuring that the
budget allocated on IT is fully utilized in time. The Committee also
desire to be apprised of the details of the projects so far completed,
review of the pending projects, if any done, result of the efforts made
for timely completion of the projects and monitoring mechanism in
place to ensure effective utilisation of funds allocated so far in this
regard.

3
Systems and Data Management
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
8. While expressing their serious concern on the Ministry’s lackadaisical
approach towards completion of computerization projects in CBEC,
despite incurring huge expenditure in the preceding few years, the
Committee had desired that a dedicated mechanism be put in place for
planning, coordination and timely completion of various computerisation
projects in CBEC. Procedural or operational hurdles, if any, should be
resolved expeditiously at the highest level of the Department.
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply have Stated as follows:—
“As regards mechanisms for planning and coordination:
(i) A dedicated Programme Management Unit (PMU) was
approved by the Ministry in July 2010 and has been set up
by CBEC. Its tasks include monitoring and coordination of
CBEC’s computerization projects.
(ii) Min istry of Finance has advised examination of the possibility
of setting up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to manage
automation in CBEC. The high level Committee set up under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Revenue) to examine the
recommendations of TAGUP has advised CBEC to propose
a proper structure for the SPV for CBEC’s IT projects in which
operational freedom would be available despite government
controls. The proposal is under active consideration of CBEC.”
10. While reiterating their earlier recommendation for putting in place
a dedicated mechanism for monitoring the completion of
computerisation projects in CBEC, the Committee take note of the
setting up of a Programme Management Unit (PMU) for the purpose,
the Committee are of the opinion that PMU is not enough and the
purpose will be served only after a SPV is set up. The Committee urge
the Government to expedite all the activities for setting up a Special
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to manage automation in CBEC’s IT projects
and apprise the Committee of the progress made so far in this regard.
Collection of Direct Taxes
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
11. Upon noticing that the Ministry had not maintained the data
with regard to the tax contribution separately from different categories

4
such as salary/business/profession etc., the Committee had desired
the Ministry to maintain tax collection figures of different categories
separately so that the trends of collection in each category would be
easily discernable for effecting changes in rates and exemptions and
improving compliance.
12. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that the
accounting of revenue is done by the office of Principal Chief Controller
of Accounts. The matter has been communicated to the Principal CCA
for examination at their end.
13. This is yet another example where the Ministry have furnished
casual reply to a specific recommendation. No mention has been
made regarding measures taken or proposed to be taken for
maintaining tax collection figures of different categories separately.
The Committee deprecate the lackadaisical approach adopted by the
Ministry and their ineffective monitoring for maintaining important
details. In the opinion of the Committee, lack of maintaining category-
wise data is a serious impediment in formulating a strategy to increase
the revenue collections from these categories. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government should make optimum use of
computerization and devise mechanism to maintain necessary data at
a centralized level.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
14. Having observed that not only the post-assessment collection
of direct taxes has declined, but even the pre-assessment or self-
assessment collections, the Committee had desired that the Department
of Revenue should study/analyse these trends and the reasons for the
same and take necessary corrective measures both statutory as well
as administrative. The Committee had also urged the Department of
Revenue to deploy their resources efficiently so that post-assessment
income tax collections by way of scrutiny, survey, etc. register a substantial
increase.
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:—
“CBDT
(i) The observations of the Committee regarding self-assessment
tax (in pre-assessment collection) and post-assessment
collection have been considered. The collection figures are
transmitted by the Office of Principal CCA and are subject
to revision and inter-head modifications till finalisation.

5
The figures submitted earlier have since been updated for
FY 2010-11 and are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
F.Y. Pre-Assessment P ost-Assessment T otal Refund Net
TDS Adv. Self. Regular Others#
Tax Assess-
ment Tax
2007-08 104741 158121 21125 25720 45907 355614 41284 314330
2008-09 128230 143332 30779 21337 49237 372915 39097 333818
2009-10 145736 173417 32507 33274 50230 435164 57101 378063
2010-11* 211403 182311 34885 44499 46413 519511 73441 446070
* Figures are provisional.
# Others include figures of Surcharge, Primary and Secondary and Higher Education Cess,
other Direct Taxes, other receipts, etc.
(ii) From the above table, it is seen that there is increase in tax
collection in absolute terms in respect of TDS, advance tax,
self-assessment tax (under the head pre-assessment) and
regular assessment (under the head post-assessment).
(iii) The comparatively lesser increase in respect of self-assessment
tax is attributed to the fact that presently emphasis is to collect
direct taxes during the financial year itself by way of advance
tax, TDS, TCS, etc. on the principle ‘pay as you earn’. This
is substantiated by the fact that TDS collection has increased
from Rs. 104,741 crore in the financial year 2007-08 to
Rs. 211,403 crore in the financial year 2010-11. Similarly, the
collection from advance tax has increased from Rs. 158,121
crore to Rs. 182,311 crore during the same period. Overall
pre-assessment collection has also shown growth rate of
16.31% and 21.68% during financial year 2009-10 and 2010-11
respectively as against overall growth in net collection at
13.23% and 18% respectively.
(iv) It is submitted that the observations about post-assessment
collection made by the Committee is in respect of sub-head
‘others’ only. The post-assessment collection consists of
‘collection from regular assessment’ and ‘others’. It is evident
from the table above that collection from regular assessment
has been growing steadily. The growth rate of collection under
the head ‘regular’ during post-recession period i.e. FY 2009-10
and FY 2010-11 was 55.94% and 33.73% respectively.
Thus the observations made by the Committee that the

6
administrative resources deployed are not getting adequately
reflected in the collection of post-assessment taxes and other
observations flowing there from are not borne out from these
facts.
(v) In respect of policy initiative to deal with issue of exorbitant
demands/non-maintainable assessments, it is stated that a
scheme of Dispute Resolution Panel (DRP) was introduced
by way of Legislative provisions of section 144C of the Income
Tax Act, 1961 with effect from 01.04.2009. Under this scheme
in case of eligible assessee, the demand is not raised till draft
assessment order prepared by the Assessing Officer is
examined and cleared by DRP after hearing the objection of
the taxpayer. The DRP is a collegium of three Commissioners
of Income Tax. It is expected that this measure would in long
run lead to reduction in exorbitant demands being raised.”
16. The Committee note from the updated figures for FY 2010-11, as
furnished by the Ministry, that the growth rate of collection under the
Head ‘Regular’ which was 55.94% during the financial year 2009-10 has
again decreased to 33.73% during the FY 2010-11. In respect of post-
assessment collection under the Sub-Head ‘Others’, including figures
of surcharge, primary and secondary and higher education cess, other
direct taxes, other receipts, etc., which has been showing increase in
collections from FY 2007-08 to 2009-10 has also decreased during the
FY 2010-11. This reinforced the view of the Committee that the
Department’s efforts till now, to augment post-assessment collection,
has not yielded significantly higher revenue. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Income Tax Department
should augment their enforcement efforts to increase their collection
of post-assessment taxes.
Revenue foregone
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
17. Having observed that Study Group constituted for undertaking a
comprehensive review on the desirability of tax/duty exemptions to SEZs
has been unable to proceed in the matter because of non-receipt of data
required for the study from the Department of Commerce. The Committee
had, therefore, expected that this matter may be taken up at appropriate
level of the Government, so that inter-departmental wrangling over
fundamental policy matters are ironed out. The Committee had also
desired to be apprised about the findings of the Study Group and the
decisions taken thereupon.

7
18. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as follows:—
“In this regard, it is stated that a three tier institutional mechanism
already exists to resolve inter-departmental difference of opinion.
These are Unit Approval Committee (UAC), Board of Approval
(BoA) and the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) at the apex
level. At the field level, the Unit Approval Committee (UAC)
functions. The UAC is headed by the Development Commissioner
and comprises as members, inter-alia, Commissioner of Central
Excise and Customs and Commissioner of Income Tax. The powers
and functions of UAC are listed in Section-14 of the SEZ Act. The
next level of administrative structure is the Board of Approval (BoA)
at the ministry level. BoA is presently headed by the Commerce
Secretary and has members from the CBEC and CBDT. The duties
and powers of the BoA are enumerated in Section-9 of the SEZ
Act. Both the UAC and BoA are to decide matters by a general
consensus of the members present. In case the UAC is unable to
decide any matter by a general consensus, such matters stand
referred to the BoA. Similarly on matters where consensus is not
reached in BoA, the matter can be escalated to the Empowered
Group of Ministers (EGoM).”
19. The Committee find the reply furnished by the Ministry to be
rather general and non-contextual. They would therefore, reiterate that
they should be apprised about the findings of the Study Group on
SEZs and action taken thereon within one month.

8
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Analysis of Expenditure Trend in Grant No. 42 – Direct Taxes
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee’s examination of Grant No. 42 – direct taxes has
revealed that till 31 December, 2010 only about 50% or less expenditure
has been incurred in the year 2010-11 under several heads of the Grant,
despite norms stipulated by the Ministry that not more than 33  % will
be spent in the last quarter. It means that the remaining expenditure
would have to be squeezed in three months only. The Committee deprecate
such a casual approach of the Ministry towards spending of funds during
the last quarter of the year under the vital sections of the Grant. Such
large scale expenditure in the last quarter of the year despite stipulated
ceilings, in the opinion of the Committee, clearly shows not only lack
of financial discipline and accountability but also indifference to the
Ministry’s own norms. Rush of expenditure just before the fiscal end or
erratic spending for the rest of the year would also render the budgetary
process itself meaningless and the schemes/programmes on which money
is sought to be spent weak, unattended and infructuous. As the Ministry
of Finance, being the nodal Ministry, is expected to set standards for
other Ministries to follow, the Committee, would expect them to show
greater financial discipline and responsibility by evenly laying out
expenditure, for which quarterly expenditure targets may be fixed and
review meetings held to ensure expenditure monitoring and financial
discipline. The Committee desire that only in exceptional circumstances,
to be certified by the Head of the Department, should any deviation be
made.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations and observations of the Committee have been
noted for future compliance. Every effort is being made to ensure even
pacing of expenditure by meeting the monthly/quarterly targets by holding
periodic reviews so that the financial discipline is followed.
1
3

9
It is submitted that during the year 2010-11, permission of Secretary
(Expenditure) was obtained to relax the 33% ceiling under Grant
No. 42—Direct Taxes.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Systems and Data Management
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee’s examination of this Head has revealed that Budget
Estimates were revised upward during the year 2011-12, despite decrease
in Revised Estimates during the year 2010. The reasons adduced by the
Ministry for such upward revision of BE are that some of the amount
in respect of different stages of implementation of consolidation project
of computerization in CBEC, which was payable during 2010-11, could
not be paid due to procedural formalities. The Committee are unhappy
to note that in spite of their recommendation in their 12th Report
(15th Lok Sabha) the CBEC has not taken effective steps to maintain
centrally the requisite data. The Committee find that during the period
2008-09 to 2010-11, total amount of Rs. 398.81 crore was budgeted under
this Head with the actual expenditure being Rs. 427.95 crore; but the
results achieved leave much to be desired. It is obvious that the efforts
of the Government towards computerization of tax machinery in CBEC
has slackened considerably and undertaken in a piecemeal and desultory
manner, causing long and interminable delays, inspite of large amount
of funds having been sanctioned and spent during the last 3 years. While
expressing their serious concern on the Ministry’s lackadaisical approach
towards completion of computerization projects in CBEC, despite incurring
huge expenditure in the preceding few years, the Committee desire that
a dedicated mechanism be put in place for planning, coordination and
timely completion of various computerisation projects in CBEC.
Procedural or operational hurdles, if any, should be resolved expeditiously
at the highest level of the Department.
Reply by the Government
CBEC
CBEC’s IT Consolidation Project was approved by the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) and conveyed vide minutes dated
06.12.2007. The approved time-frame for implementation was 24 months
from the above date i.e. by 05.12.2009. There has not been any delay in
the implementation of the IT Consolidation Project and all the projects

10
have been implemented within the stipulated period, except in locations
which are affected by force majeure and other technical, administrative
or local issues. Although provisions for staggered payment are in-built
in the contracts, payments have not been made fully due to various
procedural formalities and non-compliance of the terms and conditions
of the contracts by the vendors.
The major components of the Consolidation project are towards
building infrastructure for CBEC for porting Customs (ICES v.1.5,
ICEGATE, and RMS), Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES) applications.
The total expenditure approved by CCEA was Rs. 598.97 crore for
implementation and maintenance of the projects over a five-year period.
The expenditure so far has been about Rs. 365 crore.
The implementation plan for these projects is incorporated in the
contracts. The current status of the various components/sub-projects of
IT Consolidation Project is given in the Table below:—
Sl.No. Project Status
1. Data Centre Space and Implementation completed. The project
WAN Project is under support/maintenance since
September 2009.
2. Systems Integration Implementation completed. The project
Project is under support/maintenance since
September 2009.
3. LAN Project Implementation completed. The project
is under support/maintenance since
September 2009.
4. Data Warehousing Implementation completed. The project
Project is under support/maintenance since
September 2010.
5. ACES Project Implementation completed. The project
is under support/maintenance.
6. Project Monitoring for Implementation completed.
WAN/LAN
implementation
7. Appointment of Consul- This is an ongoing consultancy project.
tant for technical advice The current approval is upto Jan. 2012.
A brief account of the projects is as under:—
(i) Systems Integration Project
Contract with the vendor was signed in March 2008. The
primary data centre, business continuity site and disaster

11
recovery site have been put in place and made functional.
Applications have been ported on the servers installed in the
Data Centres. The project was implemented by March 2009
and is in maintenance and support phase since 1.9.2009.
In July, 2011, the Directorate of Systems, CBEC was accorded
the ISO 27001:2005 certification after a rigorous process of
audit conducted by STQC. ISO/IEC 27001 is a set of formal
specifications that is intended to bring information security
under explicit management control. CBEC is among the first
of the Indian Government Departments to have been formally
audited and certified for ISO 27001.
(ii) WAN Project
The WAN contract was signed with the vendor on 9th March
2007. Under the WAN contract, 539 buildings were covered.
506 sites were delivered on 28th Aug. 2009 when the
implementation phase was closed. The project is now under
maintenance and support.
(iii) LAN Project
Contract was signed with the vendor in March 2008. LAN
project covers 1210 buildings housing about 3000 offices and
spread in more than 250 cities in India. LAN implementation
has been completed in 1162 buildings. At the remaining
buildings, there are some implementation issues. The
implementation was completed in September 2009 and the
project is in the support phase since then.
(iv) Data warehouse project
Contract was signed with the vendor in October 2007 and
has been implemented. The project is under maintenance and
support phase since October 2010.
(v) ACES
ACES was rolled out in December, 2008 in LTU, Bengaluru
and thereafter, it was rolled out in phases in other locations
and the national roll-out was completed on 23rd March, 2009.
This is a Mission Mode Project (MMP) of the Government
of India under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), being
monitored by the Cabinet Secretary on a monthly basis. In
DG Systems the project is being closely monitored under the

12
Mission Leader, which is of the rank of Additional Director-
General. From 01.04.2010, e-filing was made mandatory for
assessees paying central excise duty/service tax over Rs. 10.00
lakh. However, from 01.10.2011, e-filing will be mandatory
for all users. This would ensure complete data capture
in e-mode and help in properly monitoring the tax
administration.
As regards mechanisms for planning and coordination:—
(i) A dedicated Programme Management Unit (PMU) was
approved by the Ministry in July 2010 and has been set up
by CBEC. Its tasks include monitoring and coordination of
CBEC’s computerization projects.
(ii) Min istry of Finance has advised examination of the possibility
of setting up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to manage
automation in CBEC. The high level Committee set up under
the Chairmanship of Secretary (Revenue) to examine the
recommendations of TAGUP has advised CBEC to propose
a proper structure for the SPV for CBEC’s IT projects in which
operational freedom would be available despite Government
controls. The proposal is under active consideration of CBEC.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
As regards widening of tax base, the Committee note that the
number of new assessees added had declined in 2009-10 as compared
to the previous years. While seeking to justify this decline, the Ministry
have Stated that the new assessees added during any Financial Year may
be affected by several factors like slow down in economic growth,
threshold limit for filing income tax returns etc. As regards the tax collected
from new assessees for the last three years category-wise, the Ministry
have merely Stated that they have not maintained any such data separately.
On this issue, the Committee had specifically asked the Department in
their earlier Report on the subject to make efforts to augment the number
of new assessees so that the tax base becomes widely dispersed, reflecting
the increase in per capita income as also the diversified nature of our
economy. In their action taken reply, the Ministry had submitted that
suitable legislative amendments/changes in rules and software
modifications are required to capture the relevant data, which are under
consideration. The Committee would like the Department of Revenue to

13
recognize the declining rate of accretion to assessee base and expedite
the procedural and enforcement measures to bring new assessees into
the tax net, in order to expanding the tax base. The Committee would
also reiterate that the Department should also widen their data base to
include more aspects and categories for better monitoring of income tax
operations.
Reply by the Government
CBDT
In respect of widening of tax base, the major factor influencing the
growth of assessee base is the basic exemption limit. The basic exemption
limit which is about 4-5 times the per capita income gives a high threshold
for levy of tax. Further, every year the limit is being raised to account
for inflation etc. This contributes significantly towards slower growth in
tax base.
From Legislative perspective emphasis on proper reporting and
monitoring of information and capturing of data has been continued. The
Income Tax Rules have been amended to incorporate new category of
transactions where quoting of PAN has been made compulsory. This will
lead to more focused capturing of data and its monitoring. The new
categories of transaction are:—
(i) “Payments in cash in connection with travel” now includes
payment in cash to an authorized person as defined in clause
(c) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999 (42 of 1999).
(ii) Making an application to any banking company to which the
Banking Regulations Act, 1949, applies or to any other
company or institution for issue of a debit card.
(iii) Paym ent of an amount aggregating fifty thousand rupees or
more in a year as life insurance premium to an insurer as
defined in clause (9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938.
(iv) Payment to a dealer, of an amount of five lakh rupees or
more at any one time or against a bill for an amount of five
lakh rupees or more, for purchase of bullion or jewellery.
(v) Widening of Tax Base is a compliance function. The field
formation is asked to increase the tax base through Central
Action Plan. Some software tools are required to capture
information along with legislative changes. Non-filers and

14
stop-filers could be identified by reconciling TDS/AIR/
CIB information with RETURN database. However, these
may require certain tools for data mining, analysis of
data etc. Presently, process for appointment of Consultant for
Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence Project is in
progress.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Collection of Indirect Taxes
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
It is seen from the figures provided by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) that the percentage growth in collection of
indirect taxes during 2010-11 from customs and central excise has
shown an increase of 63%, with achievement of 94% of the target set
and 35.7%, with achievement of only 74% of the target respectively.
The Committee are surprised that targets fixed by the Department
have not been achieved in the indirect tax collections and it also has
not reached the pre-meltdown levels. Besides, it is also noteworthy
that the growth in the collection from service tax is only 20.6% and the
effective tax rate in percentage terms in service sector as a whole is also
seen to be only 23.77%, as compared to 23.40% for the manufacturing
sector, even as the service sector has been steadily growing and
contributing a lot more as percentage of the GDP . The Committee note
that according to the Economic Survey 2010-11, the share of services in
India’s GDP at Factor Cost (current prices) is 63.4% in the year 2009-10.
The Committee, therefore, are of the view that the service sector with
such immense/potential has not been contributing by way of taxes in
proportion to its share of the GDP . The Committee would therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should chalk out an action plan so that the
potential of service sector gets commensurately reflected in its fiscal
contribution as well.
Reply by the Government
CBEC
According to the Economic Survey 2010-11, the share of services
in India’s GDP at factor cost (at current prices) is 55.2% in the year
2009-10. If construction is also included, then the share of services
increases to 63.4% in the year 2009-10. At first glance, it appears that
services sector which constitutes 63.4% of GDP is contributing less

15
revenue when compared to manufacturing sector. The reasons are as
follows:—
• In the GDP estimates, trade, hotels and restaurants are
taken as part of ‘services’ GDP (constituting 16.3%); State
governments are taxing these sectors by imposing Value Added
Tax. Service tax is not levied on these sectors so far. In the
Finance Act, 2011, service tax has been introduced on the
service element of ‘restaurant and hotels’.
• In the GDP estimates, community, social and personal services,
which include public administration and Defence (constituting
14.4% of GDP) is also taken as a part of services GDP . These
services are not subject to service tax.
• Similarly ‘railways’, ‘ownership of dwellings’ and several
other infrastructure sectors are also outside the scope of
service tax at present.
Composition of GDP as % (Quick estimates by CSO)
Sector 2009-10
Trade 14.9
Hotels and restaurants 1.4
Railways 1.0
Storage, Communication, transport other than railways 6.8
Financial services 5.4
Real estate, ownership of dwellings, and business services 11.4
Community, social and personal including public 14.4
administration and Defence
Construction 8.2
Total services 63.4
Source: Economic Survey 2010-11.
Though services constitute 63% of GDP, current service tax revenue
arises out of only a part of that 63%. A large portion of services sector
is not subject to service tax. Besides, a sizeable portion of services are
provided by unorganized and informal sectors which are below the
threshold levels of service tax.

16
However, efforts are being made to augment service tax revenue,
at the policy level, along the following lines:
Current service tax regime is based on a selective approach,
broadly known as ‘positive list’ which specifies the services, which will
be subject to service tax. This approach is prone to litigation. Therefore,
feasibility of introduction of a ‘comprehensive approach’ (described as
negative list based approach) to service tax is being examined. Under
the comprehensive approach, barring small list of services which will be
outside the tax net, all other services will be subject to tax. In his Budget
speech before the parliament, Hon’ble FM has called for a public debate
on the issue. It is expected that a negative list based, comprehensive
approach will lead to an increase in service tax collection.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Revenue Foregone
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
From the figures made available to the Committee, it is revealed
that the Revenue Foregone for corporate tax assessees has sharply increased
from Rs. 72,881 crore in 2009-10 to Rs. 88,263 crore in 2010-11. Further,
as a percentage of actual tax collection also, it is noted that revenue
foregone has quite significantly increased. Particularly, the revenue
foregone in respect of customs duties was as high as Rs. 1,95,288 crores
in 2009-10 with actual tax collection in that year being only Rs. 85,847
crore; while in 2010-11, customs revenue foregone was equally high to
the tune of Rs. 1,74,418 crore as compared to actual tax collection of
Rs. 1,08,071 crore. The Committee are not convinced with the Ministry’s
justification that higher incomes of corporate tax payers, higher
depreciation and various incentives/deductions/exemptions are factors
responsible for this trend. Further, the Committee also observe a regressive
trend with respect to collection of corporate taxes; as for instance, there
were only 692 companies in the slab of profit before tax of Rs. 100-500 crore.
On the other hand, the number of companies with profit before tax slab
of ‘less than zero’ was 1,49,283, slab of ‘zero’ tax 28,851 and slab of
‘Rs. 0-1 crore’ tax 2,23,888. The Committee thus can only conclude from
these figures that the extent of revenue foregone together with the
corporate tax collection trends point towards a regressive tax regime. The
Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Government should
review their exemptions/incentives policy for the corporate sector as a
whole so that the effective tax yield from corporates significantly improves.
It goes without saying that any tax regime in democratic societies like
ours should stay progressive with higher incomes generating
proportionately higher effective tax yields.

17
Reply of the Government
CBDT
Annexure-12 of the Receipt Budget 2011-12, table no. 5 gives the
figures of revenue foregone for corporate taxpayers. The revenue foregone
for the corporate tax payers is Rs. 72,881 crore and Rs. 88,263 crore for
the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively. It may be pointed out that
while figures for 2009-10 are based on details from electronic tax returns
filed upto the due date of filing of tax returns for Assessment Year 2010-11,
the figures for 2010-11 are projections based on 2009-10 actuals. The
actuals for 2010-11 will be reflected in the revenue foregone statement
for 2012-13. In the previous two years actual revenue foregone has been
found to be less than the estimated one.
Further, as far as corporation tax is concerned, the amount of
revenue foregone has actually decreased as a percentage of actual
corporation tax collection. The figures are as under:—
Year Corporation tax  Revenue Foregone Revenue Foregone
Collection in case of as a percentage of
(Actuals)  Corporate taxpayers Actual Corporate
(Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore) tax collection (in %)
2008-09 2,13,395 66,901 31.35
2009-10 2,44,725 72,881 29.78
2010-11 2,99,386 88,263 29.48
(estimated)
In the case of tax on companies, the tax rate is 30% (plus applicable
surcharge in case of companies with income in excess of Rs. 1 crore and
applicable cess). Thus regressive taxation of companies ( i.e. companies
with higher income suffering less proportionate tax on their incomes
as compared to the companies with lower income), comes from tax
incentives which lower taxable income, i.e., primarily profit linked
deductions.
The following measures have been taken to moderate this:—
(i) Under the Income-tax Act, 1961(Act), the policy thrust has
been not to extend the area or scope or the sunset date of
profit linked exemptions. This should moderate the revenue
forgone on account of such tax concession and exemption
once the profit linked deduction get phased out through the
respective sunset clauses.

18
(ii) To further moderate the revenue foregone due to incentives,
Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) is levied on book profits of
corporate tax payers. The rate of MAT has been progressively
increased to 18.5% for income of the Financial Year 2011-12.
(iii) In the current Budget for 2011-12, the benefits of profit linked
export incentives which were available under sections 10A
and 10B of the Act has been allowed to be phased out after
31-03-2011.
(iv) Further, vide Finance Act, 2011, exemption from payment of
MAT available to units operating in Special Economic
Zone(SEZ) and to SEZ developers as well as exemption from
payment of Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) available to
SEZ developers has been withdrawn.
The effective tax rate for all companies is increasing over the
previous years. The figures in this regard are as under:—
Year Effective Tax Rate across the entire corporate tax payers
(as %)
2007-08 22.24
2008-09 22.78
2009-10 23.53
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The revenue foregone on account of Export Promotion Concessions
other than SEZs has been stated to be Rs. 39,388 crores in 2009-10, which
has increased to 49,976 crores in 2010-11, out of which revenue foregone
on account of SEZs has been shown as Rs. 3,987 crores in 2009-10 which
has more than doubled to Rs. 8,614 crore in 2010-11. The Ministry have
explained this increase in revenue foregone on the increase in exports
and profits reported by SEZ units. On this subject, the Committee had
recommended in their 12th Report (15th Lok Sabha) that the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) should set up a Study Group to
undertake a comprehensive review on the desirability of tax/duty
exemptions to SEZs, which will bring out the costs of exemptions
vis-à-vis the benefits. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have informed
that a Study Group has already been set up to undertake a review of

19
the exemptions scheme and functioning of the SEZs. However, this Group
has been unable to proceed in the matter because of non-receipt of data
required for the study from the Department of Commerce. Whatever
data was received subsequently was also found to have several
inconsistencies. The Committee are astonished that such a conflicting
situation can develop in basic approach between the two Departments
of Government, namely Department of Revenue and Department of
Commerce, who have evidently failed to coordinate with each other and
arrive at an acceptable agreement with regard to policy changes required
for SEZs. The Committee would, therefore, like this matter to be taken
up at appropriate level of the Government, so that inter-departmental
wrangling over fundamental policy matters are ironed out. The Committee
would also like to be apprised about the findings of the Study Group
and the decisions taken thereupon.
Reply by the Government
CBEC
The Committee has, inter-alia, observed that the issue of lack of
co-ordination between DoR and DoC may be taken up at appropriate
level of Government, so that inter-departmental wrangling over fundamental
policy matters are ironed out. In this regard, it is Stated that a three tier
institutional mechanism already exists to resolve inter departmental
difference of opinion. These are Unit Approval Committee (UAC), Board
of Approval (BoA) and the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) at
the apex level. At the field level, the Unit Approval Committee (UAC)
functions. The UAC is headed by the Development Commissioner and
comprises as members, inter-alia, Commissioner of Central Excise and
Customs and Commissioner of Income Tax. The powers and functions
of UAC are listed in Section 14 of the SEZ Act. The next level of
administrative structure is the Board of Approval (BoA) at the ministry
level. BoA is presently headed by the Commerce Secretary and has
members from the CBEC and CBDT. The duties and powers of the BoA
are enumerated in Section 9 of the SEZ Act. Both the UAC and BoA are
to decide matters by a general consensus of the members present. In case
the UAC is unable to decide any matter by a general consensus, such
matters stand referred to the BoA. Similarly on matters where consensus
is not reached in BoA, the matter can be escalated to the Empowered
Group of Ministers (EGoM).
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]

20
Unaccounted Money
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
On the recommendation of the Committee, the Government has
agreed to get a fresh study conducted on unaccounted income/wealth
both inside and outside the country, bringing out the nature of activities
engendering money laundering and its ramifications on national security.
The Committee desire that they be apprised about the findings of the
study and the decisions taken thereupon at the earliest. The Committee
would like to emphasise that the Department of Revenue should
re-orient their efforts and focus their energies on the specific sectors/
channels/categories responsible for generating unaccounted money within
the country and take policy and enforcement measures both to prevent
generation as well as to detect and unearth the money/wealth. The Tax
Intelligence Network should be fully deployed and utilized for this
purpose by establishing a platform for sharing of information with other
enforcement organizations.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The Government has commissioned a study to estimate the quantum
of unaccounted income/wealth inside and outside the country and its
ramifications on national security on the basis of the recommendations
of the Standing Committee on Finance. The study will be conducted
separately by three Government Institutes namely, National Institute of
Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), National Institute of Financial
Management (NIFM) and the National Council for Applied Economic
Research (NCAER). Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) have been
signed with the Institutes on 21.03.2011. The study is expected to be
completed in a period of 18 months i.e. by September 2012.
There is shortage of man-power and budgetary resources in
the Investigation Directorates of the Income Tax Department. Therefore,
to optimally utilize the given resources, the sectors of the economy
prone to high tax-evasion are under automatic focus for investigation
through surveys, search and seizure operations to yield substantial
results.
As regards sharing of information with other enforcement agencies,
it is Stated that r egular meetings of nodal officers of Investigation
Directorates, Enforcement Directorate, DRI takes place under the Regional
Economic Intelligence Councils (REICs) where the intelligence and other

21
inputs are shared among the agencies. The REICs function under the
supervision of Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB).
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
With regard to the funds illegally stashed abroad, the Committee
have been informed that information is collected on case to case basis
through the Foreign Tax and Tax Research (FT and TR) Division of CBDT
to verify the source of funds being invested from outside India. The
Government has also prioritized countries/jurisdictions with which it
wants to enter into Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs) so
that information regarding trade mispricing or secret bank accounts or
ownership information or any other information can be obtained from
such countries/jurisdictions. TIEAs are being negotiated with these
countries/jurisdictions since there are no Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreements (DTAAs) with them. Negotiation of TIEAs with 12 countries/
jurisdictions have been completed which are Argentina, Bahamas,
Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Costa Rica, Guernsey,
Isle of Man, Jersey, Marshall Islands, Monaco and Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Out of these, Cabinet approval has been obtained in 9 cases and TIEAs
have been signed with five jurisdictions (Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands and Isle of Man). The Committee have also been
informed in this regard that the Income Tax Overseas Units set up for
this purpose are required to assist the Indian Authorities in negotiation
of Double Tax Avoidance Agreements, exchange of information etc. The
Committee desire that they be apprised of the results achieved by these
Units by way of number of cases detected and action taken thereon. The
Committee are of the view that legislative framework alone is not enough
because tax evaders may keep shifting their operations. The Government
must therefore use diplomatic pressure particularly on smaller nations
for eliciting the requisite information. The Committee would also
recommend that the Double Tax Avoidance Agreements should also be
constantly reviewed in the light of inputs received from these Units as
well as other enforcement agencies.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
(a) At present, only two Income Tax Overseas Units (ITOUs),
namely, at Mauritius and Singapore are operational. The
following areas of work are assigned to the ITOUs:—
(i) Monitor DTAA related issues;

22
(ii) Expedite the exchange of information by the Competent
Authorities of these countries as requested by the
Competent Authority in India;
(iii) Maintain liaison with various Departments of the
respective countries especially Income Tax Department,
Registrar of Companies, Department of Banking Services
and Administrators of Financial Services;
(iv) Maintain liaison with the investors investing into India
from these countries and impart information on domestic
laws of India to foreign investors.
(b) The ITOU at Mauritius took the following initiatives in the
last one year:—
(i) Facilitated the process of exchange of information by
expediting the requests with Mauritius Revenue
Authority. More than 50 cases of exchange of information
requests have been handled and the First Secretary met
the Mauritius Revenue Authorities personally and
expedited the process.
(ii) C losely monitoring the Media reports in Mauritius with
regard to India-Mauritius tax treaty and assisting in
providing inputs for review of the DTAC.
(c) The ITOU at Singapore took the following initiatives in the
last one year:—
(i) Expedite the exchange of information in the cases referred
by the Assessing Officers in India to Singapore by
coordinating with the tax authorities regularly. About 20
cases of exchange of information relating to Singapore
are being expedited with Singapore authorities.
(ii) The existing DTAA does not provide for exchange of
information on bank accounts. ITOU took up this matter
and co-ordinated the renegotiation of DTAA between
India and Singapore for amending the Article on
‘Exchange of Information’ to internationally accepted
standards information including information on bank
accounts through an amending Protocol. As a result,
the Protocol to the DTAA was signed by both countries
on 24th June, 2011 and has entered into force on
1st September, 2011. The other DTAA issues with
Singapore are under review.

23
(iii) Assisting the High Commission of India in making
efforts to promote India as investment destination for
the investors based in Singapore. The First Secretary
participated effectively in various events for this purpose
to clarify tax related matters.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Tax Revenues raised but not realized
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee are astonished to find that huge amount of tax
revenue to the tune of Rs. 51,296 crore is pending realization for a period
ranging between 1 year to 10 years and the same is not under any dispute
either. Although the Ministry have sought to assure the Committee that
the Department has been making efforts to recover the tax dues and
necessary instructions are issued from time to time including guidelines
to deal with stay petitions of outstanding demands, it seems obvious that
these efforts have not yielded the desired results. The Committee further
observe that under indirect taxes another Rs. 8,346 crore, which is not
under any dispute, is pending for realization. As regards the reasons for
non-recovery of such dues, the Ministry have routinely submitted that
this information is being collected from the field formations. The
Committee are not able to accept such a routine and cursory reply, which
only suggests that the Ministry is not very serious about recovering
pending revenue dues, even when these are not under any dispute. It
appears that the statutory powers vested in the authorities are not being
exercised to recover dues. The Committee would, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should immediately
formulate a time bound Action Plan in this regard by constituting a
special cell, if required, so that all the revenue dues which are not disputed
in any way are realised within a period of 6 months. The Committee may
be apprised about the action taken and the outcomes achieved in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
(i) The Committee has conveyed displeasure on non-recovery of
the taxes raised but not realized and more particularly the
‘demand not under dispute’. These recommendations/
observations have already been communicated to the field

24
authorities for taking necessary action. It is submitted that
the department is taking all out efforts to make recovery of
taxes from arrear demand.
(ii) Regarding reasons for non-recovery of demand not under
dispute, it is submitted that demand not under dispute is
largely non-recoverable due to several reasons such as assessee
not traceable, no assets/inadequate assets for recovery,
company in liquidation, demand under installment etc.
Comprehensive measures have been taken to analyse the
reasons and monitor recovery in all such cases. The field
formations have been asked to carefully look into each such
case and use the information available in the departmental
database and also take assistance of other organizations to
locate the assets and make recovery.
(iii) The Gov ernment is conscious of the importance of recovery
out of outstanding tax demand. All possible measures are
being taken to expedite the recovery, including that Stated
above. During the current Financial Year, an amount of
Rs. 10,000 crore (approx.) has been recovered till 31st August,
2011 as against the recovery of Rs. 12000 crore (approx.) each
in the entire year 2010-11 and 2009-10 and Rs. 10000 crore
(approx.) in the year 2008-09.
CBEC
The updated position of arrears of indirect tax revenue for the year
2011-12 (as on 30.6.2011) is as below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Total Amount under dispute Amount not under dispute
arrears Stayed Res- Total Recover- Non-re Total
trained able coverable
arrears
(BIFR/
DRT/
OL/CO)
Central 33177.63 13192.08 9041.4 22233.48 9794.3 1149.85 10944.15
Excise
Customs 9711.92 2562.91 2727.9 5290.81 3863.79 557.32 4421.11
Service 16587.55 6591.61 5912.61 12504.22 3982.61 100.72 4083.33
Tax
Total 59477.10 22346.60 17681.91 40028.51 17640.70 1807.89 19448.59

25
From the above table, it may be seen that out of total arrears of
indirect taxes of Rs. 59477.10 crore, there are arrears of Rs. 22346.6 crore,
which have been stayed by the Courts and the arrears amounting to
Rs. 17681.9 crore have been restrained by other legal bodies, such as,
Board of Industrial Finance and Reconstruction (BIFR)/Debt Recovery
Tribunal (DRT)/Official Liquidator (OL). It may also be noted that as on
30.6.2011, arrears amounting to Rs. 17640 crore are total arrears which
can be recovered by the authorities under the Department.
The Department is constantly monitoring the realization of indirect
tax arrears and the actual recovery of indirect tax arrears vis-a-vis the
annual target fixed for recovery of arrears shows that during the last
three years the actual recovery has exceeded the annual target, as may
be seen from the following table:—
Year Arrear target Actual recovery Recovery as %
over of target
2007-08 3000 5035 168
2008-09 3250 4932 152
2009-10 4000 4386 110
2010-11 3250 6065 186
2011-12 3600 1410.87 39
(up to 30.6.2011)
Main reasons for not realizing the tax revenue, are:—
(i) Pendency of decisions on stay applications by Appellate
Authorities.
(ii) Arrears recovery stayed by various Appellate Authorities and
Courts.
(iii) Defaulters not tr aceable.
(iv) Some units under BIFR.
(v) Cases pending with official liquidators.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Finance, the Board has set out a broad action plan for a multi-pronged
action for realisation/liquidation of revenue arrears, which envisages the
following:—
(i) In respect of revenue arrears stayed by courts/CESTAT or
locked-up in litigation.

26
• Intensify efforts at seeking vacation of court orders.
• Seek early redressal of court matters involving substantial
amount of revenue (over one crore), filing of early hearing
applications and pursuing the same vigorously.
• Earnest and active follow-up in matters pending before
BIFR, DRT or Official Liquidator.
(ii) In respect of revenue arrears free from encumbrances.
• Speedy implementation of favourable decisions passed
by courts/Tribunal for realisation of arrears/all outstanding
dues.
• Quick recourse to provisions of Section 11 of the Central
Excise Act and initiation of appropriate action under the
Customs (Attachment of Property of Defaulters for
Recovery of Government Dues) Rules.
• Recovery of government dues from sums outstanding
against the assessee elsewhere within the formation or
outside in other Zones.
Apart from specific course of action proposed above, the
formations have also been advised to take the following
further steps in the matter.
• In cases where either no stay has been granted or the
stay granted has since lapsed, swift action be taken for
recovery of dues. Database in this regard should be
constantly updated and kept ready for prompt action.
• Constituting dedicated teams for identification of assets
of the defaulter from third party sources like Income Tax,
Banks, Trade Associations, Police/Transport/Postal
Authorities, Registrar of Companies etc. and appropriate
action taken for attaching the identified properties/assets
and their timely disposal.
• Reviving of Arrears Recovery Cell in each Commissione-
rate for a meaningful impact.
• Expeditious action for disposal of cases fit for
write-off.

27
The Government has already set up a Tax Arrears Recovery Unit
(TAR) with a view to co-ordinate, facilitate, monitor and oversee the
efforts of the Customs and Central Excise field formations towards
recovery of arrears. Periodical instructions are issued to the field
formations to intensify their efforts towards recovery of realizable
arrears.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Position of Assessment
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
It is seen from available records that the pendency of scrutiny
assessments in income tax increased from 45.7% in 2005-06 to 50.7% in
2009-10. The Ministry have tried to explain such a pendency on shortage
of assessing officers. In this regard, the Committee in their 2nd Report
(15th Lok Sabha) had asked the Income Tax Department to arrest the
trend of declining percentage of scrutiny assessments, if necessary, by
increasing the number of Assessing Officers. In their action taken reply,
the Ministry have submitted that the selection of cases for scrutiny and
their assessment is an ongoing process and that the issue of deployment
of more manpower will be dealt with by way of cadre review of the
Indian Revenue Service. The Ministry have also informed that targets for
scrutiny assessments as suggested by the Committee have also been
included in their action plan. The infrastructure is also Stated to have
been recently augmented by way of comprehensive computerisation. The
Committee would recommend that the Income Tax Department must not
only minimize the pendency of scrutiny assessment cases but also take
up more cases for scrutiny, keeping in view the increasing number of
returns being filed. As the assesse base widens and the tax workload
expands, it is necessary that the Income Tax Department fully equips
itself for larger scrutiny work.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
(i) To minimize the pendency of scrutiny assessments, for the
financial year 2011-12, number of cases selected for scrutiny
has been kept within reasonable limit. This is expected to
create just sufficient workload for the assessing officers so
that pendency does not mount.

28
(ii) It is s ubmitted that more cases can be taken up for scrutiny
only if more number of officers are deployed for assessment
duties. It has been experienced in the past that if without
increasing the number of assessing officers, more cases are
selected for scrutiny, the figures of pending scrutiny cases
increases on year to year basis and it also compromises quality
of assessment. Presently, the Income tax Department is facing
an acute shortage of officers as well as other employees.
Against a total sanctioned strength of 57,793 the working
strength of the Income tax Department as on 31.3.2011 was
41462. No worthwhile purpose shall be served by picking
more number of cases for scrutiny unless these vacancies are
filled up.
(iii) The CBDT is taking necessary measures for equipping itself
for larger scrutiny work. The Cadre restructuring proposal
of the Income tax Department is still under examination by
Department of Personnel and Training.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Refund Cases and interest paid on refunds
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
Another disquieting matter which has engaged the attention of the
Committee relates to large pendency of refund cases and huge interest
outgo on that account. The Committee are shocked to find that 42.2 lakh
returns of income in which refund was claimed were pending processing
as on 31st December, 2010. This included returns of income filed during
the Financial Year 2009-10 and 2010-11 as well. Further, an amount as
high as Rs. 5,800 crore was paid as interest on refunds in 2008-09 and
Rs. 4,700 crore in 2009-10. According to the Department, they have been
receiving more tax returns than the processing capacity of the Department.
They have sought to assure the Committee that they have been taking
steps to reverse the situation. The Committee are astonished to find that
in spite of such large pendency and outgo of interest, the Department
have not maintained necessary data such as the number of pending cases
above Rs. 1 lakh, the number of small cases involving amount of Rs. 100
or so, the oldest case pending for refund settlement, and the number of
cases where refunds are issued beyond statutory period and quantum
of interest involved therein. On this issue, the Committee had
recommended in their 2nd Report (15th Lok Sabha) that the culpability

29
of the income tax officials should be fixed unhesitatingly in the matter.
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have generally submitted that
effective checks and balances are applied on the functioning of the
Assessing Officer. The Committee, while reiterating their earlier
recommendation for fixing accountability, would once again stress that
the Department should recognize that settlement of refunds has become
a chronic problem confronting the Department, which besides causing
hardship to taxpayers, has also resulted in avoidable loss of revenue by
way of interest outgo. The Committee recommend that the Department
should set up a Special Monitoring Cell at the level of the Board to
ensure that refund claims whether electronically or otherwise are settled
within the stipulated period of four months. Any deviation from this
should be viewed strictly and explanation called for from the concerned
officials. The interest rate on refunds may also be reduced so as to be
pegged at the level of bank rate with a view to disincentivising careless
and inflated payment of self-assessment/advance tax.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
(i) It is submitted that return filing is seasonal in nature. Spikes
in number of returns filed are seen in the (i) month of due date
of filing the return of Income or (ii) last month of the year in which
the return can be filed without any penalty or (iii) last month in
which the Return of a particular AY can be validly filed . Thus
returns are not received in a uniform manner throughout the
year. Further, number of refund cases is also going up due
to collection of taxes through TDS mechanism as more and
more types of payments are now being brought into the
purview of TDS and strengthening of TDS administration.
Pendency of 42.2 lakh refund cases as on 31-12-2010 should
also be seen in the light of these facts.
(ii) It is further s ubmitted that as per Income tax Act, a return
of income can be processed one year from the end of the
financial year in which the return is furnished. However, the
Department has committed to improve tax payer service by
way of reduction of time to process returns of income
especially those claiming refunds.
(iii) Besides, addressing the deficiencies in the procedural aspects
of the refund issuance were already under consideration of
the Income Tax Department through large-scale technological

30
interventions and Business Process Re-engineering with
a view to eliminate bottlenecks and to create systems to
reduce human interface. As a result during the past
decade the Income Tax Department has undergone large
scale transformation and has decisively moved towards a
more efficient e-governance regime. Large scale computeri-
zation, Software development for Income Tax applications,
Promotion of e-filing of Returns, Processing of the returns
(both e-filed and manually filed) at Centralized Processing
back Offices or CPCs, issuance of Refunds, electronically or
through cheques, by a Refund Banker are some of these
measures.
The Table below shows the rapid progress made in this regard
by way of higher disposal of refund cases during the last
Financial Year:—
Financial year No. of refunds encashed
2007-08 48.08 lakh
2008-09 45.37 lakh
2009-10 48.84 lakh
2010-11 75.44 lakh
(iv) The CBD T also launched a special drive to dispose all refunds
cases on top priority. The latest statistics shows the success
of these efforts and as on 31st May 2011, only about 6.75 lakh
refund returns were pending.
(v) On the issue of outgo of interest u/s 244A on refunds, it is
mentioned that as per the statutory provisions such interest
is payable from 1st April of the Assessment Year to the date
of processing of return of income. Refunds are mostly on
account of excess prepaid taxes paid during the FY in question.
Due date of filing return falls on 31st July (Individual and
other non-auditable assessees) and 30th September (All
Corporate and all auditable assessees) of the following FY.
Thus, interest payment is inescapable in all cases at least for
the period from 1st April of the Assessment Year to the date
of filing of return of income and thereafter, till the return of
income is processed. However the various administrative
measures taken by the Department as narrated above, will
reduce the time in which a return claiming refund is processed
after being filed. Already, refund returns, if e-filed are

31
processed within three-four months of its filing. This will
have a positive impact on the interest paid u/s 244A on
refunds.
(vi) As Stated above, as per the Income Tax Act, 1961, a return
of income can be processed within one year from the end
of the Financial Year in which the return is furnished. Thus,
statute allows time of 12 months or more during which the
return of income may be processed and refund due (if any)
issued. The Board, however, has advised the field formation
to expeditiously process the returns of income claiming refund
and desires that the process be completed within a period
of 6-9 months from the end of the month in which return
of income is filed. To oversee the quicker processing of such
returns of income, a Special Monitoring Cell to monitor the
progress of disposal of refund cases at the level of the Board
has been constituted.
(vii) Vide Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2003, the interest rate
for refund had been reduced from 9% per annum to 6% per
annum with effect from 08-09-2003. The present interest rate
for refund is much lower than the interest rate offered by
the banks and financial institutions for term deposits and
therefore does not incentivise excess payment of self-
assessment/advance-tax by the taxpayers. Therefore there is
no proposal to revisit the present interest rate structure for
refunds.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
While concluding their examination of the subject, the Committee
would like to point out that both the Boards under the Department of
Revenue, namely CBDT and CBEC as well as their field formations require
to get their act together in so far as computerization, networking and
creation and maintenance of data base is concerned. The Committee’s
observations and recommendations notwithstanding, the Department of
Revenue and the two Boards in question have not been able to provide
crucial information to the Committee on key aspects of their functioning
due to non-maintenance of appropriate database. The Committee are at
a loss to understand as to how the Department is able to function
effectively and monitor their operations without critical database. The

32
Committee would, therefor e, urge upon the Department of Revenue to
oversee and closely monitor creation and maintenance of requisite data
base and report to the Committee on the progress made.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The Government is conscious of the need of creation and
maintenance of a comprehensive database which will be useful for analysis.
The CBDT has recently taken a decision to appoint the Director General
of Income Tax (Logistics) as the single custodian of statistical reports. A
new MIS report is in the process of being rolled out for collecting
information from different functional areas on a periodic basis.
It is further submitted that the recommendation of the Committee
for creating and maintaining a comprehensive database has been accepted
by the Government and all steps are being taken to implement the
recommendation. Improvement and changes in developing software in
computerization is a continuous process and its ambit is consistently
being widened to make it more useful to the Department as per its needs.
This being a technical aspect, requires experts from outside sources. The
Department will require time to create and stabilize such a system for
the needed feedback and analysis.
CBEC
As regards Central Excise and Service tax data are concerned,
in response to the observations of the Committee in the 12th Report,
it was reported that initially, ACES was rolled out on a voluntary basis,
and w.e.f . 1.04.2010, e-filing was made mandatory for assessees
paying central excise duty/service tax over Rs. 10 lakh but unless all
the activities in ACES were made m andatory for all assessees, the
reports as desired by the Standing Committee could not be generated.
However, CBEC has now decided that e-filing would be mandatory for
all ACES users w.e.f. 1.10.2011. This is expected to ensure capturing of
transactional data in e-mode and help in properly monitoring the tax
administration.
As regards Customs data, all the transaction data in respect of
imports and exports are being captured in the recently upgraded Customs
application (ICES 1.5).
CBEC has also implemented the Data Warehouse Project by creating
a centralized database for reporting/data mining.

33
These steps would greatly improve the availability of the requisite
database centrally as well as at the local level.
CBEC has, thus, initiated a number of steps to put in place a
dedicated mechanism for overseeing the creation and maintenance of the
requisite database as directed by the Hon’ble Committee.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]

34
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- NIL -

35
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Analysis of Expenditure Trend in Grant No. 42 – Direct Taxes
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee are surprised to note that out of BE of Rs. 275 crore,
sanctioned under the Head ‘Information Technology’, the expenditure
till December, 2010 is Rs. 96.16 crore only. The Ministry have attributed
their failure in realistic spending of the funds to non-completion of
some of the projects of computerization from procedural/administrative
angle, timely implementation of which has been repeatedly emphasized
by the Committee. The Committee expected the Ministry to anticipate
the procedural/administrative constraints and addressing the same well
in time. The Committee would again emphasize that the existing
system of budget formulation for computerization projects and follow
up/monitoring of the projects leave much to be desired, warranting a
comprehensive review and reappraisal of the projects for their timely
completion and gainful utilisation of funds for the intended purposes.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations and observations of the Committee have been
noted for future compliance. Every effort is being made to ensure even
pacing of expenditure and meeting the monthly/quarterly targets by
holding periodic reviews so that financial discipline is followed.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Collection of Direct Taxes
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
With regard to collection of direct taxes, the information furnished
by the Ministry indicate that the percentage increase in personal income
tax was 9.2% in 2008-09, 10.61% in 2009-10 which again declined to 9.44%

36
in 2010-11. On the other hand, corporate income tax declined to 10.61%
in 2008-09 and marginally increased to 14.68% in 2009-10, while registering
an increase of 22.25% in 2010-11. The number of corporate assessees is
stated to have marginally increased to 3.7 lakh in the year 2009-10 from
3.27 lakh in 2008-09. The Committee thus find that after the global melt
down period, the increase in tax collections has been gradual and not
commensurate with the growth in the corporate sector and rising personal
incomes in the post-recession period. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Ministry to analyse the reasons for the lukewarm trends, instead
of gloating over marginal increases in the direct tax collections in absolute
terms. When the Committee sought the break-up of tax contribution
separately from different categories such as salary/business/profession
etc. the Ministry have stated that such data with reference to the sources
of income have not been maintained by them. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Ministry to maintain tax collection figures of different
categories separately so that the trends of collection in each category
would be easily discernible for effecting changes in rates and exemptions
and improving compliance.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
(i) It is submitted that during post-recession period from
2009-10 to 2010-11, the direct tax collections have exceeded
the budget estimates of the respective years. In the financial
year 2009-10, the collections were 102.18% of BE and 97.69%
of RE. In the financial year 2010-11, the direct tax collections
were 103.74% of the BE and 100.01% of RE. The main reasons
for gradual increase in collection of personal income tax
during FY 2009-10 and 2010-11 are—(a) rationalization of TDS
rates and modified higher threshold limit for TDS on payment
under various provisions of the Act, (b) raising of threshold
limit of basic exemption in the case of individuals,
(c) introduction of sec. 80CCF permitting additional deduction
of Rs. 20,000 on investment in Infrastructure Bond since
FY 2010-11.
(ii) The Committee has asked the Ministry to maintain tax
collection figures of different categories such as salary/
business/profession etc. separately so that the trends of
collection in each category would be easily discernible for
effecting changes in rates and exemptions and improving
compliance. It is stated that the accounting of revenue is
done by the office of Principal Chief Controller of Accounts.

37
The matter has been communicated to the Principal CCA for
examination at their end.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee find from the data made available that the Self-
Assessment Tax which had witnessed an increase of Rs. 9,654 crore during
the year 2008-09 showed an increase of only Rs. 6,310 crore during the
two years from 2009-10 to 2010-11. The post-assessment collection which
had increased to Rs. 5,457 crore during 2007-08 could register an increase
of only Rs. 902 crore during the period 2008-09 to 2009-10. Surprisingly,
during the year 2010-11, it in fact showed a decrease of Rs. 7,410 crore.
The Committee are surprised that not only has the post-assessment
collection of direct taxes declined, but even the pre-assessment or self-
assessment collections, which should have shown an increasing trend
due to post-recession recovery in the economy, have also not made a
significant mark. Such a trend particularly in pre-assessment collections
clearly indicates the loosening of the grip of the Department, which has
failed to ensure that pre-assessment/self-assessment tax is fully collected.
The Committee desire that the Department of Revenue should study/
analyse these trends and the reasons for the same and take necessary
corrective measures both statutory as well as administrative. The
Committee would also like to point out in this regard that the decreasing
trend in post-assessment collections can only suggest that the efforts made
by the Department and the administrative resources deployed are not
getting adequately reflected in the collection of post-assessment taxes. It
also indicates that exorbitant demands/assessments may lead to non-
maintainability of demands, while causing only harassment to genuine
taxpayers. Therefore, the Committee would like the Department of
Revenue to ensure that such harassment due to inflated/non-maintainable
demands does not arise. At the same time, they should also deploy their
resources efficiently so that post-assessment income tax collections by
way of scrutiny, survey, etc. register a substantial increase.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
(i) The observations of the Committee regarding self-assessment
tax (in pre-assessment collection) and post-assessment
collection have been considered. The collection figures are
transmitted by the Office of Principal CCA and are subject

38
to revision and inter-head modifications till finalisation. The
figures submitted earlier have since been updated for FY 2010-11
and are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
F.Y. Pre-Assessment P ost-Assessment T otal Refund Net
TDS Adv. Self- Regular Others#
Tax Assess-
ment Tax
2007-08 104741 158121 21125 25720 45907 355614 41284 314330
2008-09 128230 143332 30779 21337 49237 372915 39097 333818
2009-10 145736 173417 32507 33274 50230 435164 57101 378063
2010-11* 211403 182311 34885 44499 46413 519511 73441 446070
* Figures are provisional
# Others include figures of Surcharge, Primary and Secondary and Higher Education Cess,
other Direct taxes, other receipts etc.
(ii) From the above table, it is seen that there is increase in tax
collection in absolute terms in respect of TDS, advance tax,
self-assessment tax (under the head pre-assessment) and
regular assessment (under the head post-assessment).
(iii) The comparatively lesser increase in respect of self-assessment
tax is attributed to the fact that presently emphasis is to collect
direct taxes during the financial year itself by way of advance
tax, TDS, TCS etc. on the principle ‘pay as you earn’. This
is substantiated by the fact that TDS collection has increased
from Rs. 104,741 crore in the financial year 2007-08 to
Rs. 211,403 crore in the financial year 2010-11. Similarly, the
collection from advance tax has increased from Rs. 158,121
crore to Rs. 182,311 crore during the same period. Overall
pre-assessment collection has also shown growth rate of
16.31% and 21.68% during financial year 2009-10 and
2010-11 respectively as against overall growth in net collection
at 13.23% and 18% respectively.
(iv) It is submitted that the observations about post-assessment
collection made by the Committee is in respect of sub-head
‘others’ only. The post-assessment collection consists of
‘collection from regular assessment’ and ‘others’. It is evident
from the table above that collection from regular assessment
has been growing steadily. The growth rate of collection under
the head ‘regular’ during post-recession period i.e. FY 2009-10
and 2010-11 was 55.94% and 33.73% respectively. Thus

39
the observations made by the Committee that the
administrative resources deployed are not getting adequately
reflected in the collection of post assessment taxes and other
observations flowing there from are not borne out from these
facts.
(v) In respect of policy initiative to deal with issue of exorbitant
demands/non-maintainable assessments, it is Stated that a
scheme of Dispute Resolution Panel (DRP) was introduced
by way of Legislative provisions of section 144C of the Income
Tax Act, 1961 with effect from 01.04.2009. Under this scheme
in case of eligible assessee, the demand is not raised till draft
assessment order prepared by the Assessing Officer is
examined and cleared by DRP after hearing the objection of
the taxpayer. The DRP is a collegium of three Commissioners
of Income Tax. It is expected that this measure would in long
run lead to reduction in exorbitant demands being raised.
[Ministry of Finance (D/o Revenue) OM No. H-11013/5/2011-Parl.,
dated 27 September, 2011]

40
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- NIL -
NEW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
29 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

41
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE SEVENT H SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th December, 2011 from
1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Prem Das Rai
6. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai
9. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Piyush Goyal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary

42
2. The Committee took up following draft Reports for consideration
and adoption:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** *** ***
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at Sl. Nos. (ii) and
(iv) without any modification and those at Sl. Nos. (i), (iii) and (v) with
minor modifications. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise
the Reports in the light of the modifications suggested and present these
Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

43
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FOURTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(15TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2011-2012) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations 15
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government: 12 80.00
(Vide Recommendations at Serial Nos. 1, 3, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 13, 14 and 15)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies: Nil 00.00
(iv) Reco mmendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee: 03 20.00
(Vide Recommendations at Serial Nos. 2, 4
and 5)
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited: Nil 00.00