STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
FINANCIAL SERVICES, EXPENDITURE AND
DISINVESTMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services,
Expenditure and Disinvestment)]
26
lR;eso t;rs
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)


TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
FINANCIAL SERVICES, EXPENDITURE AND
DISINVESTMENT)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services,
Expenditure and Disinvestment)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 December, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 December, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.O.F. No. 26
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2010 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

(i)
CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
23
43
44
65
66
68
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ...................................................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
CHAPTER I Report......................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies.......................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee......................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited.................
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on
8 December, 2010..................................................
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations Contained in the Eleventh Report
of the Standing Committee on Finance  on Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services,
Expenditure and Disinvestment).................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
12. Smt. Jayaprada Nahata
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Vacant*
16. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
17. Shri G .M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri N. Dharam Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
*Shri Y .S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, MP has resigned on 29 November, 2010.
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Y .P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty-Sixth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the
Eleventh Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic
Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment).
2. The Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010. Replies indicating action taken on all
the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the
Government on 23 August, 2010.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 8 December, 2010.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report of the Committee is given in the
Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
(v)
 N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
08 December, 2010 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok
Sabha) deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their Eleventh Report on the ‘Demands for Grants
(2010-11)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment) which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010.
2. The Report contained 18 recommendations. Action taken
notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the
recommendations contained in the report. These have been categorised as
follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1,4,5,6,10,11,12,15,16,17 and 18
(Total 11)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
(Total Nil)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 2,3,7,8,9,13 and14
(Total 7)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of
the Government is still awaited:
(Total Nil)
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the comments
contained in Chapter I be furnished to them expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 2)
Shortfall in utilization of fund under the head ‘Assistance for
Infrastructure Development – Lumpsum provision’
5. The Committee found that budgetary provisions for supporting
infrastructure projects through viability gap funding had always been on the
higher side, despite little actual utilization. The primary reasons for shortfall
in actual utilization was stated to be less demands by Sponsoring authorities
and larger number of ‘in- principal’ approvals granted by the Department of
Economic Affairs etc. The Committee were of the view that the Empowered
Committee should function more efficiently and adopt a more realistic
approach, while assessing the viability of a project, so as to arrive at correct
projections and more realistic budgetary estimates.
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry has stated following:—
“The Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme is an enabling scheme to
make the Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects commercially viable.
Viability Gap funding is disbursed as equity support to the project.
The quantum of VGF to be disbursed is determined through competitive
bid process. To safeguard the public funds being invested in a PPP
project, the funds are released, in proportion to the disbursal of loan
by the Lead Financial Institution after financial closure of the project
and after the private sector equity has been completely expended on
the project.
While the Budget Estimates are formulated based on the anticipated
requirement of the approved projects, actual utilization was influenced
by a number of factors during the period 2006 when the scheme was
introduced, to 2009, including:
(i) inexperience of the project sponsors in implementing PPP projects
and lack of familiarity with the Scheme, which led to delays in
completion of the bidding process ;
(ii) projects receiving premium (negative grant)/revenue share where
VGF was not required when private sector was more optimistic
regarding return on investments during the period of high
economic growth; and

3
(iii) effect of global recession and slow down of Indian economy from
mid 2008 resulting in dampening of investor interest in projects,
prolonged bid process (as projects were rebid) and there were
delays in achieving financial closure.
In all the above cases, the budget provisions were reviewed and revised
at RE stage.
However, the Department undertakes regular review of the progress
of the projects while formulating the requirement of VGF and only after
due diligence/appraisal of project, approves VGF through the competent
authority. As the investor/developer perception of the macro-economic
conditions and expected revenue generation from the project also
influences how a project is evaluated by the market, it is difficult to
precisely estimate the actual VGF requirement before the completion
of the bid process.”
7. On the utilisation of the budgetary grant of Rs. 480.20 crore
proposed for the current year, 2010-11 as on date, i.e. mid November, 2010,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in a subsequent
reply informed inter-alia as follows:
“Budget Estimation for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) Scheme for the
current year 2010-11 was Rs. 480.20 crore. The Revised Estimates
have been proposed for Rs. 125.00 crore based on the requirements
from Sponsoring Authority and past trend of disbursement. Till date
(During the current Financial Year 2010-11) the disbursement of
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) is Rs. 53.51 crore.”
8. The Committee reiterate their concern on the continued
underutilization of budgetary provisions for assisting Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) infrastructure projects through Viability Gap
Funding (VGF) since 2006-07. During the current year 2010 as well,
the budgetary grant of Rs. 480.20 crore under the head of account was
revised downwards to Rs. 125 crore at the stage of revised estimates
of which only Rs. 53.51 crore has been disbursed as on date i.e. mid
November, 2010. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of
the Ministry which lists out factors such as inexperience of the project
sponsors in implementing the PPP projects, negative grants in projects
where private sector is more optimistic of returns, effects of global
recession of 2008 which resulted in delays in financial closure of the

4
projects etc., as the reasons for underutilization of the Budget. It is
essential to ensure that projects are not awarded to sponsors who may
not be able to honour commitments and proper assessment is made
of the potential of each project before deciding on funding through VGF.
The Committee are of the considered view that the Empowered
Committee definitely has a greater role to play in deciding on the PPP
projects requiring help through VGF and a more realistic assessment
is made of the budgetary requirement under the head of account. The
Committee expect to be apprised of the action taken to this end.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 3)
Debt Burden of the Government
9. The Committee found that over the years, the debt burden of the
Central Government remained at a high level. Debt ratio of 56.7 per cent
was budgeted for the year 2009-10, of which internal debt along with other
internal liabilities accounted for 54.4 per cent. This combined with States’
debt liabilities, had reached a level of 80 per cent, exceeding the outer limit
of 75 per cent, prescribed by the Twelfth Finance Commission. Further
around 36 per cent of the revenue of the Central Government was being spent
on servicing of debt. The Committee, therefore, desired that the Government
apprise them of the specific measures being taken in pursuance of the
recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance Commission to contain the deficit
while reducing the debt burden of the Government, both for the Centre and
States.
10. The Ministry furnished following action taken reply on this issue,
stated as under:
“The total debt of the Central Government comprises the internal debt,
external debt and other liabilities. Under internal debt the major
components are market loans, treasury bills of various maturities,
securities issued against small savings etc. The external debt is the
borrowing of the government from bilateral and multilateral organiza-
tions. The other liabilities comprise the National Small Savings Fund,
State Provident Funds and other Public Accounts liabilities. The increase
in the debt is primarily on account of increased borrowings of the
Government to Finance its developmental expenditure. The total
liabilities (Internal debt, External Debt and other liabilities) of the Union
Government have risen marginally to 57.0 per cent of the GDP in the

5
year 2009-10 (RE) after falling to 56.7 per cent in 2008-09 (Provisional)
from a level of 61.6 per cent of the GDP in the year 2004-05.
Total debt of the Government during the period 2004-05 to 2010-11(BE)
as per cent of GDP is given below:
Year end Internal Other External T otal
March Debt liabilities Debt
2004-05 39.4 20.3 1.9 61.6
2005-06 37.5 20.9 2.5 61.0
2006-07 36.1 20.8 2.4 59.3
2007-08 36.5 18.5 2.3 57.3
2008-09 (provisional) 36.4 18.1 2.2 56.7
2009-10(RE) 37.9 16.8 2.3 57.0
2010-11(BE) 39.5 15.1 2.3 56.9
11. The 13th Finance Commission has assessed the finances of
the Union and the States and specified a combined debt target of 68%
to be met by 2014-15. For the Centre it has recommended that revenue
deficit be eliminated and fiscal deficit be brought down to 3% of GDP
by 2013-14. The Government has accepted these recommendations in
principle.
A comparison of the fiscal targets given by the 13th Finance
Commission and those given in the FRBM statements are as follows
(all numbers are in percentage of GDP):
2010-11 Target for Target for
2011-12 2012-13
Fiscal Deficit 5.5 4.8 4.1
(as per FRBM)
Fiscal Deficit (as per 5.7 4.8 4.2
13th Finance Commission)
Total liabilities 51.1 50.0 48.2
(as per FRBM)
Total liabilities (as per 53.9 52.5 50.5
13th Finance Commission)

6
12. The Debt position reported in the FRBM Statements are prepared
after the following adjustments in the debt numbers reported in the Receipt
Budget: (i) NSSF loans to the States are excluded from the liability of the
Central Government to avoid double counting, and (ii) external loans are
calculated at current exchange rates (against the exchange rates at book value
in the Receipt Budget). With these adjustments the total debt – GDP ratio
in RE 2009-10 works out 51.5% and comes to 51.1% in BE 2010-11. The
FRBM statement projects the fiscal deficit for 2011-12 and 2012-13 at 4.8%
and 4.1% respectively. The corresponding numbers for the total debt —
GDP ratio are 50.0% (2011-12) and 48.2% (2012-13) respectively. A
comparison of the 13th Finance Commission and the Government’s targets
for debt for the next two years clearly shows that the Government is actually
targeting a level even lower than that recommended by the 13th Finance
Commission.
13. Interest payments as a percentage of Total Revenue Receipts over
the last six years has been as follows:
     Year Interest payments as a percentage
of Total Revenue Receipts
2004-05 41.5
2005-06 38.2
2006-07 34.6
2007-08 31.6
2008-09 (provisional) 35.6
2009-10 (RE) 38.0
2010-11 (BE) 36.4
It is true that Interest Payments have increased over the last two years
due to increased borrowings undertaken to finance the counter-cyclical
expansionary fiscal policy undertaken by the Government to combat
the economic slowdown. However, with the return to fiscal
consolidation in the current year, interest payments as a percentage of
Total Revenue Receipts is likely to come down to 36.4 percent in
2010-11 (BE) from a level of 38 percent in 2009-10 (RE).

7
14. The Government has embarked on a fiscal consolidation process
in the Budget 2010-11. The fiscal deficit of the Government has come down
from a level of 6.7% of GDP in RE 2009-10 to 5.5% in BE 2010-11.
The total debt is projected to come down slightly from 51.5% of GDP in
RE 2009-10 to 51.1% in BE 2010-11. It has also been announced in the
Budget Speech that “the Government would target an explicit reduction in
its domestic public debt-GDP ratio”. As announced in the Budget, a status
paper giving detailed analysis of the debt situation and a roadmap for curtailing
overall public debt will be brought out shortly. With all these measures and
an abiding commitment to fiscal consolidation, the Government is confident
of meeting the fiscal deficit and debt targets laid down by the 13th Finance
Commission.”
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
O.M. No. 12(6)-W&M/2010, dated 8.7.2010]
15. As per the action taken note, following the adjustments of
National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) loans to States and current
exchange rates for external loans, the total debt liability of the Central
Government, as percent of GDP, works out to 51.5% in RE 2009-10
and 51.1% in BE 2010-11, which is lower than 53.9% projected by the
Thirteenth Finance Commission for the year. Nevertheless, the
Committee cannot help noting that no mention has been made in the
action taken note of the total liabilities of the State Governments and
consequent combined debt liabilities of the Central and State
Governments. Moreover, the action taken note is also not clear in
regard to measures undertaken or proposed for containing the
combined Government debt, which at 80% of GDP in 2010-11 i.e. at
the time of examination of the Demands for Grants was in excess of
the maximum limit of 75% recommended by the Twelfth Finance
Commission – a figure that is also far in excess of the targeted
combined debt level of 68% to be achieved by 2014-15 as accepted by
the Government on the basis of the recommendation of the Thirteenth
Finance Commission. Though the Government intends to lower the
revenue and fiscal deficits, concrete measures/mechanism for
containing the deficits and reducing the debt liability have not been
mentioned. The Committee apprehend that in the absence of concrete
measures, the projections on containing the deficits and overall debt
liability may remain unachievable. The Committee also express
concern over the fact that the interest payment as a percentage of

8
revenue receipts, though estimated to go down marginally to a level
of 36.4% in 2010-11, would nevertheless, continue to be on the higher
side. The Committee, therefore, expect the Government to spell out
the debt management strategy in clear and unambiguous terms and
pursue the same in right earnest.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 7)
Financial Inclusion
16. While the Union Budget had announced the issuing of additional
licences for private banks for extending geographic coverage of banking
services, it was not clear as to how the potential of private players will be
tapped to provide banking services in unbanked/under-banked areas,
particularly keeping in view their poor track-record in this regard. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that RBI should keep this aspect in mind
and give topmost priority to the issue of greater financial inclusion and social
banking while granting licences to private players who should be mandated
to render the specified extent of banking services in rural and semi-urban
areas.
17. In the action taken note, submitted by the Ministry, following reply
has been furnished:—
“As on June 30, 2010, there are 88,363 offices of Scheduled
Commercial Banks (SCBs) in the country, out of which 32,603 (37%)
bank offices are in rural areas, 21,011 ( 24%) in semi-urban areas,
18,268( 20%) in urban areas and 16,481 (19%) in metropolitan areas.
The number of branches in semi-urban and rural areas constitutes
around 61% of the total number of branches in the country.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reported that average population
per bank branch for commercial banks is reducing as given below:
As on Average population per bank branch
31st March 2008 14,649
31st March 2009 14,153
31st December 2009 13,639
31st March 2010 13,400

9
An underbanked district is a district where the average population per
branch office (APPBO) is more than the national average. At present
there are 375 underbanked districts in the country. Presently, there are
89 unbanked blocks in the country out of which 80 unbanked blocks
are in NE Region, 5 in the State of Jharkhand and 4 blocks in Jammu
& Kashmir. Opening of branches in these unbanked blocks is being
followed up with the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) Convenor
Banks, RBI and State Governments. The Department of Financial
Services has also requested the Home Ministry to take up the matter
with the North-Eastern State Governments to provide premises in
Government buildings preferably near the local Police Stations. The
State Governments have also been urged to avail benefits under the
RBI’s Viability Gap Funding Scheme for this purpose. The scheme
provides financial support to banks by the Reserve Bank for setting up
banking facilities viz., currency chests, extension of foreign exchange
and Government business facilities at “agreed” centers in the North-
Eastern Region, which are not found to be economically viable by
banks. This Scheme requires the State Governments to make available
necessary premises and other institutional support. The Reserve Bank
of India, as its contribution, would bear the one time capital cost and
recurring cost per annum for a limited period of five years as per the
lowest bid offered by the Bank.
Several other initiatives have also been taken by the Government of
India and RBI to extend the reach of banking to rural and semi-urban
areas:
(a) Simplified branch authorisation
(b) Relaxed KYC norms for opening bank accounts
(c) No frills accounts
(d) General Credit Cards – providing credit facility, in the nature of
revolving credit entitling the holder to withdraw up to the limit
sanctioned
(e) Business Correspondents/Business Facilitators
(f) Core Banking Solution (CBS) in all RRBs
(g) Scaling up IT

10
(h) Mobile Banking
(i) Special package for North-Eastern States
(j) “Financial Inclusion Fund” (FIF) and “Financial Inclusion
Technology Fund” (FITF) for meeting the cost of developmental
and promotional interventions and the cost of technology adoption
for ensuring financial inclusion.
(k) Each SLBC convenor has been asked to set up a credit-counselling
centre in one district as a pilot, and extend it to all other districts
in due course
(l) SHG bank linkage programme
(m) Roadmap for Financial Inclusion.
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010-11 stated that in order
to reach the benefits of banking services to the ‘Aam Aadmi’, the
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), has
decided to provide appropriate banking facilities to habitations having
population in excess of 2000 (as per 2001 census) by March, 2012.
These services will be provided using the Business Correspondent and
other models with appropriate technology back up. The roadmaps for
Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs) for providing banking facilities in
villages having population over 2000 have been finalized by most banks/
SLBCs by 31 March, 2010. These plans are being reviewed by the RBI
in detail with the Banks prior to operationalization…
…The number of habitations having a population of over 2000 (as per
the 2001 census) proposed to be covered under these financial inclusion
plans, as per the information received from the SLBC convenor banks
is approximately 72,300 . All the above efforts are being monitored
closely to ensure that the reach of banking services can be extended
rapidly to the hinterland.
Opening New Bank branches: RBI has recently invited suggestions and
comments, by (September 30, 2010), on the following aspects
delineated in the Discussion Paper regarding opening/licensing of new
bank branches:
1. Minimum capital requirements for new banks and promoters
contribution

11
2. Minimum and maximum caps on promoter shareholding and other
shareholders
3. Foreign shareholding in the new banks
4. Whether industrial and business houses could be allowed to
promote banks
5. Should Non-Banking Financial Companies be allowed conversion
into banks or to promote a bank
6. Business model for the new banks.
RBI after receiving feedback, comments and suggestions on the
possible approaches discussed in this paper and detailed discussions
with the stakeholders, comprehensive guidelines for licensing of new
banks would be framed and applications invited for setting up new
banks.”
18. As seen from the action taken note, as many as 375 districts
in the country continue to be under banked and 89 blocks unbanked
of which a majority i.e. 80 blocks are in the North-Eastern region. This
is despite the number of measures taken by the Government and RBI
to extend the reach of banking i.e. simplified branch authorization
policy, viability gap funding scheme of RBI, relaxed know your
customers (KYC) norms, introduction of basic banking ‘no-frills’
account, issue of General Purpose Credit Cards (GCCs), use of Banking
Correspondents/Facilitators, implementation of Core Banking Solution
(CBS) in all RRBs, scaling up IT initiatives for financial inclusion,
mobile banking, setting up Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF) and
Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF), setting up Financial
Literacy and Credit Counseling Centers by SLBC convener banks and
SHG-Bank Linkage Programme etc. More seriously, the action taken
note is elusive in regard to the specific recommendation of the
Committee that RBI should give topmost priority to the issue of
financial inclusion and social banking while granting new bank licenses.
The Committee would reiterate that the issue of extending outreach
of banking should be given utmost priority while granting new licences.
The Committee expect to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.

12
Recommendation (Sl.No. 8)
Banking Correspondents (BC)/Banking Facilitators (BF) model
19. The Committee were of the opinion that entrusting implementation
of the BC/BF model through totally untested medium like individual grocery
(kirana)/medical/fair price shop owners, PCO operators, Petrol Pump
owners, Retired Teachers etc. seemed to be fraught with uncertainties. On
the other hand, Banks, both in the public sector and in the private sector,
had evolved over decades a unique model of Pigmy/Tiny Deposit Collectors
who are well versed with the exact banking need of un-banked people
vis-à-vis the Banks, but their prospect of contributing to the cause of
“Financial Inclusion” is being neglected by Government. Therefore RBI
should focus on gainfully utilizing the Pigmy/Tiny Depositors, especially in
view of their vast experience and proven trust worthiness. Further, the
Committee recommended the Government to make a study on effectiveness
of the BC/BF model in extending banking services to the unbanked areas and
rationale of levying charges on customers of banking services in these areas
and apprise them of the details thereof.
20. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated as below:
“The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010-11 stated that in order
to reach the benefits of banking services to the ‘Aam Aadmi’, the
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), has
decided to provide appropriate banking facilities to habitations having
population in excess of 2000 (as per 2001 census) by March, 2012.
These services will be provided using the Business Correspondent and
other models with appropriate technology back up.
The number of habitations having a population of over 2000 (as per
the 2001 census) proposed to be covered under these FIPs, as per the
information received from the SLBC convenor banks is approximately
72,300. The Banks have already initiated action adopting various
technologies and models across the country.
Since January 2006, the Reserve Bank has permitted banks to utilise
the services of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), micro-
finance institutions (other than Non-Banking Financial Companies) and
other civil society organisations as intermediaries in providing financial

13
and banking services through the use of business facilitator and
Business Correspondent (BC) models. The BC model allows banks to
do ‘cash in-cash out’ transactions at a location much closer to the rural
population, thus addressing the last mile problem.
From April 2010, the ambit of the BC model has been widened to engage
any individual as BC by banks. With a view to ensuring the viability
of the BC model, banks have been permitted to collect reasonable
service charges from the customer, in a transparent manner under a
Board-approved policy.
The BC Model ensures a closer relationship between poor people and
the organized financial system. As in March 2010, banks have reported
employing 2301 BCs covering 53382 villages. Of this, public sector
banks have reported employing 2128 BCs, private sector banks 172 BCs
and foreign banks 1 BC. Further, in the annual Policy of the
Reserve Bank for the year 2010-11, it has been announced that any
individual may be employed as BC by banks, including Common Service
Centres (CSCs), subject to bank’s comfort level and their carrying out
due diligence. RBI has since liberalized the list of entities who could
be appointed as BCs and permitted banks to use the services of
Non-Governmental Organizations, Micro Finance Institutions, Retired
Bank Employees, Ex-servicemen, Retired Govt. Employees etc. in the
category of BCs. The Banks have largely used services of companies
listed in Section 25 and other civil society organizations as Business
Correspondents in providing financial and banking services. These
companies may appoint their sub agents to execute the job. If the model
of Pigmy / Tiny Deposit Collectors fit in any of these models, the banks
are free to utilize their services wherever these are found feasible/
operable. Further the banks have freedom to choose whatever model
suits them according to their need in fulfilment of the objective of
providing banking services and levy a suitable charge(s).
The Ministry of Finance has been urging State Governments to provide
the necessary support required for extending banking services to
the rural hinterland. State Governments have also been requested to
route payments of all government schemes and programmes through
banks.”

14
21. The Committee feel constrained to note that the action
taken note is silent on the recommendation made for conducting a
study on the effectiveness of the Banking Correspondents (BCs)/
Banking Facilitators (BFs) model in extending banking services, as also
the issue of the rationale of levying charges on banking services
provided through this model on customers in unbanked areas. The
Government has merely chosen to furnish figures on the total number
of Banking Correspondents (BCs) employed by banks (2301), of whom
a majority are employees of Public Sector banks (2128), with the private
sector and foreign banks having employed only 172 and 1 BCs
respectively. The action taken note is also evasive in regard to the
emphasis made by the Committee on giving preference to Pigmy/Tiny
Depositors for furthering the cause of ‘Financial Inclusion’. It is also
apparent from the action taken note that the BC model has not found
much favour with the private sector and foreign banks. The
Committee, once again emphasise the need for evaluating this model
as a channel of banking covering inter-alia, the norms for engaging
Banking Correspondents, the number of accounts added, business
generated through this model till date etc. The Committee expect to
be apprised of the action taken to this end at an early date.
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9)
Bank lending to Agriculture and Weaker Sections
22. The Committee noticed that performance of commercial banks
had remained pathetic with regard to agriculture and weaker sections
lending as required under RBI guidelines which showed that banks were
getting away with lower disbursement to agriculture with impunity. While
the performance of public sector banks in case of weaker sections had been
relatively better, private sector banks had shown very poor record. As per
the information supplied by the Ministry, only 16 public sector banks and
4 private sector banks could achieve the desired percentage of lending last
year.
23. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated following:
“The RBI guidelines on priority sector lending require domestic
commercial banks to lend 40 per cent of their Adjusted Net Bank Credit
(ANBC) with sub-targets for lending to agriculture (18 per cent) and
weaker sections (10 per cent). The target achieved by Public Sector

15
Banks under priority sector lending and agriculture sector lending
(as on the last reporting Friday of March) for the three years is as under:
Advances to the Priority Sectors by Public Sector Banks
(Rs. in crore)
Sector March March March
2007 2008 2009
I. Agriculture 2,02,614 2,49,397 2,98,211
Percentage (15.4) (17.5) (17.2)
II. Weaker Section 94,285 1,26,935 166,843
Percentage (7.2) (9.3) (9.62)
III. T otal priority sector 5,21,376 6,10,450 7,20,083
advances
Percentage (39.7) (44.7) (42.5)
IV . Net Bank Credit 13,13,840 13,64,268 16,93,437
Source: RBI Figures in brackets are percentage achievement.
It may be seen that the performance of public sector banks has
improved. In the year 2006-07, the agriculture sector advances were 15.4%,
this was increased to 17.25% in the year 2008-09. Weaker Section advances
have increased from 7.2% in the year 2006-07 to 9.62% in the year
2008-09. The overall priority sector advances increased from 39.7% in
2006-07 to 42.5% in 2008-09.
Advances to the Priority Sectors by Private Sector Banks as on the
last reporting Friday is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Sector March March March
2007 2008 2009
   1 2 3 4
I. Agriculture 52,034 58,567 76,062
Percentage (12.7) (15.4) (15.9)

16
   1 2 3 4
II. Weaker Section 5,229 7,228 15,844
Percentage (1.55) (2.10) (3.31)
III. T otal Priority sector 1,44,549 1,64,068 1,90,207
advances#
Percentage (42.9) (47.8) (46.8)
Source: RBI Figure in Brackets are percentage achievement.
It may be seen that the performance of private sector banks has also
improved. In the year 2006-07, the agriculture sector advances were
12.7%, this has increased to 15.7% in the year 2008-09. Weaker Section
advances have been increased from 1.55% in the year 2006-07 to
3.31% in the year 2008-09. The overall priority sector advances
increased from 42.9% in 2006-07 to 46.8% in 2008-09.
The shortfall in the agriculture lending/priority sector/weaker sections
of the scheduled commercial banks is being utilized for the benefit
of the rural areas and the weaker section through different funds like
the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), Short Term
Cooperative Credit (STCRC) Refinance Fund, Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (MSME) Refinance Fund, Rural Housing Fund,
etc. The allocation made by RBI from the lending shortfall to these
funds for the last two years is as under:
Amount allocated in the last two years
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the Fund 2008-09 2009-10
Rural Infrastructure Development 14,000 14,000
Fund (RIDF)
Bharat Nirman Programme 4,000 6,500
Short Term Cooperative Credit (STCRC) 5,000 5,000
(Refinance) Fund 2009-10
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 4,000 4,000
(MSME) Refinance Fund, 2009-10
Rural Housing Fund, 2009-10 1,200 2,000
Total 28,200 31,500

17
The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) has been getting
allocations in the successive Union Budgets and NABARD has partnered
with various State Governments in the creation of rural infrastructure.
Over the years, the coverage under RIDF has been made more broad
based in each tranche and at present, a wide range of 31 sectors under
RIDF XV (2009-10) are being financed. The aggregate allocations
under RIDF have reached the level of Rs. 1,34,000 crore.
Further, a separate window under RIDF has been created for partly
funding the rural roads component of the Bharat Nirman Programme
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. So far, Rs. 18,500 crore has been
allocated from the shortfall of priority sector lending for this
programme.
In view of above it may be observed that the shortfall in priority sector
lending by banks is being utilized by the Government of India for various
infrastructure projects and other developmental activities in the rural
areas and these funds are serving a very useful purpose for the rural
and agricultural economy.”
24. The Committee had expressed their serious concern over the
fact that banks, particularly from the private sector were getting away
with impunity for not meeting the mandated level of priority sector
lending, mainly to the agriculture sector. The submission made in the
action taken note that ‘shortfall in priority sector lending by banks
is being utilized by the Government for various infrastructure projects
and other developmental activities in the rural areas’ by allocating the
shortfall amounts to ‘rural development oriented funds’ is neither
tenable nor acceptable. While around Rs. 31500 crore of the shortfall
in the banking sector lending to agriculture in the preceding two years
is stated to have been allocated to three funds i.e. Short Term
Cooperative Credit Refinance Fund (STCRC), Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Refinance Fund (MSME) and Rural Housing Fund
besides the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), the action
taken note neither contains details of the off-take of the accruals to
the funds nor the nature of assets created by utilizing the accruals from
the funds. The Committee expect to be apprised of the details of the
off-take of the accruals from these four funds in the preceding three
years.
25. The Committee also note that despite the policy measure of
allocating the shortfalls in lending to the ‘earmarked funds’, banks,

18
particularly from the private sector continue to fall short of the
mandated lending targets. For instance, the private sector banks
lending to agriculture sector has been to the extent of only 15.9% in
2009 with 3.31% extended to weaker sections, which is a matter of
serious concern. On an even more serious note, the Committee wish
to point out that this measure of allocating the lending shortfalls to
the earmarked funds cannot be a viable alternative to direct lending
to agriculture sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
effectiveness of the additional funds in prompting banks to meet the
stipulated agriculture lending targets. Increasing direct agriculture
advances being an urgent need, the Committee reiterate that the
Government/RBI should ensure that the banks achieve the targeted
lending to agriculture and weaker sections.
Recommendation (Sl.Nos. 13 & 14)
Surrender of Unutilised funds by Ministries/Departments
26. The Committee found that huge amount of funds were being
surrendered by various Ministries/Departments year after year. Such large
percentage of surrender of funds from the budgetary allocations only pointed
to the fact that the concerned Ministries/Departments did not have adequate
capacity to utilize the allotted funds, thereby leaving the programmes and
schemes under their purview incomplete and unattended. The Committee,
therefore, desired that the Government should focus on capacity-building of
Ministries/Departments mandated to incur large expenditure on development.
There should also be a deterrent mechanism to ensure that such large amount
of funds are not routinely surrendered every year.
27. Further even if the funds remained unutilised, the allocation of
funds were not reduced in the subsequent year. The Committee therefore,
recommended that while making fresh allocations, the past amount of
surrendered funds should be kept in consideration and subsequent allocations
should be made only after assessing the progress made in the schemes/
programmes. Further, from the information made available to the Committee,
it was also not clear as to what extent these surrenders were due to economy
measures or due to non-implementation of the schemes/programmes. The
Committee therefore, desired to be apprised about the percentage of
surrenders on account of savings/implementation of economy measures and
the percentage of surrenders due to non-utilisation of funds.

19
28. Following action taken reply has been furnished by the Ministry:
“The expenditure position of Union Government in the year 2009-10
is estimated as indicated below:—
(Rs. in crore)
2009-10
Budget Estimate Revised Estimate
Non-Plan Expenditure 695689 706371
Plan Expenditure 325149 315176
Total Expenditure 1020838 1021547
During the mid-year review of the budgetary allocation of all Ministries/
Departments at the time of finalization of Revised Estimates for the
financial year, the expenditure position of all Ministries/Departments is
taken into account. The budgetary allocations of those Ministries/
Departments, which have not kept pace upto September of the financial
year, are scaled down keeping in view the absorptive capacity of the
administrative Ministry/Department concerned in the remaining part of
the financial year. The savings so effected are re-deployed to other
Ministries/Departments where additionalities are sought. The mid-year
review is aimed at rational distribution of scarce resources of
Government. As a result, Ministries/Departments, whose budgetary
allocations are scaled down, are required to surrender the savings
identified to the Ministry of Finance.
The budgetary allocations of the following Ministries/Departments were
scaled down during 2009-10 consequent upon the mid-year review after
taking into account the pace of expenditure and the absorptive capacity
of the Ministry/Department concerned:—
1. Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
2. Atomic Energy
3. Ministry of Coal
4. Department of Commerce

20
5. Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion
6. Department of Posts
7. Department of Information Technology
8. Department of Consumer Affairs
9. Department of Food and Public Distribution
10. Ministry of Culture
11. Ministry of Earth Sciences
12. Ministry of Environment & Forests
13. Department of Economic Affairs
14. Department of Financial Services
15. Department of Expenditure
16. Ministry of Food Processing Industries
17. Department of Health & Family Welfare
18. Department of Heavy Industry
19. Department of Public Enterprises
20. Ministry of Home Affairs
21. Police
22. Other expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs
23. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
24. Department of School Education Literacy
25. Department of Higher Education
26. Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
27. Ministry of Labour & Employment
28. Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
29. Ministry of Mines
30. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
31. Ministry of Panchayati Raj

21
32. Ministry of Planning
33. Ministry of Power
34. Department of Rural Development
35. Department of Land Resources
36. Department of Drinking Water Supply
37. Department of Science & Technology
38. Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
39. Department of Bio-Technology
40. Department of Shipping
41. Department of Road Transport and Highways
42. Department of Space
43. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
44. Ministry of Steel
45. Ministry of Tourism
46. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
47. Lakshadweep
48. Ministry of Water Resources
Apart from the above, there are other reasons for surrender of savings.
One of the principal reasons is that re-distribution of savings available
in one section to another section of the Grant like from Capital to
Revenue section or vice-versa or from V oted to Charged section or vice-
versa, which is done through the approval of Parliament, result in
surrender of savings technically. Such savings are also taken as unspent
provision, which is actually not the position, since these funds are
deployed elsewhere as per requirements.
As regards capacity-building of Ministries/Departments, Finance
Minister and Secretary, Department of Expenditure hold separate
meetings with Financial Advisers of all Ministries/Departments during
the course of the year, wherein the need to accelerate the expenditure
is emphasized and at the same time they are advised to exercise caution
and avoid making excessive projection in their budget proposals. The
detailed guidelines relating to the methodology of preparing the detailed

22
budget estimates are also enumerated elaborately in the General
Financial Rules and in Budget Circular issued annually. As regards
percentage of surrenders on account of savings/implementation of
economy measures and the percentage of surrenders due to
non-utilization of funds, the surrenders effected through economy
measures are subsumed in the overall savings effected through mid-
year review and details of such savings through economy measures
are not maintained centrally.”
29. The Committee find from the action taken note that steps
such as mid-year reallocation of resources on the basis of the absorptive
capacity of the Ministries/Departments after mid-year review have not
prevented funds remaining unutilized/savings effected in the case of
number of Ministries/Departments. Savings have also been shown to
be on account of factors such as redistribution of funds from capital
to revenue section or vice-versa etc., which is not reflected properly in
the accounting system. This calls for reviewing the accounting system
with a view to overcoming the shortcomings and reflecting savings and
expenditure correctly. Furthermore, no specific reply has been
furnished with regard to the emphasis made by the Committee on
reviewing the budgetary planning process with a view to building an
effective deterrent mechanism so as to prevent surrenders every year.
It would be necessary to ensure that Ministries are dissuaded from
delaying expenditure, projecting expenditure in excess of actual
potential, and also delaying surrenders. Also, while regular meetings
are stated to be held between the Finance Minister and Secretary,
Department of Expenditure with Financial Advisors of different
Ministries/Departments, the effectiveness of such mechanisms in
impacting funds remaining unspent does not seem to be reflected.
30. What the Committee also find extremely surprising to note
from the reply is the fact that the Ministry has no clear picture on
the surrenders/savings effected on account of economy measures as
distinct from savings owing to non-implementation of schemes/
programmes. This information being of vital importance in enabling
efficient expenditure management, the Committee would recommend
that the Government establish a mechanism for collecting and
maintaining information on savings/surrenders on account of delays in
project/programme implementation etc. as distinct from savings on
account of economy measures.

23
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee found that although the Government had announced
setting up of National Social Security Fund (NSSF) with a corpus of
Rs.1000 crore, the implementation aspect of the concept had not been well
thought out, giving rise to the inevitability of the fund remaining unutilised.
Having recognised the necessity of setting up a social security fund long back,
absence of any action plan for a proper delivery mechanism gave rise to an
apprehension that the purpose for which the fund had been established might
not materialise well in time to benefit the unorganised labour. In the
Committee’s view, even if the fund was meant to be kept in public account,
the Government should have taken a coordinated approach with all the
concerned Ministries to devise the schemes/programmes under the fund. The
Ministry of Finance thus seemed to have adopted a casual approach while
launching this scheme without making any assessment as to actual
requirements. The corpus of the fund seemed to have been arbitrarily decided
without reference to ground realities. The Committee, therefore, desired that
the Government should persuade other related Ministries/Departments to
formulate the programmes/schemes in a time bound manner for proper
utilisation of the fund. Further, a coordination committee should be set up
for this purpose in the Ministry of Finance to oversee the implementation
of the scheme as early as possible. The Committee desired to know the
progress made in this regard within three months.
Reply of the Government
Recognising need for providing social security to the workers in the
unorganised sector, the Government enacted the Unorganised Workers Social
Security Act, 2008 and the Rules framed under the Act came into force
w.e.f. 14th May, 2010. Earlier, National Social Security Board was
constituted on 18.08.2009. The Board has recommended extension of
various social security schemes for unorganised sector workers, viz.,

24
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima  Yojana (RSBY), Janshree Bima Yojana (JBY),
Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension (IGNOAP) etc. It is an outcome
after due consideration regarding the social security available for labour in
the informal sector and the impending need for expanding their coverage.
As a followup to implementation of the Finance Minister’s Budget
Announcements 2010-11, a review meeting was taken by Finance Secretary
with the concerned Secretaries of Ministries/Departments on 17.05.2010 in
which, among others, the scheme on National Social Security Fund for
unorganized sector workers has also been reviewed for an action plan for
its speedy implementation. It has been decided that Ministry of Labour and
Employment will be the nodal Ministry to interact with other Ministries/
Departments to finalise scheme guidelines and formulate schemes for
obtaining necessary approval for implementation. The accounting procedure
will be prepared by Ministry of Finance on the basis of the administrative
approval of the scheme guidelines and manner of implementation.
As a sequel to the decision above, a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment with representatives drawn
out from Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission, concerned project
related Ministry/Department and Director General (Labour Welfare) has been
constituted to examine scheme related proposals and to submit its
recommendations for approval of Cabinet/CCEA . Moreover, two Task
Forces, viz. (a) For suggesting schemes to provide social security to
Rickshaw Pullers, street vendors, rag pickers, etc. and (b) To suggest a
scheme for Pension/Provident Fund for unorganized workers, have been set
up to consider and formulate schemes to be implemented under the fund.
Meanwhile, a few schemes relating to unorganised sector workers are being
actively processed within Ministry of Labour and Employment to avail of
the fund.
In the light of the above, once the scheme guidelines and its related
schemes are approved by the competent authority, Ministry of Finance will
release requisite funds for their speedy implementation. To ensure that the
schemes under National Social Security Fund for unorganized sector workers
take off at the earliest possible, Ministry of Finance is also closely reviewing
the status of implementation of this scheme at regular intervals in consultation
with Ministry of Labour and Employment who are, in turn, taking up with
the concerned Ministries/Departments to achieve the desired purpose and
results. Hence, all efforts are being taken for utilising the amount of Rs.1000

25
crore allocated for the National Social Security fund for Unorganised Sector
workers.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee noted that Unit Linked Insurance Products (ULIPs)
which are in the nature of insurance cum investment scheme, were
introduced in 2001 and had since become a popular avenue for investment,
with total value of sum assured under the scheme being Rs.8.5 lakh crore
as on 31st March, 2009. However, the Committee were surprised that despite
ULIPs being an old product, the regulatory jurisdiction over these products
was still hazy and not clearly defined with both SEBI and IRDA claiming
to be mandated to regulate the marketing and sale of these products. It was
also apparent that while mutual funds, which were akin to ULIPs were well
regulated in terms of entry loads, disclosure norms etc., this does not appear
to be the case with ULIPs. The Committee, therefore, desired that the
Ministry of Finance should take steps to ensure safeguarding the interest of
investors by resolving the jurisdictional dispute and putting in place
comprehensive regulations for ULIPs, incorporating the concerns of both
SEBI and IRDA.
Reply of the Government
In the recent past there had been a jurisdictional dispute between the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority (IRDA) concerning Unit Linked Insurance
Policies (ULIPs). Both the regulators issued orders in this regard which
caused some confusion and concern to the ULIP investors. As a consequence
of such Orders, insurance companies were also not able to issue new ULIPs.
Therefore, it was decided to settle this issue by legally permissible means.
Accordingly, Government has promulgated an Ordinance on 18th June, 2010
to make necessary changes in the existing legislations in order to remove
doubts and make it clear that the life insurance business also includes any
unit linked insurance business.
Further, for resolving differences of opinion as to whether any hybrid
or composite policy, scrip or any other instrument having a component of
investment and a component of insurance or any other component falls within
the jurisdiction of the IRDA or the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) or the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), an institutional mechanism
has been put in place, whereby a Joint Committee under the chairmanship
of the Hon.ble Finance Minister would address the jurisdictional issues

26
concerning hybrid or composite instrument between the regulators so as to
ensure the smooth functioning of the financial sector.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
In this context, the Committee also noted that key financial regulators
appointed by Government being at loggerheads on an issue concerning
large number of investors/subscribers was very unusual and extremely
disquieting. The Committee noted with concern that a ban had been imposed
by SEBI on the ULIPs issued by 14 life insurance companies, which had
been contradicted by IRDA by asking all these companies to continue with
their business as usual, notwithstanding the order of SEBI. The Committee
were of the view that the Ministry of Finance could not remain a mute
spectator to such posturings of one upmanship by its regulatory bodies. The
Committee therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Finance must not
only intervene immediately to resolve the deadlock in this matter, but also
as a general policy, spell out in clear terms their supervisory role vis-à-vis
regulatory bodies under their jurisdiction. The Committee desired to be
apprised of the steps taken in the matter within one month. In this context,
the Committee also desired that the proposed Financial Stability and
Development Council should be constituted early to address inter alia such
inter-regulatory issues.
Reply of the Government
In the recent past there has been a jurisdictional dispute between the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority (IRDA) concerning Unit Linked Insurance
Policies (ULIPs). Both the regulators issued orders in this regard which
caused some confusion and concern to the ULIP investors. As a consequence
of such Orders, insurance companies were also not able to issue new ULIPs.
Therefore, it was decided to settle this issue by legally permissible means.
Accordingly, Government has promulgated an Ordinance on 18th June, 2010
to make necessary changes in the existing legislations in order to remove
doubts and make it clear that the life insurance business also includes any
unit linked insurance business.
Further, for resolving differences of opinion as to whether any hybrid
or composite policy, scrip or any other instrument having a component of
investment and a component of insurance or any other component falls within
the jurisdiction of the IRDA or the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) or the

27
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), an institutional mechanism
has been put in place, whereby a Joint Committee under the chairmanship
of the Hon’ble Finance Minister would address the jurisdictional issues
concerning hybrid or composite instrument between the regulators so as to
ensure the smooth functioning of the financial sector.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee noted that though Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF) and
Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF) had been set up with the
objective of promoting financial inclusion, their utilization towards achieving
the same had been erratic. As on 31 January, 2010, while under FIF, out
of Rs. 34.09 crore available, funds to the extent of Rs. 14.31 crore remained
unutilized, the utilization under FITF had exceeded its corpus, since
committed funds under this had exceeded the available funds. The reasons
cited for meagre release out of the FIF included inter alia, time lag between
sanctions and release, project funding through the mechanism of viability gap
funding, inability of RRBs/Cooperative banks to sink the projects due to lack
of perspective and technically qualified staff, appointment of individuals as
Banking Correspondents (BCs), RBI’s requirement of banks to bring FIF/
FITF proposals, role of cooperatives remaining unidentified, etc. Further,
inadequacy of corpus was also stated to be a big factor in limiting
commitments. The committee felt that for better utilization of these funds
as well as speedier achievement of the goal of financial inclusion, it was
imperative that projects were identified/tailor made before-hand. Off the shelf
projects could be prepared by Lead Banks, which would be readily available
for implementation by the banks. Further, the role of cooperative Banks and
Regional Rural banks had to be clearly established and their staff needed to
be trained and motivated to ensure affective implementation of schemes/
projects. The Committee desired that Government should apprise them of
the measures taken to resolve the problems as highlighted above. They also
recommended the Government to correctly assess the requirement of funds
for implementation of financial inclusion so as to make budget provisions
in consonance with actual requirements.
Reply of the Government
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010-11 stated that to reach
the benefits of banking services to the ‘Aam Aadmi’, the Government in
consultation with the RBI, has decided to provide appropriate Banking

28
facilities to habitations having population in excess of 2000 by March, 2012.
It is also proposed to extend insurance and other services to the targeted
beneficiaries. These services will be provided using the Business Correspon-
dent and other models with appropriate technology back up. By this
arrangement, it is proposed to cover 60,000 habitations.
The roadmaps for these Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs) have been
finalized by most banks/State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs). These
plans are being reviewed by the RBI in detail with the Banks prior to
operationalization. These roadmaps are being up-loaded by the SLBC
Convener Banks on their websites in order to facilitate monitoring of the
progress by the State Governments, RBI and Government of India. The
number of habitations having a population of over 2000 (as per the 2001
census) proposed to be covered under these financial inclusion plans, as
per the information received from SLBC convenor banks is approximately
72,300. The banks have been advised to select their technologies for
branchless banking through the Business Correspondent (BC) model, procure
the required hardware/software, identify their business correspondents’
state wise and roll out their financial inclusion plans in a time bound
manner.
In view of the challenging task to be achieved by the Banks, there is
a need to identify and support innovative methods of taking financial inclusion
forward. As a result the Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF) and Financial
Inclusion Technology Funds (FITF) have a large number of projects in the
pipeline that require fund support. It is thus envisaged that the utilization under
these Funds shall rapidly scale up.
NABARD has reported that an amount of Rs.19.47 crore has been
sanctioned out of the corpus of Rs. 50 crore under Financial Inclusion Fund
(FIF) while under the Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF) an amount
of Rs. 21.83 crore has been sanctioned out of the corpus of Rs. 50 crore.
Further, NABARD has prepared a programme for expenditure under these
funds in the coming year which will take into account needs of Co-operative
Banks and RRBs. Also FM in the budget speech 2010-11 has announced that
the corpus of these funds would be augmented by Rs 100 crore for each
of these funds. NABARD has reported that there are many projects that can
be taken up under these funds in the coming years in view of the priority
given to financial inclusion effort by the Government.

29
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The present mechanism of deterrence through Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) did not seem to have the desired effect in
persuading banks to achieve targeted level of lending. Therefore, the
effectiveness of four similar funds (Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit
Fund, MSME Refinance Fund, MSME Risk Capital Fund and Rural Housing
Fund), is also doubtful. Further, through this system, direct credit to farmers
is being replaced by indirect credit, which is also not forthcoming due to
less demands from States for implementation of projects. Therefore, the
Committee felt that an alternate system/mechanism/process needed to be
formulated to enable the farmers to get the benefit of direct institutional credit.
The Committee were of the opinion that instead of a penal system the
Government /RBI could examine the system of incentives for banks who
had achieved the targeted disbursements to agriculture and weaker sections.
Reply of the Government
The overall target for agriculture lending is 18% of Adjusted Net Bank
Credit (ANBC). The achievement of Public Sector Banks for the last three
years in this regard are as under:
Financial year Total Agriculture advance in % of ANBC out
respect of public sector of the total target
banks (Rs. in crore) of 18%
2006-07 2,02,614 15.40
2007-08 2,49,397 17.50
2008-09 2,98,211 17.20
2009-10 3,70,730 17.28
It may be observed from the above table that the achievement of
agriculture lending target has been increased from 15.40% in the year
2006-07 to 17.28% in the year 2009-10. However, the public sector banks
are slightly lagging behind the overall agriculture credit target of 18% of
ANBC.
The shortfall in the agricultural lending / priority sector/ weaker sections
of scheduled commercial banks is being utilized by creating different funds

30
like Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), Short Term Cooperative
Rural Credit (STCRC) (Refinance) Fund, Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSME) Refinance Fund, Rural Housing Fund etc. The allocation
of these funds for the last two years is as under:
Amount allocated in the last two years
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the Fund 2008-09 2009-10
Rural Infrastructure Development 14,000 14,000
Fund (RIDF)
Bharat Nirman Programme 4,000 6,500
Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit 5,000 5,000
(STCRC) (Refinance) Fund 2009-10
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 4,000 4,000
(MSME) Refinance Fund, 2009-10
Rural Housing Fund, 2009-10 1,200 2,000
Total 28,200 31,500
Further, in order to ensure the banks comply with the agriculture credit
target, the Government of India has made agriculture lending as one of the
parameters for assessing the performance of the top management of Public
Sector Banks through the performance linked incentive indicators on which
the CMDs and EDs of the public sector banks are assessed. It is a new
initiative to incentivize the achievement of the agriculture lending target
2010-11. Thus, the Government and RBI have put in place a policy of
incentives and penalties to encourage the achievement of the agricultural
lending targets. Also the Finance Minister in his zonal reviews with CEOs
of Public Sector Banks and State Governments directed that the Kisan Credit
Cards (KCCs) be increased by 20% in number and 20% in amount in the
Financial Year 2010-11.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee were informed that Lead Banks had been assigned the
task of ensuring financial inclusion for villages having population of over 2000
by March, 2011, as recommended by the High Level Committee to review

31
the Lead bank Scheme. The Committee are of the view that in addition to
financial inclusion, the Lead Banks may also be given additional responsibility
to chalk out action plan for overall development of villages.
Reply of the Government
A High Level Committee to review the Lead Bank Scheme was
constituted by the Reserve Bank of India. The Committee in its report in
August, 2009, had inter alia  recommended the broadening the scope of
Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) to specifically cover financial inclusion. Further,
the Committee recommended that the Lead Bank Scheme is useful and needs
to continue. The overarching objective of the scheme is to enable banks and
State Governments to work together for inclusive growth. With a view to
improving the efficacy of the LBS, the RBI advised that the various fora under
the LBS need to be strengthened. More time of the SLBC/DCC machinery
may be utilized to discuss specific issues inhibiting and enabling financial
inclusion. At the District Consultative Committee (DCC) level,
sub committees as appropriate may be set up to work intensively on specific
issues and submit reports to the DCC for its consideration. Besides, the
Reserve Bank of India has directed the banks through its circulars dated
February 26, 2010, March 2, 2010 and July, 26, 2010 to implement the
recommendations of the High Level Committee. Some of the important areas
which are common to all the districts on which the Lead Banks should
invariably discuss in these meetings include:
(a) Monitoring mechanism to periodically assess and evaluate the
progress made in achieving the road map to provide banking
services within the time frame prescribed.
(b) Identification of unbanked/under banked areas for providing
banking services in a time bound manner with a view to achieve
100% financial inclusion
(c) The specific issues inhibiting and enabling IT enabled financial
inclusion
(d) Issues to facilitate ‘enablers’ and remove/minimise ‘impeders’ for
banking development for inclusive growth

32
(e) Monitoring initiatives for providing ‘Credit Plus’ activities by
banks and State Governments such as setting up of Credit
Counseling Centres and RSETI type Training Institutes for
providing skills and capacity building to manage businesses.
(f) Review of performance of banks under Annual Credit Plan
(ACP)
(g) Flow of credit to priority sector and weaker sections of the
society
(h) Assistance under Government sponsored schemes
(i) Grant of educational loans
(j) Progress under SHG - bank linkage
(k) SME financing and bottlenecks thereof, if any
(l) Timely submission of data by banks
(m) Review of relief measures (in case of natural calamities wherever
applicable)
The Monitoring Mechanism will further strengthen the action plan in
providing banking services within the timeframe.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note with concern the increase in net NPAs of banks
over the last three years. It is seen that public sector banks as a whole had
reported an increase in NPAs of around Rs. 10,000 crore during the period
March 2007 to December 2009, while in the corresponding period , net NPAs
of private sector banks had shown an increase of around Rs. 3000 crore,
with the actual position showing a trend of decline in March, 2009
vis-à-vis December, 2009. It seemed that while public sector banks had fallen
short of lowering their NPAs, their private sector counterparts had fared
better in this regard. Among public sector banks, 13 banks had shown rising
NPAs since March 2008, while as many as 6 banks had shown consistent
rise in net NPAs since March 2007. In contrast, new private banks had

33
reported higher NPAs as against their old counterparts. Also, 4 new private
banks had shown steady rise in NPAs since March, 2007. In view of the
above, the Committee did not find merit in the contention that NPAs had
risen only recently owing to extraordinary economic circumstances. The
Committee, therefore, desired to be apprised about the effectiveness of
measures taken by Government/Reserve Bank of India in arresting the growth
of NPAs. They also desired to be apprised on the role of DRTs in effecting
settlement of debt.
Reply of the Government
On the basis of information available with the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI), it is observed that Net Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) of Public Sector
Banks (PSBs) were Rs.15,892 crore and Rs.25,610 crore as on March 2007
and December 2009 respectively, the accretion being Rs. 9,718 crore. The
Net NPAs of Private Sector banks were Rs. 4,022 crore and 7,134 crore
for the similar period, the accretion being Rs. 3,112 crore. As regards the
gross advances, the gross advances of PSBs had increased from
Rs. 13,73,777 crore as on March, 2007 to Rs. 22,92,221 crore as on
December 2009 while that of private sector banks increased from
Rs. 3,91,869 crore to Rs. 5,41,147 crore.
‘While the actual amount of NPAs has increased in absolute terms both
in respect of PSBs and private sector banks, in percentage terms, however,
the Gross NPAs and Net NPAs of PSBs had fallen from 2.81 to 2.36 and
1.18 to 1.13 respectively during the aforesaid period. As regards the private
sector banks, while the percentage of Gross NPAs of old private sector banks
had fallen from 3.17 to 2.64, that of new private sector banks had in fact
increased from 2.10% to 3.39% during the period under reference. In so
far as the net NPAs are concerned, the net NPAs of new private sector
banks had increased from 1.06 to 1.49 while that of the old private sector
banks had marginally fallen from 0.97 to 0.96 during the period under
consideration.
It may thus be observed from the above that while in absolute
terms, the net NPAs of PSBs had increased during the period from
March 2007 to December 2009; they had actually declined in percentage
terms.

34
RBI has, over a period of time, provided the following menu of options
for facilitating expeditious recovery of NPA dues from the defaulting
borrowers:
A. Compromise/One Time Settlement
(i) Guidelines on One Time Settlement for small borrowal accounts
and eligibility for fresh loans - In order to offer small borrowers
an opportunity to settle their NPA accounts with banks and
become eligible for fresh finance, all scheduled banks
(including Regional Rural Banks and Local Area Banks) have been
advised to provide a simplified mechanism for one time settlement
of loans where the principal amount is equal to or less than
Rs. 25,000/- and which have become doubtful and loss assets
as on September 30, 2005.
(ii) Besides, Commercial banks can frame their own Board approved
policy for compromise settlement of the Non-Performing Assets
in terms of extant RBI Circular.
B. Steps relating to filing of suits
(i) Banks have been advised to review cases of loss assets
outstanding for more than two years and where legal action has
not been initiated.
(ii) In May 2001 banks were advised to examine all cases of wilful
default of Rs. 1 crore and above and file suits in such cases, if
not already done. Further, they were also advised to examine
whether in such cases of wilful defaults, there are instances of
cheating / fraud by the defaulting borrowers and if so, they should
also file criminal cases against those borrowers. In other cases
involving amounts below Rs. 1 crore, they were advised to take
appropriate action, including legal action, against the defaulting
borrowers.
C. Prudential guidelines on Restructuring of advances by banks
RBI has, at various points of time, prescribed various types of
restructuring guidelines applicable to different types of borrowers

35
viz. (i) Guidelines on restructuring of advances extended to
industrial units under the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR)
Mechanism, (ii) Guidelines on restructuring of advances
extended to Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) and
(iii) Guidelines on restructuring of all other advances. The
objective of the CDR framework is to ensure a timely and
transparent mechanism for restructuring of the corporate debts
of viable corporate entities affected by internal or external
factors, outside the purview of BIFR, DRT and other legal
proceedings, for the benefit of all concerned and is applicable only
to multiple-banking accounts/syndicates/consortium accounts
with outstanding exposure of Rs.10 crore and above with the
banks and financial institutions.
In order to align the principles governing restructuring of different
types of advances, a Working Group was constituted and based
on its recommendations and public comments, fresh guidelines
on the subject of restructuring superseding all the earlier guidelines
on the subject, have been issued on August 27, 2008.
D. Publication of list of big loan defaulters of banks
With effect from March 2003, dissemination of credit information
covering data supplied on suit-filed defaulters in the financial
system is being undertaken by Credit Information Bureau (India)
Ltd. (CIBIL). Accordingly, such data can now be accessed
on CIBIL’s website. Further, RBI had issued instructions to
banks/FIs to obtain the consent of all their borrowers (and not
only defaulters) for pooling of data for development of a
comprehensive credit information system. The credit information
helps as an ‘alert’ to the financing institutions before extending
fresh credit facilities.
E. Steps relating to Wilful Defaulters
(i) In order to prevent the access to the capital market by the wilful
defaulters, a copy of the list of wilful defaulters would henceforth
be forwarded by RBI to SEBI as well. It has been decided that

36
the banks and Financial Institutions (FIs) should initiate penal
measures against willful defaulters like:
• Non-grant of additional facilities to them;
• Debarring entrepreneurs/promoters of defaulting companies
from institutional finance for floating new ventures for a
period of 5 years etc.
(ii) Further, in case, any falsification of accounts on the part of the
borrowers is observed by the banks/FIs, they should lodge a
formal complaint against the auditors of the borrowers with the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), if it is
observed that the auditors were negligent or deficient in
conducting the audit to enable the ICAI to examine and fix
accountability of the auditors.
F. Guidelines on purchase/sale of Non-Performing Assets
In order to increase the options available to banks for resolving
their non-performing assets and to develop a healthy secondary
market for non-performing assets, where securitisation
companies and reconstruction companies are not involved,
guidelines have been issued to banks on purchase/sale of
non-performing Assets, in July 2005.
G . Other Steps
Banks have also been advised to:
(i) Formulate and implement Loan Policy and Loan Recovery
Policy with the approval of the Board of Directors.
(ii) Establish Recovery Cells at Head Office, fixing of recovery
targets for various levels and close monitoring of recovery
performance.
(iii) Review of NPA accounts of Rs.1 crore and above by Board
of Directors with special reference to fixing of staff
accountability and review of top 300 NPA accounts by
Management Committee of the Board.

37
(iv) Strengthen the risk management systems by putting in place
institutional framework for identifying, monitoring and
management of credit risk.
(v) Debar bank loan defaulters from holding any public
office.
H. Recovery of NPAs — Legal Mechanism
The three legal options also available to banks for resolution of
NPAs, viz., the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act,
2002, Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) and Lok Adalats, have led
to a steady increase in the adjudication and recovery of disputed
amounts.
The details of resolution of NPAs under the three legal
mechanisms are as follows:
Resolution of NPAs
(Cumulative as at end-March 2009)
(Amount in Rupees crore)
Resolution Number Amount Number Amount Number Amount
Mechanism
1 2 345 67
SARFAESI Notices Issued Recovery Compromise Proposals
3,41,756 68,127 2,10,641 19,396 79,277 11,249
DRTs Cases Filed Adjudicated Cases Recovery
81,173 1,30,508 49,033 65,585 N.A. 24,889
Lok Adalats Cases Filed Cases Decided Recovery
17,12,958 11,763 4,55,423 2,220 3,75,858 982
N.A.: Not Available.

38
Among the various channels of recovery available to banks for dealing with bad loans, the SARFAESI Act and the Debt
Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) have been the most effective in terms of amount recovered. During the years 2007-08 and 2008-
09, the amount recovered as percentage of amount involved was the highest under the DRTs, followed by SARFAESI Act.
The details are given in the table below:
NPAs Recovered by Scheduled Commercial Banks through Various Channels
(During the Year)
(Amount in Rs. crore)
Recovery Channel 2007-08 2008-09
No. of Amount Amount Col. (4) as No. of Amount Amount Col. (8) as
cases Involved Recovered % of Col. cases Involved Recovered % of Col.
Referred (3) Referred (7)
 1 2 3 456789
(i) Lok Adalats 1,86,535 2,142 176 8.2 5,48,308 4,023 96 2.4
(ii) DRTs 3,728 5,819 3,020 51.9 2,004 4,130 3,348 81.1
(iii) SARFAESI Act 83,942# 7,263 4,429 61.0 61,760 12,067 3,982 33.0
#: Number of notices issued.
Source: Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2009.

39
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee took serious note of the fact that capital expenditure
of the Central Government has declined over the last five years, with only
10 per cent of the total expenditure going towards creation of assets in the
year 2008-09. The reason for this declining trend in capital formation was
stated to be the change in classification of revenue and capital expenditure,
under which transfers to States for implementation of various schemes
through which assets were created, were shown as revenue expenditure in
accounts of the Central Government. However, in the absence of any
concrete mechanism to monitor as to the extent of these transfers actually
materialising in asset creation in States, the Committee were not ready to
accept the Ministry’s contention with regard to fall in capital expenditure of
Central Government. Regardless of the technical classification of expenditure,
the Committee therefore, expected the Government to ensure that the extent
of capital expenditure made, actually resulted in corresponding asset creation.
For this purpose, the Ministry of Finance must put in place an effective on-
line monitoring system to gauge the creation of assets, particularly in rural
development schemes.
Reply of the Government
The capital expenditure as percentage to total expenditure during the
last four years together with position in BE 2010-11 is given below:
(Rs. in crore)
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 RE BE
2009-10 2010-11
Total Expenditure 583387 712671 883956 1021547 1108749
Revenue 514609 594433 793798 906355 958724
Capital 68778 118238 90158 115192 150025
Capital expenditure 11.79% 16.59% 10.20% 11.28% 13.53%
% of total
expenditure
As may be seen from the table given above, the capital expenditure of
the Union Government in comparison with total expenditure is hovering
around 11.8% to 13.5% barring the years 2008-09 and 2009-10. The
implementation of the recommendation of 6th Central Pay Commission took
place in the years 2008-09 and 2009-10, which resulted in higher revenue

40
expenditure and as a corollary in percentage to total expenditure. However,
in absolute terms, as may be seen, the capital expenditure went up from
Rs.90,158 crore in 2008-09 to Rs.1,15,192 crore in 2009-10.
The other reason for depicting less percentage in capital expenditure
is due to inherent system of classification under which transfers of funds
to States for implementation of various schemes are shown as revenue
expenditure in the accounts of the Central Government. There was no
provision of disaggregating the grants-in-aid for Capital and Revenue.
Effective from 2009-10, Ministries/Departments were requested to
review the expenditure provisions especially relating to grants-in-aid and to
disaggregate the provisions appropriately into two distinct object heads, viz.
‘Grants-in-aid General’ and ‘Grants for creation of capital assets’,
consequent upon amendment of the existing object head ‘Grants-in-aid’ to
‘Grants-in-aid General’ and opening of a new object head ‘Grants for creation
of capital assets’. This exercise would facilitate identifying the transfers to
State and Union Territory Governments for implementation of various
schemes through which assets are created.
As regards the Committee’s recommendation for on-line monitoring
system to gauge the creation of assets, particularly in rural development
schemes, the Ministry has noted the importance and purposefulness of the
same. Instructions would be issued to respective Ministries implementing the
schemes to develop concrete mechanism to monitor and gauge the creation
of assets out of grants for creation of assets.
The Controller General of Accounts is also designing “Plan Accounting
& Public Financial Management System” to capture Ministry-wise/State-wise
Plan Schemes, on-line release of funds and expenditure thereof which may
help in monitoring the utilization of funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The disinvestment of Central Public Sector Enterprises has been revived
in the current year. In the year 2009-10, Initial Public Offers (IPOs)/Follow
on Public Offers (FPOs) had been made in case of five public sector
undertakings, thereby realizing Rs. 23552.97 crore. However, the policy of
the Government regarding utilisation of disinvestments proceeds was not very
transparent. On the one hand, the Government had stated in the Medium Term
Fiscal Policy Statement that these proceeds had helped in cutting down fiscal
deficit, while on the other hand, the Committee were informed that these
proceeds would be utilised for capital expenditure under the specified social
sector schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the
Government should clearly spell out the policy stance with regard to utilisation

41
of disinvestment proceeds. They also desired that they be apprised of the
details of the utilization of the amount of disinvestment proceeds realized so
far including the extent of expenditure incurred on reviving sick PSUs.
Reply of the Government
The National Investment Fund was constituted in November, 2005. The
objective of the National Investment Fund was that 75% of the annual income
of the fund will be used to finance selected social sector schemes and residual
25% to meet capital investment requirements of profitable and revivable
CPSEs in order to enlarge their capital base to finance expansion/
diversification. Since the corpus of the National Investment Fund was of a
permanent nature, income generated from the investments made out of the
National Investment Fund is alone available for meeting the objectives of NIF.
Subsequently, in view of the difficult economic situation caused by the
global slowdown of 2008-09 and severe drought conditions, the Government
decided on 5.11.2009 that disinvestments proceeds deposited in the National
Investment Fund from April, 2009 to March, 2012 will be utilized only for
capital expenditure on identified social sector schemes.
The disinvestment receipts to the tune of Rs. 1651 crore in
2007-08 and Rs. 163.45 crore in 2008-09 (arrears of 2007-08 transferred
in 2008-09) were placed at the disposal of Fund Managers for efficient and
professional management and receiving suitable returns therefrom. Since
the NIF was operationalised in 2007-08; no amount was transferred to it in
2005-06 & 2006-07.
The disinvestment receipts of Rs. 23, 552.97 crore in 2009-10 and BE
of Rs. 40,000 crore in 2010-11 are utilized towards meeting capital
expenditure on the following social sector schemes in accordance with the
decision taken by the Cabinet on 5.11.2009.
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the Scheme 2009-2010 BE 2010-2011
12 3
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 1462.97 4656.00
Programme (AIBP)
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran 3000.00 5000.00
Yojana (RGGVY)
Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) 5280.00 8448.00

42
12 3
National Rural Employment 11730.00 18768.00
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS)
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban 1922.00 3076.00
Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
Accelerated Power Development 158.00 520.00
and Reform Programme (APDRP)
Total 23552.97 40000.00
The income generated from the investments made out of National
Investment Fund is utilized towards Mid-day Meals Scheme in Schools
to the tune of Rs. 185.90 crore in RE 2009-10 and Rs. 125.88 crore in
BE 2010-11. The balance amount due for capital investment requirements
of profitable and revivable CPSEs is left in the Fund for deployment.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
Though the disinvestments of PSU shareholdings through IPOs/FPOs,
have been stated to be oversubscribed, details of the companies participating
in these offers have not been divulged. The Committee apprehended the
disinvestment programme, if carried out in the present manner, might have
to be bailed out by Government owned companies.
Reply of the Government
Insurance companies and public sector banks participate in the IPOs/
FPOs in a big way irrespective of whether they are from public sector or
private sector. Therefore, it cannot be concluded that Government Issues
are bailed out by Government Companies.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee were of the view that the disinvestments programme
should not become dependent on public financial institutions. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the Government should review their disinvest-
ment policy and make proper assessment of market conditions before
deciding to offload the shares so as to realise the true value of undertakings
in the larger interest of the nation.
Reply of the Government
Before launching the Public Offerings, all aspects including market
conditions are taken into consideration by the Government, in consultation
with the Advisors appointed for the transaction, to ensure best returns to
the Government and some benefits to the investors.

43
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS, WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

44
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee found that budgetary provisions for supporting
infrastructure projects through viability gap funding had always been on the
higher side, despite little actual utilization. The primary reasons for shortfall
in actual utilization was stated to be less demands by Sponsoring authorities
and larger number of ‘in-principle’ approvals granted by the Department of
Economic Affairs etc. The Committee were however surprised to note that
these shortcomings were going unnoticed despite review of PPP projects by
the Empowered Committee. Further, the receipt of negative grants in many
projects showed the inadequacies in actual commercial/market evaluation,
resulting in false assessment of the viability of the projects. Therefore, the
Committee were of the view that the Empowered Committee needed to
function more efficiently and adopt a more realistic approach, while assessing
the viability of a project, so as to arrive at correct and more realistic budget
estimates under this head to ensure greater efficiency in allocation of the
resources.
Reply by the Government
The Viability Gap Funding (VGF) scheme is an enabling scheme to make
the Public Private Partnership projects commercially viable. Viability Gap
funding is disbursed as equity support to the project. The quantum of VGF
to be disbursed is determined through competitive bid process. To safeguard
the public funds being invested in a PPP project, the funds are released, in
proportion to the disbursal of loan by the Leading Financial Institution after
financial closure of the project and after the private sector equity has been
completely expended on the project.
While the Budget Estimates are formulated based on the anticipated
requirement of the approved projects, actual utilization was influenced by a

45
number of factors during the period 2006 when the scheme was introduced,
to 2009, including :
(i) inexperience of the project sponsors in implementing PPP projects
and lack of familiarity with the Scheme, which led to delays in
completion of the bidding process;
(ii) projects receiving premium (negative grant)/revenue share where
VGF was not required when private sector was more optimistic
regarding return on investments during the period of high
economic growth; and
(iii) effect of global recession and slow down of Indian economy from
mid 2008 resulting in dampening of investor interest in projects,
prolonged bid process (as projects were rebid) and there were
delays in achieving financial closure.
In all the above cases, the budget provisions were reviewed and revised
at RE stage.
However, the Department undertakes regular review of the progress
of the projects while formulating the requirement of VGF and only after due
diligence/appraisal of project, approves VGF through the competent authority.
As the investor/developer perception of the macro-economic conditions and
expected revenue generation from the project also influences how a project
is evaluated by the market, it is difficult to precisely estimate the actual VGF
requirement before the completion of the bid process.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
It was a matter of serious concern for the Committee that the combined
debt burden of the Centre and State Governments had now reached
80 per cent of GDP. They founded that over the years, the debt burden of
the Central Government manifested a high level of 56.7 per cent as budgeted
for the year 2009-10, of which internal debt along with other internal liabilities
accounted for 54.4 per cent. This combined with States debt liabilities had
reached a level of 80 per cent, exceeding the outer limit of 75 per cent,
prescribed by the Twelfth Finance Commission. Thus, whatever achievement
on the level of fiscal deficit that had been made so far by the Centre and
States had been altogether negated by fiscal profligacy under-pinned by high
debt, which undoubtedly would be unsustainable in the future. More alarming
was the fact that around 36 per cent of the revenue of the Central Government

46
was being spent on servicing of debt. This, in the view of the Committee,
clearly indicated the inexorable path of debt trap towards which the country
might be heading for, nearly mortgaging the future generations to present-
day compulsions. Although, based on the projections of the Thirteen Finance
Commission, it might be possible to reverse this trend, however, the
Committee apprehended that this might not be achievable, in view of the large
proportion of revenue being expended for interest payment. The admission
by the Finance Secretary during the deposition before the Committee about
the difficulty to achieve the deficit targets as envisaged by the Finance
Commission was also not a very encouraging sign. The Committee, therefore,
desired that the Government should apprise them of the specific measures
being taken in pursuance of the recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance
Commission to contain the deficit while reducing the debt burden of the
Government, both for the Centre and States.
Reply of the Government
The total debt of the Central Government comprises the internal debt,
external debt and other liabilities. Under internal debt the major components
are market loans, treasury bills of various maturities, securities issued against
small savings etc. The external debt is the borrowing of the Government from
bilateral and multilateral organizations. The other liabilities comprise the
National Small Savings Fund, State Provident Funds and other Public
Accounts liabilities. The increase in the debt is primarily on account of
increased borrowings of the Government to Finance its developmental
expenditure. The total liabilities (Internal Debt, External Debt and other
Liabilities) of the Union Government have risen marginally to 57.0 per cent
of the GDP in the year 2009-10 (RE) after failing to 56.7 per cent in
2008-09 (Provisional) from a level of 61.6 per cent of the GDP in the year
2004-05.
Total debt of the Government during the period 2004-05 to 2010-11(BE)
as per cent of GDP is given below:
 Year end Internal Other External T otal
  March Debt liabilities Debt
    1 2 3 4 5
2004-05 39.4 20.3 1.9 61.6

47
    1 2 3 4 5
2005-06 37.5 20.9 2.5 61.0
2006-07 36.1 20.8 2.4 59.3
2007-08 36.5 18.5 2.3 57.3
2008-09 (provisional) 36.4 18.1 2.2 56.7
2009-10(RE) 37.9 16.8 2.3 57.0
2010-11(BE) 39.5 15.1 2.3 56.9
The 13th Finance Commission has assessed the finances of the
union and the states and specified a combined debt target of 68% to
be met by 2014-15. For the Centre it has recommended that revenue
deficit be eliminated and fiscal deficit be brought down to 3% of GDP
by 2013-14. The Government has accepted these recommendations in
principle.
A comparison of the fiscal targets given by the 13th Finance
Commission and those given in the FRBM statements are as follows
(all numbers are in percentage of GDP):
2010-11 Target for Target for
2011-12 2012-13
Fiscal Deficit 5.5 4.8 4.1
(as per FRBM)
Fiscal Deficit (as per 5.7 4.8 4.2
13th Finance Commission)
Total liabilities 51.1 50.0 48.2
(as per FRBM)
Total liabilities (as per 53.9 52.5 50.5
13th Finance Commission)
The Debt position reported in the FRBM Statements are prepared
after the following adjustments in the debt numbers reported in the Receipt
Budget: (i) NSSF loans to the States are excluded from the liability of the

48
Central Government to avoid double counting, and (ii) external loans are
calculated at current exchange rates (against the exchange rates at book value
in the Receipt Budget). With these adjustments the total debt – GDP ratio
in RE 2009-10 works out 51.5% and comes to 51.1% in BE 2010-11. The
FRBM statement projects the fiscal deficit for 2011-12 and 2012-13 at 4.8%
and 4.1% respectively. The corresponding numbers for the total debt - GDP
ratio are 50.0% (2011-12) and 48.2% (2012-13) respectively. A comparison
of the 13th Finance Commission and the Government’s targets for debt
for the next two years clearly shows that the Government is actually
targeting a level even lower than that recommended by the 13th Finance
Commission.
Interest payments as a percentage of Total Revenue Receipts over the
last six years has been as follows:
  Year Interest payments as a percentage
of Total Revenue Receipts
2004-05 41.5
2005-06 38.2
2006-07 34.6
2007-08 31.6
2008-09 (provisional) 35.6
2009-10 (RE) 38.0
2010-11 (BE) 36.4
It is true that Interest Payments have increased over the last two years
due to increased borrowings undertaken to finance the counter-cyclical
expansionary fiscal policy undertaken by the Government to combat the
economic slowdown. However, with the return to fiscal consolidation in the
current year, interest payments as a percentage of Total Revenue Receipts
is likely to come down to 36.4 percent in 2010-11 (BE) from a level of
38 percent in 2009-10 (RE).
The Government has embarked on a fiscal consolidation process in the
Budget 2010-11. The fiscal deficit of the Government has come down from

49
a level of 6.7% of GDP in RE 2009-10 to 5.5% in BE 2010-11. The total
debt is projected to come down slightly from 51.5% of GDP in RE
2009-10 to 51.1% in BE 2010-11. It has also been announced in the Budget
Speech that “the Government would target an explicit reduction in its
domestic public debt-GDP ratio”. As announced in the budget, a status paper
giving detailed analysis of the debt situation and a roadmap for curtailing
overall public debt will be brought out shortly. With all these measures and
an abiding commitment to fiscal consolidation, the Government is confident
of meeting the fiscal deficit and debt targets laid down by the 13th Finance
Commission.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Financial inclusion has received major policy focus in recent years. The
Government had taken various measures like relaxation in branch
authorization policy of RBI, increased use of banking correspondents/
facilitators (BCs/BFs), mobile banking, greater role of lead bank in promoting
financial inclusion, use of appropriate technology etc. However, these steps
notwithstanding, 375 districts and 99 blocks in the country continue to be
either under-banked or unbanked. While the Union Budget had announced
the issuing of additional licenses for private banks for extending geographic
coverage of banking services, it was not clear as to how the potential of
private players would be tapped to provide banking services in unbanked/
under-banked areas, particularly keeping in view their poor track-record in
this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommended that RBI should keep
this aspect in mind and give topmost priority to the issue of greater financial
inclusion and social banking while granting licenses to private players who
should be mandated to render the specified extent of banking services in rural
and semi-urban areas.
Reply of the Government
As on June 30, 2010, there are 88,363 offices of Scheduled Commercial
Banks (SCBs) in the country, out of which 32,603 (37%) bank offices are
in rural areas, 21,011 (24%) in semi-urban areas, 18,268 (20%) in urban areas
and 16,481 (19%) in metropolitan areas. The number of branches in semi-
urban and rural areas constitutes around 61% of the total number of branches
in the country.

50
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reported that average population
per bank branch for commercial banks is reducing as given below:
     As on Average population per bank branch
31st March 2008 14,649
31st March 2009 14,153
31st December 2009 13,639
31st March 2010 13,400
An under-banked district is a district where the Average Population Per
Branch Office (APPBO) is more than the national average. At present there
are 375 under-banked districts in the country. Presently, there 89 unbanked
blocks in the country out of which 80 unbanked blocks are in NE Region,
5 in the State of Jharkhand and 4 blocks in Jammu & Kashmir. Opening
of branches in these unbanked blocks is being followed up with the State
Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) Convenor Banks, RBI and State
Governments. The Department of Financial Services has also requested the
Home Ministry to take up the matter with the North Eastern States
Governments to provide premises in Government buildings preferably near
the local Police Stations. The State Governments have also been urged to
avail benefits under the RBI’s Viability Gap Funding Scheme for this purpose.
The scheme provides financial support to banks by the Reserve Bank for
setting up banking facilities viz., currency chests, extension of foreign
exchange and Government business facilities at “agreed” centres in the North-
Eastern Region, which are not found to be economically viable by banks was
formulated. This Scheme requires the State Governments to make available
necessary premises and other institutional support. The Reserve Bank of
India, as its contribution, would bear the one time capital cost and recurring
cost per annum for a limited period of five years as per the lowest bid offered
by the Bank.
Several other initiatives have also been taken by the Government of
India and RBI to extend the reach of banking to rural and semi-urban
areas:—
(a) Simplified branch authorisation — To facilitate the opening of
bank branches in rural areas and to address the issue of uneven

51
spread of bank branches RBI has relaxed its branch authorization
policy. Since December 2009, RBI has permitted domestic
scheduled commercial banks to freely open branches in Tier 3
to Tier 6 centres with population of less than 50,000 under general
permission, subject to reporting. In the North Eastern States and
Sikkim, domestic scheduled commercial banks can now open
branches in rural, semi-urban and urban centres without the need
to take permission from Reserve Bank in each case, subject to
reporting.
(b) Relaxed KYC norms —The Know Your Customer (KYC)
requirements for opening bank accounts have been relaxed since
August, 2005 and simplified for accounts with balances not
exceeding Rs. 50,000/- and aggregate credits in the accounts
not exceeding Rs. one lakh a year. Introduction by an account
holder who has been subjected to full KYC drill would suffice
for opening such accounts or the bank can take any evidence as
to the identity and address of the customer to the satisfaction of
the bank.
(c) No frills accounts —Reserve Bank of India, in November, 2005
advised all scheduled commercial banks to make available a basic
banking ‘no-frills’ account with ‘nil’ or very low minimum
balances that would make such accounts accessible to vast
sections of the population. RBI has reported that banks have
opened 3.92 crore such accounts as on March 31, 2010. Banks
have also been advised to provide small overdrafts in such
accounts.
(d) General Credit Cards—In December, 2005, banks were advised
to consider introduction of a General Purpose Credit Card (GCC)
facility up to Rs. 25,000/- at their rural and semi-urban branches.
The credit facility is in the nature of revolving credit entitling the
holder to withdraw up to the limit sanctioned. Based on
assessment of household cash flows, the limits are sanctioned
without insistence on security or purpose. Interest rate on the
facility is completely deregulated. As on March 31, 2010, public
sector banks had provided credit aggregating Rs. 575.38 crore
under the GCC scheme.

52
(e) Business Correspondents/Business Facilitators —Since Janu-
ary 2006, the Reserve Bank has permitted banks to utilise the
services of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), micro-
finance institutions (other than Non-Banking Financial Compa-
nies) and other civil society organisations as intermediaries in
providing financial and banking services through the use of
business facilitator and business correspondent (BC) models. The
BC model allows banks to do ‘cash in - cash out’ transactions
at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing
the last mile problem. From April 2010, the ambit of the BC model
has been widened to engage any individual as BC by banks. With
a view to ensuring the viability of the BC model, banks have been
permitted to collect reasonable service charges from the
customer, in a transparent manner under a Board-approved policy.
As on March 2010, banks have reported employing 2301 BCs
covering 53382 villages. Of this, public sector banks have
reported employing 2128 BCs, private sector banks 172 BCs and
foreign banks 1 BC.
(f) CBS in RRBs—Given the strategic positioning of Regional Rural
Banks (RRBs), the Reserve Bank has directed their sponsor banks
to speedily, and fully, implement Core Banking Solution (CBS) in
all RRBs and commit to firm timeline, by September 2011, by
which all RRBs will become fully CBS- compliant. This is
expected to give a further fillip to financial inclusion efforts given
the penetrative outreach of the RRBs in the rural areas. So far
more than 3000 branches have been rolled over to CBS.
(g) Scaling up IT—Banks had been urged in May, 2007 to scale up
IT initiatives for financial inclusion speedily while ensuring that
solutions are highly secure, amenable to audit, and follow widely-
accepted open standards to ensure eventual inter-operability
among the different systems.
(h) Mobile Banking—Mobile banking has potential for facilitating
financial inclusion. Mobile banking guidelines for banks were
issued in October 2008. Since December 2009, banks have been
permitted to offer this service to their customers subject to a daily
cap of Rs 50,000/- per customer for both funds transfer and
transactions involving purchase of goods/services.

53
(i) Special package for North Eastern States— To improve bank-
ing penetration in the North-East, the Reserve Bank asked the
State Governments in the region and banks to identify centres
where there is a need for setting up either full fledged branches or
those offering forex facilities, handling Government business or
for meeting currency requirements. It has also offered to fund the
capital and running costs for five years as per lowest bid offered
by banks, provided the State Government concerned is willing to
make available the premises and other infrastructural support.
Accordingly, bids were invited from public sector banks and
RRBs for opening of bank branches (general banking business) at
five centres and currency chest at three centres in Meghalaya
State, on a pilot basis and these have been allocated to three public
sector banks. In Tripura the bidding process has been initiated for
opening branches at five centres. The Reserve Bank is working
with other States like Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland
in the north-east to institute similar arrangements.
(j) FIF and FITF—Based on the recommendations of the “Commit-
tee on Financial Inclusion” set up by the Government of India
(GoI) under Dr. C. Rangarajan, two Funds, namely, the “Financial
Inclusion Fund (FIF)” for meeting the cost of developmental and
promotional interventions for ensuring financial inclusion, and the
“Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF)”, to meet the cost
of technology adoption has been set up at NABARD with an
overall corpus of Rs. 500 crore each. The corpus is shared by
GoI, RBI and NABARD in the ratio 40:40:20. As on 31 March,
2010, 20 projects with financial outlay of Rs 19.47 crore under
FIF and 27 projects with financial outlay of Rs 21.83 crore under
FITF have been sanctioned for BC/BF model to various Banks.
(k) Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling Centres —Each
SLBC convenor has been asked to set up a credit-counselling
centre in one district as a pilot, and extend it to all other districts
in due course. As on March 2010, banks have reported setting
up 135 credit counselling centres in various States of the country.
A model scheme on Financial Literacy and Credit Counselling
Centres (FLCCs) was formulated and communicated to all
scheduled commercial banks and RRBs with the advice to set up

54
the centres as distinct entities maintaining an arm’s length from
the bank so that the FLCC’s services are available to even other
bank’s customers in the district.
(l) SHG bank linkage programme —To give an impetus to
microfinance, the same was categorized under priority sector
lending and lending to SHGs was brought under the weaker
sections of the priority sector. Banks have been advised to provide
adequate incentives to their branches for financing the SHGs.
Roadmap for Financial Inclusion
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010-11 stated that in order
to reach the benefits of banking services to the ‘Aam Aadmi’, the Government
in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), has decided to provide
appropriate banking facilities to habitations having population in excess of
2000 (as per 2001 census) by March, 2012. These services will be provided
using the Business Correspondent and other models with appropriate
technology back up. The roadmaps for Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs) for
providing banking facilities in villages having population over 2000 have been
finalized by most banks/SLBCs by 31 March, 2010. These plans are being
reviewed by the RBI in detail with the Banks prior to operationalization. The
SLBC convenors have also been advised to up-load these financial inclusion
plans on their websites in order to facilitate monitoring of the progress by
the State Governments, RBI and Government of India.
The banks have also been advised to select their technologies for
branchless banking through the Business Correspondent (BC) model, procure
the required hardware/software, identify their business correspondents’ state-
wise and roll out their financial inclusion plans in a time bound manner. Banks
have been advised to make efforts to contact the State Governments and
ensure that all State Government Social Security benefits are also routed
through the banking system, such that financial inclusion becomes viable for
the banks and attractive for the villagers.
The number of habitations having a population of over 2000 (as per
the 2001 census) proposed to be covered under these financial inclusion
plans, as per the information received from the SLBC convenors banks is
approximately 72,300. All the above efforts are being monitored closely to
ensure that the reach of banking services can be extended rapidly to the
hinterland.

55
Opening New Bank Branches : RBI has recently invited suggestions
and comments, by (September 30, 2010), on the following aspects
delineated in the Discussion Paper regarding opening/licensing of new bank
branches:
1. Minimum capital requirements for new banks and promoters
contribution.
2. Minimum and maximum caps on promoter shareholding and other
shareholders.
3. Foreign shareholding in the new banks.
4. Whether industrial and business houses could be allowed to
promote banks.
5. Should Non-Banking Financial Companies be allowed conversion
into banks or to promote a bank.
6. Business model for the new banks.
RBI after receiving feedback, comments and suggestions on the
possible approaches discussed in this paper and detailed discussions with the
stakeholders, comprehensive guidelines for licensing of new banks would be
framed and applications invited for setting up new banks.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Considering the unavoidable link between the opening of Branches by
Commercial Banks in remote/un-banked areas and viability thereof, the
proposal of banking correspondents (BCs)/banking facilitators (BFs) model
with a view to bringing basic banking services, particularly collection of
deposits, delivery of remittances etc. to the doorsteps of a large population
residing in un-banked areas assumes significance. But entrusting implemen-
tation of the BC/BF model through totally untested medium like individual
grocery (kirana)/medical/fair price shop owners, PCO operators, Petrol
Pump Owners, Retired Teachers etc. seemed to be fraught with uncertainties.
On the other hand, banks, both in the public sector and in the private sector,
had evolved over decades a unique model of Pigmy/Tiny Deposit Collectors
who were well versed with the exact banking need of un-banked people
vis-à-vis the Banks, but their prospect of contributing to the cause of

56
“Financial Inclusion” was being neglected by Government. Keeping in view
the primary need of ensuring evolution of dependable and trustworthy BCs/
BFs model’s network and broad basing the concept of financial inclusion,
RBI should focus on gainfully utilizing the Pigmy/Tiny Depositors, especially
in view of their vast experience and proven trustworthiness. Further, the
Committee recommended the Government to make a study on effectiveness
of the BC/BF model in extending banking services to the unbanked areas and
rationale of levying charges on customers of banking services in these areas
and apprise them of the details thereof.
Reply of the Government
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010-11 stated that in order
to reach the benefits of banking services to the ‘Aam Aadmi’, the Government
in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), has decided to provide
appropriate banking facilities to habitations having population in excess of
2000 (as per 2001 census) by March, 2012. These services will be provided
using the Business Correspondent and other models with appropriate
technology back-up.
The number of habitations having a population of over 2000 (as per
the 2001 census) proposed to be covered under these FIPs, as per the
information received from the SLBC convenor banks is approximately
72,300. The Banks have already initiated action adopting various technologies
and models across the country.
Since January 2006, the Reserve Bank has permitted banks to utilise
the services of non-governmental organisations (NGOs), micro-finance
institutions (other than Non-Banking Financial Companies) and other civil
society organisations as intermediaries in providing financial and banking
services through the use of business facilitator and business correspondent
(BC) models. The BC model allows banks to do ‘cash in — cash out’
transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing
the last mile problem.
From April 2010, the ambit of the BC model has been widened to
engage any individual as BC by banks. With a view to ensuring the viability
of the BC model, banks have been permitted to collect reasonable service
charges from the customer, in a transparent manner under a Board-approved
policy.

57
The BC Model ensures a closer relationship between poor people and
the organized financial system. As on March 2010, banks have reported
employing 2301 BCs covering 53382 villages. Of this, public sector banks
have reported employing 2128 BCs, private sector banks 172 BCs and foreign
banks 1 BC. Further, in the Annual Policy of the Reserve Bank for the year
2010-11, it has been announced that any individual may be employed as BC
by banks, including Common Service Centres (CSCs), subject to bank’s
comfort level and their carrying out due diligence. RBI has since liberalized
the list of entities who could be appointed as BCs and permitted banks to
use the services of Non-Governmental Organizations, Micro Finance
Institutions, Retired Banks Employees, Ex-servicemen, Retried Govt.
Employees etc. in the category of BCs. The Banks have largely used services
of companies listed in Section 25 and other civil society organizations as
Business Correspondents in providing financial and banking services. These
companies may appoint their sub-agents to execute the job. If the model of
Pigmy/Tiny Deposit Collectors fit in any of these models, the banks are free
to utilize their services wherever these are found feasible/operable. Further
the banks have freedom to choose whatever model suits them according to
their need in fulfilment of the objective of providing banking services and
levy a suitable charge(s).
The Ministry of Finance has been urging State Governments to provide
the necessary support required for extending banking services to the rural
hinterland. State Governments have also been requested to route payments
of all Government schemes and programmes through banks. 9.00 crore
accounts including 4.18 crore Post Office accounts and 5.01 crore of Bank
accounts of MGNREGA wage earners have been opened. Disbursement of
wages amounting to Rs. 21,625 crore through these accounts i.e. 84% of
total disbursement of wages (F.Y. 2009-10). Further, in 2009-10 Rs.12,760
crore was disbursed as wages through 5.1 crore individual and joint bank
accounts.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee notice that performance of commercial banks had
remained pathetic with regard to agriculture and weaker sections lending as
required under RBI guidelines, wherein 18 per cent of Adjusted Net Bank
Credit (ANBC) was to be lent to agriculture and 10 per cent of ANBC was
to be extended for weaker sections. In the year 2009, only 14 public sector

58
and 8 private sector banks had been able to meet the agricultural lending
target. This showed that banks were getting away with lower disbursement
to agriculture with impunity. While the performance of pubic sector banks
in case of weaker sections had been relatively better, private sector banks
had shown very poor record. As per the information supplied by the Ministry,
only 16 public sector banks and 4 private sector banks could achieve the
desired percentage of lending last year.
Reply of the Government
The RBI guidelines on priority sector lending require domestic
commercial banks to lend 40 per cent of their Adjusted Net Bank Credit
(ANBC) with sub-targets for lending to agriculture (18 per cent) and weaker
sections (10 per cent). The target achieved by Public Sector Banks under
priority sector lending and agriculture sector lending (as on the last reporting
Friday of March) for the three years is as under:
Advances to the Priority Sectors by Public Sector Banks
(As on the last reporting Friday)
(Rs. in Crore)
Sector March March March
2007 2008 2009
I. Agriculture 2,02,614 2,49,397 2,98,211
Percentage (15.4) (17.5) (17.2)
II. Weaker Section 94,285 1,26,935 1,66,843
Percentage (7.2) (9.3) (9.62)
III. T otal priority sector 5,21,376 6,10,450 7,20,083
advances
Percentage (39.7) (44.7) (42.5)
IV . Net Bank Credit 13,13,840 13,64,268 16,93,437
Source: RBI (Figures in brackets are percentage achievement )
It may be seen that the performance of public sector banks has
improved. In the year 2006-07, the agriculture sector advances were 15.4%,

59
this was increased to 17.25% in the year 2008-09. Weaker Section advances
have been increased from 7.2% in the year 2006-07 to 9.62% in the year
2008-09. The overall priority sector advances increased from 39.7% in
2006-07 to 42.5% in 2008-09.
Advances to the Priority Sectors by Private Sector Banks as on the
last reporting Friday is as under:
(Rs. in Crore)
Sector March March March
2007 2008 2009
I. Agriculture 52,034 58,567 76,062
Percentage (12.7) (15.4) (15.9)
II. Weaker Section 5,229 7,228 15,844
Percentage (1.55) (2.10) (3.31)
III. T otal Priority sector 1,44,549 1,64,068 1,90,207
advances#
Percentage (42.9) (47.8) (46.8)
Source: RBI (Figures in brackets are percentage achievement)
It may be seen that the performance of private sector banks has also
improved. In the year 2006-07, the agriculture sector advances were 12.7%,
this has increased to 15.7% in the year 2008-09. Weaker Section advances
have been increased from 1.55% in the year 2006-07 to 3.31% in the year
2008-09. The overall priority sector advances increased from 42.9% in
2006-07 to 46.8% in 2008-09.
The shortfall in the agricultural lending/priority sector/weaker
sections of the scheduled commercial banks is being utilized for the benefit
of the rural areas and the weaker section through different funds like the
Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF); Short Term Cooperative
Rural Credit (STCRC) Refinance Fund; Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSME) Refinance Fund; Rural Housing Fund etc. The allocation made by

60
RBI from the lending shortfall to these funds for the last two years is as
under:
Amount allocated in the last two years
(Rs. in crore)
Name of the Fund 2008-09 2009-10
Rural Infrastructure Development 14,000 14,000
Fund (RIDF)
Bharat Nirman Programme 4,000 6,500
Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit 5,000 5,000
(STCRC) (Refinance) Fund 2009-10
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 4,000 4,000
(MSME) Refinance Fund, 2009-10
Rural Housing Fund, 2009-10 1,200 2,000
Total 28,200 31,500
The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) has been getting
allocations in the successive Union Budgets and NABARD has partnered with
various State Governments in the creation of rural infrastructure. Over the
years, the coverage under RIDF has been made more broad based in
each tranche and at present, a wide range of 31 sectors under RIDF XV
(2009-10) are being financed. The aggregate allocations under RIDF have
reached the level of Rs. 1,34,000 crore.
Further, a separate window under RIDF has been created for partly
funding the rural roads component of the Bharat Nirman Programme,
Pradham Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. So far, Rs. 18,500 crore has been
allocated from the shortfall of priority sector lending for this programme.
In view of above it may be observed that the shortfall in priority sector
lending by banks is being utilized by the Government of India for various
infrastructure projects and other developmental activities in the rural areas
and these funds are serving a very useful purpose for the rural and agricultural
economy.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 13 & 14)
The Committee found that huge amount of funds had been surrendered
by various Ministries/Departments year after year. For instance, as per the

61
figures furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure),
in the year 2008-09, a significant proportion of allotted funds had been
surrendered by Ministries/Departments like Planning (84.37%), Land
Resources (25.43%), Shipping (24.74%), New and Renewable Energy
(27.82%), Earth Sciences (26.41%), Housing and Poverty Alleviation
(21.31%), Atomic Energy (17.81%), Space (18.63%) and School Education
and Literacy (11.41%). Such large percentage of surrender of funds from
the budgetary allocations could only point to the fact that the concerned
Ministries/Departments did not have adequate capacity to utilize the allotted
funds, thereby leaving the programmes and schemes under their purview
incomplete and unattended. The Committee, therefore, desired that the
Government should focus on capacity-building of Ministries/Departments
mandated to incur large expenditure on development. There should also be
a deterrent mechanism to ensure that such large amount of funds were not
routinely surrendered every year. Further, the Committee also found that the
total amount surrendered in the years 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 were
Rs. 33111 crore, Rs. 31892 crore and Rs. 77271 crore respectively, which
further showed that even if the funds remained unutilised, the allocation of
funds were not reduced in the subsequent year. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that while making fresh allocations, the past amount of
surrendered funds should be kept in consideration and subsequent allocations
should be made only after assessing the progress made in the schemes/
programmes. Further, from the information made available to the Committee,
it was also not clear as to what extent these surrenders were due to economy
measures or due to non-implementation of the schemes/programmes. The
Committee, therefore, desired to be apprised about the percentage of
surrenders on account of savings/implementation of economy measures and
the percentage of surrenders due to non-utilisation of funds.
Reply by the Government
The expenditure position of Union Government in the year 2009-10 is
estimated as indicated below:
(Rs. in crore)
2009-10
Budget Estimate Revised Estimate
Non-Plan expenditure 695689 706371
Plan Expenditure 325149 315176
Total Expenditure 1020838 1021547

62
During the mid-year review of the budgetary allocation of all Ministries/
Departments at the time of finalization of Revised Estimates for the financial
year, the expenditure position of all Ministries/Departments is taken into
account. The budgetary allocations of those Ministries/Departments, which
have not kept pace upto September of the financial year, are scaled down
keeping in view of the absorptive capacity of the administrative Ministry/
Department concerned in the remaining part of the financial year. The savings
so effected are re-deployed to other Ministries/Departments where
additionalities are sought. The mid-year review is aimed at rational distribution
of scarce resources of Government. As a result, Ministries/Departments,
whose budgetary allocations are scaled down, are required to surrender the
savings identified to the Ministry of Finance.
The budgetary allocations of the following Ministries/Departments were
scaled down during 2009-10 consequent upon the mid-year review after
taking into account the pace of expenditure and the absorptive capacity of
the Ministry/Department concerned:
11. Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
12. Atomic Energy
13. Ministry of Coal
14. Department of Commerce
15. Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
16. Department of Posts
17. Department of Information Technology
18. Department of Consumer Affairs
19. Department of Food and Public Distribution
10. Ministry of Culture
11. Ministry of Earth Sciences
12. Ministry of Environment & Forests
13. Department of Economic Affairs
14. Department of Financial Services
15. Department of Expenditure

63
16. Ministry of Food Processing Industries
17. Department of Health & Family Welfare
18. Department of Heavy Industry
19. Department of Public Enterprises
20. Ministry of Home Affairs
21. Police
22. Other expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs
23. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
24. Department of School Education Literacy
25. Department of Higher Education
26. Ministry of Information & Broadcasting
27. Ministry of Labour & Employment
28. Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
29. Ministry of Mines
30. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
31. Ministry of Panchayati Raj
32. Ministry of Planning
33. Ministry of Power
34. Department of Rural Development
35. Department of Land Resources
36. Department of Drinking Water Supply
37. Department of Science & Technology
38. Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
39. Department of Bio-Technology
40. Department of Shipping
41. Department of Road Transport and Highways
42. Department of Space

64
43. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
44. Ministry of Steel
45. Ministry of Tourism
46. Ministry of Tribal Affairs
47. Lakshadweep
48. Ministry of Water Resources
Apart from the above, there are other reasons for surrender of savings.
One of the principal reasons is that re-distribution of savings available in one
section to another section of the Grant like from Capital to Revenue section
or vice-versa or from V oted to Charged section or vice-versa, which is done
through the approval of Parliament, result in surrender of savings technically.
Such savings are also taken as unspent provision, which is actually not the
position, since these funds are deployed elsewhere as per requirements.
As regards capacity-building of Ministries/Departments, Finance
Minister and Secretary, Department of Expenditure hold separate meetings
with Financial Advisers of all Ministries/Departments during the course of
the year, wherein the need to accelerate the expenditure is emphasized and
at the same time they are advised to exercise caution and avoid making
excessive projection in their budget proposals. The detailed guidelines relating
to the methodology of preparing the detailed budget estimates are also
enumerated elaborately in the General Financial Rules and in Budget Circular
issued annually. As regards percentage of surrenders on account of savings/
implementation of economy measures and the percentage of surrenders due
to non-utilization of funds, the surrenders effected through economy
measures are subsumed in the overall savings effected through mid-year
review and details of such savings through economy measures are not
maintained centrally.

65
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
IS STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
 N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
08 December , 2010 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

66
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 8th December, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Manicka Tagore
11. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
14. Shri Moinul Hassan
15. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
16. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
17. Shri Y .P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

67
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial
Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment);
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Planning;
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports with minor modifica-
tions. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present all the Reports
to Parliament in the current session.
The Committee adjourned at 1550 hours.

68
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, FINANCIAL SERVICES,
EXPENDITURE AND DISINVESTMENT)
(i) Total number of Recommendations
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have
been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 4,
5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17 and 18)
(iii) Recommendation/observation which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 7,
8, 9, 13 and 14)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited
18
11
Nil
7
Nil
Total
61.11
0.00
38.89
0.00
% of Total

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”