 1 
81 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Economic Affairs) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in                       
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on  „Inflation and Price Rise‟] 
 
 
EIGHTY FIRST REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


 2 
 
EIGHTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Department of Economic Affairs) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in                       
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on „Inflation and Price Rise‟] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


 3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………...... (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
 
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
 
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29 November, 2013................ 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
„Inflation and Price Rise‟………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
 
                                                 
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

 5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Eighty First Report on action taken by 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the 
Committee on „Inflation and Price Rise‟.  
 2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
17 December, 2009.  Updated replies indicating action taken on all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on    
15 February, 2013.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held 
on 29 November, 2013. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
29 November, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
08 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 

 6 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Sixth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance on the 
subject „Inflation and Price Rise‟, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 
December, 2009 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.  The Report contained 16 recommendations. Action taken notes have been 
received from the Government in respect of all the recommendations contained 
in the Report. These have been categorised as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 16 
(Total: 12) 
(Chapter II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
Nil 
(Total : Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5 and 14 
(Total: 4) 
(Chapter IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
  Nil    
(Total : Nil) 
 (Chapter V) 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies of the observations contained 
in Chapter I be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations. 

 7 
      A.                  Trend of Inflation  
 
Recommendation (Serial No 1) 
 Paragraph No:  10.19 
 
5. It was a matter of great concern for the Committee t hat annual inflation for 
food items, namely cereals, wheat, rice, sugar, pulses and vegetables etc. had 
soared to 19.05 percent in the week ended November 28, 2009, the highest in 
more than a decade.  Retail prices of certain items like sugar, pulses and 
potatoes had steeply increased by 50 to 100 percent within a short period of six 
months.  Prices of other essential food items like milk, egg, onions and even 
seasonal vegetables also considerably increased in tandem during that period.  
In that context, wh en one looked at the historic trend of prices and inflation in 
general, the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) measured inflation rate hovered 
around 4 to 6 percent during the years 2004 -05 to 2007 -08, while in the year 
2008-09, it increased upto 8.41 percent. Ho wever, the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI) measured inflation, which almost corresponded to the market situation, 
showed a constantly increasing trend from 2004 -05 to 2008 -09 with a marginal 
decrease in the year 2007 -08.  In fact, the CPIs for both industrial w orkers and 
rural labourers shot up to 9.10 percent and 10.19 percent respectively during the 
year 2008-09.  When we considered the commodity-wise weighted contribution in 
WPI inflation, the contribution of food items was as high as 135.6 percent during 
this year as compared to the previous year.  Most notable was the steep rise 
registered in the prices of wheat, pulses and sugar, with sugar showing highest 
gain in prices.  The Committee were alarmed that the prices of primary articles 
including food items m ore than doubled during the last one year.  Most 
households in the country would be aware of the situation without the statistical 
confirmation.  The Committee were constrained to point out that the statistical 
position enunciated above could only reflect one side of the depressing story of 
steady increase in the prices of essential commodities and food articles over a 
period of time.  The other side, which portrays the reality was the brunt borne by 
the common man, particularly the impoverished, as they fi nd their real incomes 
shrinking by the day.  What was more alarming about that situation was the 
impact that rising food prices would eventually have on the prices of 
manufactured articles, leading to a vicious inflationary spiral in the economy.  

 8 
The Mini stry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), which was 
responsible for formulating price policies and management of inflation at macro 
level, had obviously failed to intervene timely and squarely address that burning 
issue with due seriousness.  In su ch a dismal scenario, the Committee could not 
but urge the Government to overcome its inertia and come to grip with the reality 
of unabated rise in the prices of essential commodities.  The Committee would, 
therefore, strongly recommend that a comprehensiv e food pricing and 
management policy be formulated not only to provide much needed relief to the 
common man but also as an antidote for the growing economic imbalance in the 
country.   
 
6. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) have submitted as follows: 
      “Hon‟ble Finance Minister in the budget speech 2010 -11 has 
summarized the inflation situation as follows:  
“A major concern during the second half of 2009 -10 has been the 
emergence of double digit food inf lation. There was a momentum 
in food prices since the flare -up of global commodity prices 
preceding the financial crisis in 2008, but it was expected that the 
agriculture season beginning June 2009 would help in moderating 
the food inflation. However, the erratic monsoons and drought like 
conditions in large parts of the country reinforced the supply side 
bottlenecks in some of the essential commodities. This set in 
motion inflationary expectations. Since December 2009, there 
have been indications of these high food prices, together with the 
gradual hardening of the fuel product prices, getting transmitted to 
other non-food items as well. The inflation data for January seems 
to have confirmed this trend.” 
“Government is acutely conscious of this situation an d has set in 
motion steps, in consultation with the State Chief Ministers, which 
should bring down the inflation in the next few months and ensure 
that there is better management of food security in the country.”  
 As stated in the budget speech, a Confere nce of Chief Ministers 
was organized on 6 th February, 2010 at New Delhi to discuss issues 
relating to prices of essential commodities. The Conference was attended 
by Hon‟ble Prime Minister, Finance Minister, Minister for Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Dis tribution, members of the Cabinet Committee on 
Prices besides Chief Ministers/Food Ministers of States and Union 
Territories. After detailed deliberations, the Conference recommended 

 9 
constitution of a Standing Core Group of Chief Ministers and concerned 
Central Ministers to deliberate and recommend measures to:  
(i)  increase agricultural production and productivity (including 
long term policies for sustained agricultural growth) ; 
(ii)   reduce the gap between farm gate prices and retail prices;  
(iii)   better implementation of and amendment to Essential 
Commodities Act;  
(iv)  ensure better and effective delivery of essential 
commodities to the vulnerable section of society;  
(v)  augmentation of warehousing and storage capacity 
(including cold chain); and  
(vi) issues relating to inputs viz. seeds/fertilizers etc.    
The Government of India has constituted the Core Group on               
15th March, 2010. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has been 
designated as the nodal Department to service the Core Group. The “Core 
Group of Central Ministers and State Chief Ministers on Prices of 
Essential Commodities" in their meeting held on April 4th, 2010 under the 
Chairmanship of the Prime Minister constituted three Working Groups as 
follows : (i) Working G roup on Agriculture Production (ii) Working Group 
on Consumer Affairs (iii) Working Group on Food & Public Distribution. 
Working Group on Agriculture Production presented their report in 
December 2010. It proposes, inter alia, measures to improve yields, 
expand winter rice cultivation in Eastern India, electric power availability, 
water control, improved farming system, new varieties and hybrid seeds, 
seed replacement rate, fertilizer use, agri -business, private sector 
investment, marketing, insurance and o ther related areas. Working Group 
on Consumer Affairs presented its report in March 2011. It recommends 
measures, inter alia, to improve competition in Agriculture Produce 
Markets and Reforms on APMCs, develop single unified agricultural 
market, reduce mar ket barriers, improve seller information, better 
extensive services, improve infrastructure, such as irrigation technology 
and storage, improve spot and futures market, integrate ware housing and 
cold chain facilities, more agro -processing, extend priority  credit and 
others. 
      
7. The Ministry have further submitted that the Government has taken 
several measures to check inflation in food items, which include: 
 
1. Reduced import duties to zero -for wheat, onion, pulses, 
crude palmolein and to 7.5 per cent fo r refined vegetable & 
hydrogenated oils. 
2. Duty-free import of white/raw sugar was extended up to 
June 30, 2012; presently the import duty has been kept at 
10 per cent.  
3. Ban on export of onion was imposed for short period of 
time whenever required. Exports o f Onion were calibrated 
through the mechanism of Minimum Export Prices (MEP). 

 10 
4. Suspended Futures trading in rice, urad, tur, guar gum and 
guar seed. 
5. Banned export of edible oils (except coconut oil and forest 
based oil) and edible oils in blended consumer p acks upto 
5 kg with a capacity of 20,000 tons per annum and pulses 
(except Kabuli chana and organic pulses and lentils up to a 
maximum of 10,000 tonnes per annum). 
6. Imposed stock limits from time to time in the case of select 
essential commodities such as p ulses, edible oil, and 
edible oilseeds and in respect of paddy and rice upto 
30.11.2013. 
 
Further, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, an Inter 
Ministerial Group (IMG), chaired by the Chief Economic Adviser, Ministry 
of Finance, was constituted on  2 February 2011, to review the overall 
inflation situation with particular reference to primary food articles. Based 
upon deliberations in its meetings, the IMG has recommended two 
important policy changes that can have multiplier effect and large benefit s 
to manage inflation: reforms in the APMC Acts and foreign direct 
investment (FDI) in multi -brand retail. The IMG recommended that the 
APMC Act be revisited and secondly, the IMG recommended that 
leveraging FDI in multi -brand retail could be one of the me ans available 
for addressing issues relating to high rates of food inflation, low prices 
realized by Indian farmers, developing a 'farm-to-fork' retail supply system, 
and addressing the investment gaps related to post harvest infrastructure 
for agricultural produce.  
 As a result of these measures, the food inflation (weight 24.31 per 
cent) has declined from a peak of 20.22 per cent recorded in February 
2010 to 1.45 per cent in January 2012 before rising further to 10.39 per 
cent in December 2012”.  
 
 
8. The Committee in its original report had strongly recommended that 
a comprehensive food pricing and management policy be formulated by 
the Government to provide relief to the common man and foster economic 
growth with price stability in the Country.  The Gov ernment on its part 
constituted a core group of Central Ministers and State Chief Ministers on 
Prices of Essential commodities.  The Core Group further constituted three 
Working Groups on Agriculture Production, Consumer Affairs and Food & 
Public Distribut ion.   The Working Group on Agricultural Production has 
suggested measures to improve yields, expand winter rice cultivation in 
Eastern India, private sector investment, etc.  The Working Group on 
Consumer Affairs has recommended measures to improve Compet ition in 
Agriculture Produce Market and reform on APMCs, developing a single 

 11 
unified agricultural market, improve infrastructure such as irrigation 
technology and storage, improve Spot and Futures market, integrate 
warehousing and cold chain facilities, extend priority credit, etc.   
9. The Committee are constrained to observe that the measures 
initiated thus far fall short of a comprehensive food pricing and 
management policy as recommended by the Committee, even as food 
inflation as reflected by the CPI c ontinues to be in double -digit, which is 
further worsened by lingering “inflationary expectation”.  The existing 
system of food management which is run through a mechanism of 
Minimum Support Price for procurement of food grains and distribution 
through Public Distribution System (PDS) is beset with corruption and full 
of leakages.  It has therefore failed to provide relief to the common man 
from the unabated rise in the prices of essential commodities.  The 
Committee would thus reiterate that the Government  should formulate a 
comprehensive food management and pricing policy in coordination with 
States so that food inflation is effectively checked and price stability 
becomes a reality.  
             
B.                     Wholesale and Retail Price Indices  
 
Recommendation (Serial No 2) 
 Paragraph No:  10.20 
 
10. A significant issue related to the subject under examination was the 
relevance of indices as a barometer of the retail price situation, particularly that of 
essential food items.  As inflation in the country was measured by the Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI) with wider coverage but only 15 percent weightage for food, 
that could not truly reflect the increases in food prices.  The Consumer Price 
Index (CPI) with 46 percent to 69 percent weightage for food was thus a better 
indicator of food prices.  The country thus witnessed a phase recently, when 
inflation rate was reported negative, even as prices in the market, particularly 
those of essential food articles including fruits and vegetables, were soaring 
unchecked.  Even the CPIs with a higher weightage of food articles could not 
faithfully reflect the actual price situation in the retail market.  The Committee, 
therefore, believed that considering the momentum in the food prices, time was 

 12 
now ripe for a fo cused index exclusively for essential food items like rice, wheat, 
cereals, pulses, sugar, edible oils, vegetables etc., which could accurately reflect 
the prevailing price situation in these commodities.  Such a realistic index, which 
may be termed as „Fo od Price Index (FPI)‟, would also be more useful in the 
formulation of government policies and in the management of food economy of 
the country. 
11.     In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs) have submitted as follows: 
 
“The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) 
compiles and releases Wholesale Price Index (WPI) with 2004 -05 as the 
base year. DIPP has been disseminating detailed information on inflation 
month over month, build up from March and year-on-year basis for all 676 
items in the WPI basket with breakdown for three major groups viz. 
Primary Articles (Weight 20.12%), Fuel & Power (Weight 14.91%) and 
Manufactured Products (Weight 64.97%). DIPP in their monthly release of 
WPI data also indicate s inflation in food articles in Primary group (weight 
14.34%) and food products (weight 9.97%) in the Manufactured Group. 
The monthly WPI data, being regularly released by DIPP, with a 
composite food index (weight of 24.31%) captures a wide range of food 
items. 
 
 One of the groups of the CPI (Rural/Urban/Combined) series, which 
is released by the Central Statistics Office with effect from January 2011, 
is Food, beverages and tobacco. This group has a weight (percentage 
share in the total expenditure) of 59. 31% in CPI (Rural), 37.15% in CPI 
(Urban) and 49.71% in CPI (Combined). Group wise indices at State/ UT 
and also at all India levels are released every month. 
 
Under CPI -IW (released by Labour Bureau), the indices at 
disaggregated level are already available for six major groups and Food is 
one of them. The Food index which reflects the movement in prices of 
food items exclusively is being used in the formulation of government 
policies and in the management of food economy as desired by the 
Committee.”  
 
 
12.    While the emphasis of the Committee‟s recommendation has been on 
the creation of a focused Food Price Index, which could accurately reflect 
the prevailing retail price situation in essential food items like rice, wheat, 
cereals, pulses, sugar, edible oils, vegetables etc., the Government through 
its action taken notes have merely chosen to inform about the existing 
price indices and the weight of different food articles/products in these 

 13 
indices.  It is obvious from the action taken note that the Gove rnment have 
chosen to be evasive in regard to the pointed suggestion made by the 
Committee for formulation of dedicated food index, which would be useful 
in formulation of government policies and management of food economy of 
the Country.  The Committee wo uld therefore reiterate their earlier 
recommendation on the need for developing a Food Price Index, which 
would truly reflect the price movement in the market of essential food 
articles including fruits and vegetables. 
 
           C.                      Rationalisation of Price Indices 
 
Recommendation (Serial No 5) 
 Paragraph No:  10.23 
 
13.   At present, there were multiple agencies involved in the collection, 
compilation and release of various indices.  While the Consumer Price Indices 
(CPIs) for Industr ial Workers, Agricultural Labourers and Rural Labourers were 
compiled and released by the Labour Bureau in the Ministry of Labour, the fourth 
index, namely CPI for Urban Non -Manual Employees (CPI-UNME) was compiled 
and released by the Central Statistical O rganisation (CSO) in the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation.  The Wholesale Price Index (WPI), on 
the other hand, was compiled by the office of Economic Adviser in the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry.  With a view to rationalizing the co mpilation and release 
of the various indices, the Committee recommended that the Government should 
consider entrusting the job of coordinating and releasing of indices to a single 
nodal agency, preferably the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, which already had the professional expertise required for this 
purpose. 
 
14.   In their action taken reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs) have submitted as follows: 
 
  “In India the price index data collection has evolved to  meet the 
requirements of specific sections of the population. Historically, 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) data is collected, complied and released by 
Office of Economic Adviser, Ministry of Commerce & Industry. Consumer 
Price Indices (CPIs) for Industrial W orkers, Agricultural Labourers and 
Rural Labourers are compiled and released by Labour Bureau, Ministry 

 14 
of Labour & Employment and CPI for Urban Non -Manual Employees 
(CPI-UNME) was compiled and released by Central Statistics Office, 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation. However, CPI -
UNME was discontinued from January 2011. These organizations have 
developed necessary expertise in their respective fields and requisite 
systems are in place to ensure the correctness and reliability of price 
data being collected by these agencies.  
 However, in the light of the recommendations of the National 
Statistical Commission to develop all -India consumer price indices for 
rural and urban areas and at national level, the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Im plementation, Central Statistics Office, was tasked to 
formulate a national Consumer Price Index (CPI), and CPI for urban and 
CPI for rural areas as a prelude to formulating a national CPI. Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation, Central Stati stics Office has 
already introduced a new series of Consumer Price Indices (CPI) on 
base 2010=100 for all -India and States/UTs separately for rural, urban 
and combined with effect from January, 2011. CPI (Urban) covers 310 
towns while CPI (Rural) covers 11 81 villages in the country.  The 
weighting diagrams for the new CPI series have been derived on the 
basis of average monthly consumer expenditure of an urban/rural 
household obtained from the NSS 61st round Consumer Expenditure 
Survey data (2004-05).” 
 
 
15.    The Committee note from the action taken reply of the Government 
that three different Ministries are engaged in compiling five different types 
of Price Indices.  There are four sectional CPIs and one WPI.  The 
Committee note that the sectional CPIs do not take into account changes in 
the prices of goods and services consumed by the entire rural/urban 
population.  The Committee feel that there is disconnect between the brunt 
borne by the common man on account of steady increase in the prices of 
essential commodities and food articles over a period of time and the price 
levels indicated by the different price indices as released by multiple 
agencies of the Government.  The Committee would therefore reiterate that 
the existing multiple price indices should  be rationalized and released by a 
single nodal agency, which has professional expertise required for this 
purpose, preferably the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, so that a consolidated and a realistic picture of the 
economy is reflected.   

 15 
 
D.     Intervention Policy 
 
Recommendation (Serial No 14) 
 Paragraph No:  10.32 
 
 
16.    With a view to augmenting availability of essential commodities like rice, 
wheat, pulses and sugar, the Government had imposed restricted ban on export 
of these c ommodities.  Furthermore, import duties of many commodities had 
been either lowered or kept at zero.  Public Sector Undertakings were allowed to 
import pulses against part -reimbursement of losses and service charges upto 
31st March, 2010.  Import of raw su gar under Open General License (OGL) at 
zero duty by sugar mills has been extended upto 31 March, 2010.  Import of raw 
sugar has also been opened to private trade upto 31 st March, 2010 for being 
processed by domestic factories on job basis.  Public Sector agencies like 
MMTC, STC and NAFED were allowed to import 1 million tonnes of white sugar 
duty free under OGL upto 30th November, 2009.  Duty free import of white/refined 
sugar under OGL has also been opened to other Central/State Government 
agencies as als o to private trade.  The Committee are, however, astonished to 
find that the public sector agencies, required to import upto 1 million tonnes of 
white/refined sugar by 1 st August, 2009 under OGL at zero duty, could not fulfill 
their mandate.  Although STC was allowed to import 2.50 lakh tonnes of sugar at 
zero duty vide Customs Notification dated 17 th April, 2009, till end -July, 2009, 
they could import only 28,700 MT of sugar.  It was understood that NAFED, 
another public sector agency could not import any of the mandated quantity of 
sugar.  Even after the period of zero -duty import was extended vide Customs 
Notification dated 31st July, 2009, when the Scheme was opened to private trade, 
the public sector agencies could carry out imports (till 9 November, 20 09) only 
upto 1,99,000 MT of white/refined sugar, far below the mandated quantity of 1 
million MT, which should have been imported by 31 st July, 2009.  The Committee 
were dismayed to note that established public sector agencies with much 
expertise and vast  experience in international trade failed to fulfill their mandate 
with regard to import of sugar, particularly at a time when there was a bottle -neck 
in domestic sugar supplies and the retail prices had started rising sharply.  This 
inability to import on the part of the public sector agencies was also suggestive of 

 16 
the abject failure of the Government‟s market intervention policies to meet 
demand-supply gaps in essential commodities. The reason adduced by 
Department of Commerce that parity between interna tional and domestic prices 
did not give enough incentive to import for the market could only further 
strengthen the case that the market intervention by government agencies was 
weak, inappropriate and delayed.  During this time, a buffer stock could have 
been easily built by way of imports to meet rising domestic demand.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly believed that even if some loss had to be incurred 
by these agencies, the Government should have undertaken to bear this loss by 
way of a subsidy, so tha t the soaring sugar prices in the domestic market could 
have been promptly checked.  Bridging the price gap through subsidization as a 
possible policy measure was also endorsed by the Secretary, Department of 
Food & Public Distribution during her depositio n before the Committee.  
However, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, which 
was the nodal Ministry to take this crucial decision and issue necessary 
instructions to the concerned agencies, clearly failed to do their duty, thereb y 
allowing sugar prices to continue rising.  The Committee, while taking a serious 
view of the culpability of the nodal Ministry and concerned agencies in this 
matter, recommended an independent enquiry, covering the whole gamut of the 
issue and the decisi ons taken or not taken regarding the failure in carrying out 
import of sugar within the stipulated period.  The Committee should be apprised 
of the findings of the enquiry within a period of one month. 
17.   In their action taken reply the Ministry of Fina nce (Department of Economic 
Affairs) have submitted as follows: 
 
“Department of Food & Public Distribution, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food & Public Distribution has submitted that providing subsidy on import 
of sugar to lower domestic prices may discou rage sugar mill/merchant - 
export/exporter to contract import of sugar. Sugar subsidies are also 
factored in almost invariably in export price by exporting countries and 
may neutralize the benefits that may accrue to domestic consumers. 
Further, Department of Food & Public Distribution, Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution is of the view that since the decision of 
the Central Agencies /National Agricultural Marketing Federation of India 
Limited (NAFED) not to import sugar was based on the ir commercial 
consideration, there is no need to make separate enquiry in the matter.” 
 
 

 17 
18.   Noting with serious concern the consequences of the failure of the 
public sector agencies to import sugar within the stipulated period, the 
Committee had recomme nded an independent enquiry covering the whole 
gamut of issues.  The Ministry in their action taken note have simply stated 
that since the decision of the Central agencies not to import sugar was 
based on their commercial consideration, “there is no need t o make 
separate enquiry in the matter”.  The action taken note has further stated 
that any subsidization of sugar import by the Central Government would 
discourage the sugar mills/merchants to contract import of sugar.  
However, the Ministry seems to have conveniently ignored the fact that the 
decision not to import sugar by central/public sector agencies at a crucial 
juncture eventually led to a demand -supply mismatch of sugar in the 
market.  This further accentuated the shortage of sugar in the domestic 
market, leading to spiraling of price.  The Committee thus reiterate their 
view point that the Government failed to curb inflation and inflationary 
expectations in the economy on account of lack of appropriate intervention 
in the market.  The Committee woul d like to point out further that the PSUs 
also did little on their part to stabilize the price situation in the domestic 
market even during critical junctures.   
19. The Committee would therefore reiterate their recommendation for a 
through enquiry into th is matter so that those responsible for allowing 
sugar prices to spiral during the period in question and traders to make 
windfall gains are identified and brought to book.  In this context, the 
Committee would also urge the government to remain alert and foresee 
possibilities of shortages and supply constraints developing in the market 
and formulate their response with alacrity so that the consumer does not 
have to bear the brunt of price-spiral every time. 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
29 November, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
08 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on Finance.  
 

 18 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th November, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
8.  Adv. A. Sampath 
9. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
13.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
 
2.  XX  XX   XX   XX 
XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
                                          The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
 
 

 19 
Part II 
(1240 hrs. to 1320 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
  
3.  XX  XX   XX   XX 
XX  XX   XX   XX 
  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
Part III 
(1320 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
 
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption :-  
 
(i)  Draft Report on actio n taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 79 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on „Counterfeit Currency Notes in 
Circulation‟; 
 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 6th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on „Inflation and Price Rise‟; and  
 
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 71st Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
   
5.     The Committee adopted the above d raft reports without any modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament. 
    
 
6. The Committee decided to hold their next sitting on 5 th December, 2013 subject 
to other exigencies.   
 
          The Committee then adjourned. 

 20 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
‘INFLATION AND PRICE RISE’  
 
  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   16   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government  12  75.00 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,  
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 16) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect            
of which replies of the Government have   04  25.00 
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 5 and 14) 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL   0.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
 