 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in  
Thirty-Second Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Appraisal of BPL Criteria”] 
 
 
 
SEVENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013, Sravana, 1935 (Saka) 
72 


 
 
 
SEVENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in  
Thirty-Second Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Appraisal of BPL Criteria”] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 August, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2013, Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                            Page 
 
Composition of the Committee (ii) 
Introduction (iii) 
Chapter I. Report   1 
Chapter II. Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
18 
Chapter III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view o the Government‟s replies 
 
46 
Chapter IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
47 
Chapter V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply 
of the Government is still awaited 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. 
 
II. 
State-wise coverage under Aam Aadmi Bima Yojana (AABY) 
as on 31.10.2012  
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 17 and                  
24 May, 2013  
50 
 
 
51 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by t he Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on “Appraisal of BPL Criteria” 
   
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
  
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay* 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab   
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Vacant** 
17.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi    -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen   -  Committee Officer  
___________________________________________________ 
*       Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  13 th December, 2012 
**      Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao, MP ceased to be the Member of the C ommittee w.e.f 17.06.2013 consequent upon his 
induction to the Union Council of Ministers 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Seventy -Second Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in Thirty -Second 
Report of the Committee (15 th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Appraisal of BPL 
Criteria”. 
 2. The Thirty -second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to                       
Lok Sabha/laid in Raj ya Sabha on 18 March, 2011.  Updated replies indicating 
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished 
by the Government on 7 December, 2012. 
3. The Committee discussed the draft report at their sitting(s) held on                
17 May, 2013 and 24 May, 2013 and adopted the same at their sitting held on              
24  May, 2013. 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                          YASHWANT SINHA, 
25 July, 2013                                                                   Chairman, 
03 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
the Government on the rec ommendations/observations contained in their Thirty 
second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject „Appraisal of BPL Criteria‟ of the 
Ministry of Planning, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 March, 2011 and 
simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.   The Report contained 18 recommendations. Updated action taken notes have 
been received from the Government  on 7 December, 2012  in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised as follows: 
 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7,8, 9, 10, 11,12 ,13,15,16,17 & 18 
 
(Total: 17) 
(Chapter II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
 
Nil 
(Total : Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Recommendation No.  14 
(Total: 1) 
(Chapter IV) 
  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
  Nil    
(Total : Nil) 
 (Chapter V) 
 
 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies of the observations contained in 
Chapter I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
 

 
 
BPL Identification - Criteria 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1, 5, 6, 7 & 9) 
 
 
  5.    The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“Despite six decades of plann ing, a plethora of schemes and various 
measures initiated by successive governments, it remains a stark reality 
that large number of our people are forced to live in abject poverty.  It is 
disconcerting that we still have not yet arrived at a flawless and 
acceptable poverty estimation formula, which has predictably resulted in 
large variations of poverty estimates between the Planning 
Commission/Central government on the one hand and the States on the 
other, which again, may be at variance with the actual i ncidence of 
poverty.  Several States have questioned the inconsistency in the criteria 
determined by the Planning Commission and have termed it absurd, as it 
seeks to pre -determine state-wise poverty according to certain normative 
criteria super imposed on  the States.  Such mis -match and contradictions 
have inevitably resulted in wrong targeting of different welfare schemes 
and consequent failure to achieve the objectives envisaged.  In the year 
2008-09 alone, the actual expenditure incurred in respect of c entrally 
sponsored flagship schemes was to the tune of Rs. 126848.32 crore.  It is 
obvious that the huge amount of anti -poverty funds spent over the years 
have not yielded the desired and tangible results.  This obviously raises 
issues inter-alia about the  role, mandate and functioning of the Planning 
Commission and the efficacy of the planning process per se.   While not 
attempting a critique on the planning process as a whole at this point, the 
Committee would like to emphasise in this Report, the key con cern areas 
relating to estimation of poverty, targeting of poverty alleviation schemes 
and suggest ways to overcome the discrepancies, mis -match and 
distortions that have crept in the system over the years.”   
 
6.    The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply, stated as follows: 
 
“The various centrally sponsored schemes/ programmes have been in 
operation from time to time with the specific objectives. While it is 
acknowledged that the impact of implementation of these schemes may 
not have been up to the expectations, but certainly these schemes have 
brought a tangible impact in improving the standard of living of the people. 
For example, there has been a significant reduction in the headcount 
poverty ratio over the years irrespective of the methodo logy applied for 
estimation of poverty, increase in life expectancy, reduction in infant 
mortality rate, improvement in literacy rate, increased access to basic 
amenities, such as drinking water, sanitation and availability of increased 
benefits of socio-economic infrastructure in rural and urban areas. 
 
The Planning Commission undertakes the exercise of reviewing the 
implementation of various centrally sponsored schemes/ programmes 
especially before the commencement of a five -year plan. During this 

 
 
review exercise, the utility of the schemes is assessed for their 
continuation. As a part of the above review, the Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSS) are restructured/ modified on the basis of feedback 
received on their implementation. Accordingly, a Committee und er the 
Chairmanship of     Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, Member, Planning Commission 
was constituted to look into the issue of restructuring of CSS to enhance 
its flexibility, scale & efficiency and the report has already been submitted. 
Presently, the Twelfth Fiv e-Year Plan is being finalized and the 
recommendations of the B.K. Chaturvedi Committee will be taken note of. 
Therefore, it is a part of the planning process and policies are modified on 
a continuous basis keeping in view the changed situation in the country.    
 
Similarly, the methodology for estimation of poverty including the definition 
of poverty line has been reviewed from time to time based on the 
recommendations of the experts in the field of poverty. The methodologies 
based on the recommendations o f the Task Force, Lakadawala 
Committee and Tendulkar Committee are the examples. Now, a nother 
Expert Group has been set up in June 2012 to Review the Methodology 
for Measurement of Poverty under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan. 
Poverty itself is a dy namic concept, therefore, requires a review of 
methodology for its estimation from time to time.    There is also a need to 
have a uniform methodology for the purpose of having a time -series data 
on poverty in the country which serves as a barometer to ass ess the 
success and failure of the policy interventions. Therefore, the Planning 
Commission adopts a defined methodology to estimate the poverty; 
however, the problems in identification of BPL families are being 
addressed to in consultation with the expert s, States and other 
stakeholders through the exercise of Socio -Economic and Caste Census 
(SECC) 2011.  The census is a comprehensive exercise involving the 
Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, the Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner 
of India and the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations.” 
  
7. The Expert Group is required to submit its report in a year. 
 
8.    The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“With a view to ascertaining the ex tent of divergence in the BPL estimates 
drawn by the Planning Commission with those identified by the State 
Governments, the Committee requested the State Governments/UTs to 
furnish the total number of BPL population identified in the States/UTs in 
the last BPL census of 2002.  The Committee note with surprise that there 
is a wide divergence between the aggregate estimates made by the 
Planning commission and those submitted by the State Governments.  
The divergence is all the more glaring in respect of Stat es like Jammu & 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and 
Arunachal Pradesh.  The Committee are thus constrained to observe that 
the estimation of poverty and the consequential identification of BPL 
households which have been stated a s two separate exercises by the 

 
 
Planning Commission, do not seen to have worked in tandem at the 
ground level.  This has thus resulted in unacceptably high level of 
divergence in many States, thereby defeating the very purpose of 
estimation by the Planning Commission.  The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend that the Planning Commission should only confine itself to 
formulating the indicative criteria for determination of BPL population, 
while leaving the estimation and enumeration to a  better-equipped 
machinery.”  
 
9.    The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply, stated as follows: 
 
“The Hon'ble Committee in their report (page 31) analyzed the wide gap 
between the BPL population as identified by the States/ UTs based on 
BPL Census 2002, vis -à-vis, Planning Commission's poverty estimates. 
Column 2 of the table given at page 31 of the report indicates the total  
BPL population in the States which has been worked out by applying the 
poverty ratio of  1993 -94 to the projected population estimated b y the 
Registrar-General of India as on  1st March, 2000.   In fact, the figures in 
Column 2 in the table at page 31 of this report are not BPL persons, rather 
it is total number of BPL households. With a purpose to clarify the position, 
a table indicating the basis of calculating the BPL households in respect of 
selected States is given as under: 
 
It may be clarified that the number of BPL households as indicated in Col. 
7 of the above table has been arrived at by applying the poverty ratio 
1993-94 to the projected population of RGI as on 1 -3-2000.   These 
poverty estimates were worked out by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food & Public Distribution for the purpose of allocation of foodgrains to the 
States at BPL prices. As per the i nformation made available by the 
Ministry of Rural Development, the number of BPL households identified 
by the States in the rural areas is indicated in Col. 8 of the table.   It may 
be observed from the table that except the State of Bihar there does not 
seem to be much variation in the poverty figures as identified by the 
States from that of estimated BPL households.   It is pertinent to mention 
S. 
No. 
State Projected  
Population of   
RGI as on 1-3- 
2000 (in lakhs) 
Average 
House- 
hold 
Size 
Total  
House- 
hold 
(In lakhs) 
Poverty 
Ratio 
(1993-94) 
BPL 
House- 
hold 
(in 
 lakhs) 
BPL 
Household 
Identified 
By the States 
In Rural Areas 
BPL  
Population 
as mentioned 
in Report 
(In lakhs) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1. J&K 99.45 5.52 18.02 40.86 7.36 6.179 37.78 
2. H.P. 67.11 5.34 12.57 40.86 5.14 2.823 23.54 
3. Karnataka 520.91 5.52 94.37 33.16 31.29 19.190 98.41 
4. Rajasthan 535.59 6.04 88.67 27.41 24.31 17.362 21.21 
5. M.P. 548.22 6.65 97.03 42.52 41.25 40.842 68.89 
6. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
11.92 4.93 2.42 40.86 0.99 0.830 40.08 
7. Bihar 731.11 6.16 118.79 54.96 65.23 113.410 113.41 
8. Kerala 322.62 5.28 61.10 25.43 15.54  20.50 
9. Chhattisgarh 249.25 5.65 44.11 42.52 18.75 17.892 34.50 

 
 
here that Bihar has identified 113.41 lakh households as BPL as against 
the total 118.79 lakh households of the  State which means 95.4% of the 
State's population was living below the poverty line. This seems to be 
different from the ground reality, therefore, cannot be accepted. The State 
of Kerala did not finalise the list of BPL households on the basis of BPL 
Census 2002.  It seems that in the report the total BPL population 
identified by the States is compared with the estimated BPL households 
due to which the variations look very vast. Further, Arunachal Pradesh is 
reported to have identified 40.08 lakh populati on as BPL whereas its total 
population based on 2011 Census is just 13.82 lakhs. It seems there is 
some typographical error.”   
 
 
10.    The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee are given to understand that the Planning Commission 
uses the pover ty ratio of Assam (estimated at 19.73% in 2004 -05) for 
estimating poverty in seven States, namely, Sikkim (20.06% in 2004 -05), 
Arunachal Pradesh (17.60% in 2004-05), Meghalaya (18.52% in 2004-05), 
Mizoram (12.62% in 2004 -05), Manipur (17.34% in 2004 -05), N agaland 
(19.05% in 2004 -05) and Tripura (18.94% in 2004 -05).  According to the 
Member Secretary, Planning Commission, they have to rely on Assam 
data because the data for other States is either not available or the 
sample size of the NSSO is so small as to  be virtually unusable.  The 
Committee find such a situation unsatisfactory where accurate poverty 
estimates for North -eastern States are not available at all.  This raises 
serious questions about the adequacy and veracity of poverty related 
statistics in the country.  The Committee are astonished that loose 
estimation is being done without undertaking proper household survey.  
When the Ministry of Rural Development is conducting household survey, 
there does not appear to be any need on the part of Planning  Commission 
to go for mere estimates, resulting in wastage of resources.  In the opinion 
of the Committee, such duplication of exercise, added with the issues of 
divergence in approach and mis -match in determining the incidence of 
poverty and the poor hous eholds are problem areas that need to be 
addressed.  The Committee would thus recommend that a joint -
mechanism may be instituted for this purpose, comprising of all the 
concerned Central Departments viz., Planning Commission, Ministry of 
Rural Development,  Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, 
NSSO under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
Registrar General of Census under the Ministry of Home Affairs, Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) etc. , the concerned sta te 
Government Departments including the Panchayati Raj Institutions, for a 
joint and comprehensive poverty survey.  Since different wings of 
government cannot be allowed to function at cross -purposes and 
jeopardize the goal of poverty eradication, the prop osed survey in 2011 
should thus be undertaken on a joint basis. “ 
 

 
 
11.   In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Planning,  have stated as under: 
 
“It is true that the poverty ratio of Assam was applied to other North -
Eastern States also based on the methodology recommended by Expert 
Group headed by Prof. D.T. Lakadawala. But now the Planning 
Commission has already accepted the poverty estimates for 2004 -05 as 
computed by the Tendulkar Committee. The Tendulkar Committee   
estimated the poverty for all the North -Eastern States separately, 
therefore, the issue of applying the poverty ratio of Assam is not relevant 
now. Regarding the relevance of estimation of poverty by Planning 
Commission in the context of Ministry of Rural Development's household 
survey, it is submitted that there is no overlapping in this exercise.    The 
Ministry of Rural Development is conducting the survey for the purpose of 
identification of BPL families in the rural areas. This exercise does not give 
us the total number of   BPL pe rsons in the country because there is no 
definition of poverty in terms of proxy parameters being used in the 
survey, which would make the distinction between poor and non -poor. It is 
therefore, clarified that estimation of poverty and identification of BP L 
families are two separate exercises which are complimentary to each 
other. For the purpose of identification of BPL families, the role of 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) is defined as the BPL list is to be 
approved in the Gram Sabha. The methodology f or conducting the Socio -
Economic and Caste Census has been finalized in consultation with the 
stakeholders.  The census is a comprehensive exercise involving the 
Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, the Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, 
India and the State Governments and the Union Territory Administrations.” 
 
12.   The Committee recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that various Expert Groups/agencies have indicated 
different estimates of poverty based on different assumptions and context.  
The Expert Group headed by Prof. Tendulkar, which was constituted by 
the Planning Commission to review the methodology for poverty 
estimation, suggested moving away from anchoring the poverty lines t o 
the calorie intake norm and incorporating the changing consumption 
patterns of the people which would reflect more accurately their nutritional 
status.  On the basis of their proposed methodology, the all -India rural 
poverty head count ratio for 2004 -05 was estimated at 41.8%, urban 
poverty head count ratio at 25.7% and all India level at 37.2%.  The 
Ministry of Rural Development constituted an Expert Group in 2008 under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena to advise them on the suitable 
methodology for co nducting the BPL Census for the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan.  This Expert Group suggested that „the percentage of people entitled 
to BPL status should be drastically revised upwards to at least 50%, 
though the existing calorie norm of 2400 would warrant this f igure to be 
about 80%.  This Group also suggested identification of poor families 
according to „automatic exclusion and inclusion criteria‟.  The remaining 

 
 
households will be surveyed according to specified weightages.  The 
Economic Survey, 2008-09 had brought out that based on the calculations 
on data on household consumption expenditure for 2004 -05 (NSS 61 st 
round 2004 -05), the population with less than Rs. 20 per day per capita 
consumption expenditure was 60.5%.  the National commission for 
Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) under the Chairmanship 
of Late Shri Arjun Sengupta in their report on „conditions of work and 
promotion of livelihood in the Unorganised Sector‟ estimated that 77% of 
the population had a per capita daily consumption of upt o Rs. 20 in 2004 -
05, which could be considered as „poor and vulnerable‟.  The proposed 
Survey/Census to be conducted by the Ministry of Rural Development in 
2011 may further produce different results.  The Committee are 
confounded at such a wide variation in the estimates of poverty made by 
Expert Groups constituted by the Government based on different sets of 
criteria.  These facts only add credence to the emphasis placed by the 
Committee on the need for harmonizing the criteria for identifying and 
enumerating the poor through a joint mechanism of the concerned central, 
state and local agencies.”   
 
13.   The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply, stated as follows: 
 
“Officially, the Planning Commission is the only nodal Government agency 
entrusted with the responsibility of estimation of poverty. The poverty 
estimates recommended by the Tendulkar Committee for the year 2004 -
05 have been accepted as official poverty estimates. The number of BPL 
persons arrived at by other committees/ experts are based on different 
methodologies/ perceptions and may have been mentioned in a specific 
context. This position was explained to the committee in detailed written 
submissions.   However, for identification of BPL families, the State 
Governments and local ag encies have been involved in the exercise of 
SECC, 2011 which is being carried out under the guidelines of Ministry of 
Rural Development and Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation.” 
 
 
14. In response to observations of the Committee that the crite ria and 
estimates formulated by the Planning Commission have proved to be 
inadequate, unrealistic and thus eluded proper implementation at the State level,  
the Ministry of Planning, in their written reply, stated that  the Planning 
Commission estimates po verty at the national and State -level, separately for 
rural and urban areas from a large size sample survey of household consumption 
expenditure carried out the NSSO after every five years approximately.    These 
poverty estimates are worked out with refer ence to the State specific poverty 
lines defined in terms of monthly per capita consumption expenditure. The States 
undertake the exercise to identify the Below Poverty Line (BPL) households for 
which proxy parameters are used for household consumption exp enditure. The 
reason for using proxy parameters is that the collection of data on household 
consumption expenditure on census basis becomes a huge exercise which 

 
 
requires a large number of trained enumerators besides being a time -consuming 
process. Therefo re, for identification of BPL families, the indicators reflecting 
various types of deprivations and vulnerabilities are taken into account.  The 
Ministry further added that  the number of BPL families identified on the basis of 
proxy parameters used for co nsumption expenditure are not strictly comparable 
to the poverty estimates because poverty line is not defined in terms of these 
parameters and no common cut-off is imposed. 
 
15.   The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee are sanguine that the p overty ratio needs to be estimated 
objectively and realistically and the criteria therefore should stretch 
beyond the current norm which lays emphasis on calorific value and 
reflect faithfully the changing nutritional profile and living status of the 
masses.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the operational 
methodology for identification of the poor should be based inter -alia on 
collectible information covering aspects relating to access to primary 
health including the number of illnesses of household members in a period 
of about a month which would give an indicative account on the extent of 
economic burden of households owing to poor health outcomes; level of 
indebtedness which often leads households into destitution and the 
reasons therefore; owne rship and type of residence like kuccha, semi -
pukka and pukka; proportion of total household members to the total 
members engaged in economically productive occupation or are self 
employed; schooling status of children along with number of working 
children in a household; and proportion of dependent children and the 
elderly, which would indicate the extent of economic strain on a 
household.  Aspects relating to access to basic education, banking 
channels and micro credit should be suitably factored in opera tionalising 
the criteria for identification of the poor.  The criteria may also provide for 
automatic exclusion of specified categories like those (a) possessing 
irrigated land double that of district average, (b) possessing two/four wheel 
mechanized trans port vehicle, (c) income tax payees, (d) residence in a 
pucca house more than specified covered area, say 1,000 sq. ft (e) house-
holds with at least one person holding pensionable job etc.   Keeping in 
view such a broader approach, the Committee feel that there need not be 
any specific „automatic inclusion criteria‟.  In view of the Committee, it 
would thus be in order to have a more comprehensive and multi -
dimensional approach to determine poverty, which will also take into 
account dynamic aspects like sli pping back and forth across the poverty 
line as also issues relating to empowerment of masses.”   
 

 
 
16.   The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply, inter-alia, stated as 
follows: 
 
“The methodology to estimate poverty reviewed by the Expert Gro up 
headed by Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar recommended to move away from 
anchoring the  poverty line in calorie norm.  The extracts from the report 
are reproduced under: 
 
“……a conscious decision was taken by the Expert Group to move 
away from anchoring the PL in calorie norm as in the past  because 
(a) there is overwhelming evidence of downward shift in calorie 
Engel curves over time and (b) calorie consumption intake 
calculated by converting the consumed quantities in the last 30 
days as collected by NSS has n ot been found to be well correlated 
either over time or across States with the nutritional outcomes 
observed in other specialized nutrition outcome surveys such as 
the National Family Health Surveys (NFHS)." (pages 7-8) 
 
The report also mentions that:  
"Even while moving away from the calorie norms, the proposed 
poverty lines have been validated by checking the adequacy of 
actual private expenditure per capita near the poverty lines on food, 
education and health by comparing them with normative 
expenditures consistent with nutritional, educational and health 
outcomes. Actual private expenditures reported by households near 
the new poverty lines on these items were found to be adequate at 
the all-India level in both the rural and the urban areas and for most 
of the states. It may be noted that while the new poverty lines have 
been arrived at after assessing the adequacy of private household 
expenditure on education and health, the earlier calorie -anchored 
poverty lines did not explicitly account for these. The  proposed 
poverty lines are in that sense broader in scope.” (page 2/ para 5)   
 
Recently, the Planning Commission appointed an Expert Group in 
2012 „to Review the Methodology for Measurement of Poverty‟ under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan. The Terms of Reference of the 
Expert Group are: (i) to comprehensively review the existing 
methodology of estimation of poverty and examine whether the poverty 
line should be fixed solely in terms of a consumption basket or whether 
other criteria are also relevan t, and if so, whether the two can be 
effectively combined to evolve a basis for estimation of poverty in rural 
and urban areas; (ii) to examine the issue of divergence between 
consumption estimates based on the NSSO methodology and those 
emerging from the National Accounts aggregates; and to suggest a 
methodology for updating consumption poverty lines using the new 
consumer price indices launched by the CSO for rural and urban areas 
state-wise; (iii) to review alternative methods of estimation of poverty 

 
 
which may be in use in other countries, including their procedural 
aspects; and indicate whether on this basis, a particular method can be 
evolved for empirical estimation of poverty in India, including 
procedures for updating it over time and across states and (iv) to 
recommend how the estimates of poverty, as evolved above, should 
be linked to eligibility and entitlements for schemes and programmes 
under the Government of India. 
 
Besides, macro level estimation of poverty, the current SECC -2011 is 
gathering the information on a host of socio -economic indicators 
through a door -to-door enumeration of all the households in rural and 
urban areas of the country for actual identification of BPL households.  
 
From amongst the rural households, the SECC 2011 is gath ering the 
following information; for likely use as inclusion criteria, the data are 
collected on: (a) households without shelter, (b) destitutes/living on 
alms, (c) manual scavengers, (d) Primitive Tribal Groups, and (e) 
legally released bonded labourers. 
 
The deprivation of the households is assessed from the following 
deprivation indicators. (a) Households with only one room with kucha 
walls and kucha roof; (b) Households with no adult member between 
age 16 to 59; (c) Female headed households with no adul t male 
member between age 16 to 59; (d) Households with any disabled 
member and no able bodied adult member; (e) SC/ST households; (f) 
Households with no literate adult above 25 years; (g) Landless 
households deriving the major part of their income from ma nual casual 
labour; 
 
The data on the following indicators are being gathered for use as 
possible exclusion criteria: (a) Households owning Motorized 
Two/Three/Four Wheelers/Fishing boats (which require registration); 
(b) Households owning mechanized Three/ Four wheeler agricultural 
equipments such as tractors, harvesters etc; (c) Households having 
Kisan Credit Card with the credit limit of Rs.50,000 and above; (d) 
Households with any member as Government Employee: gazetted and 
non-gazetted employees of Centr e government, State government, 
Public Sector Undertakings, Government -aided autonomous bodies 
and local bodies. (This will exclude incentive and other honorarium 
based workers like ASHA, Anganwadi workers etc;) (e) Households 
with Enterprises registered w ith the Government for any purpose: any 
non agricultural enterprise registered with the Central or State 
Governments; (f) Households with any member in the family earning 
more than Rs. 10,000 p.m.; (g) Households paying income tax or 
professional tax; (h) Households with three or more rooms with pucca 
walls and pucca roof; (i) Households owning Refrigerator; (j) 
Households owning landline phones; (k) Households owning  2.5 acres 
or more irrigated land with at least one irrigation equipment such as 
diesel/ e lectric operated borewell/ tubewell; (l) 5 acres or more land 
irrigated for two or more crop seasons; (m) Households owning 7.5 

 
 
acres or more  land with at least one irrigation equipment such as 
diesel/ electric operated borewell / tubewell.  
 
Similarly for urban areas, the information through SECC 2011 is being 
collected on a number of parameters which includes occupation, status 
of wage earnings, caste, educational status, disability, chronic illness, 
type of house/material used, ownership of house, size of the house, 
access to amenities such as drinking water, sanitation and source of 
lighting besides ownership of assets such as refrigerator, 
telephone/mobile phones, computer/laptop with or without internet, 
motorized wheelers, air conditioners, washing machines, etc.  
 
The manner and method of utilizing this information for identification of 
beneficiaries for Government programmes have not been finalized.” 
 
17. The Committee had expressed serious concern over non -existence 
of a flawless and acceptable pov erty estimation formula resulting in failure 
to achieve objectives envisaged in different Welfare Schemes despite  
allocation of  huge amount s of anti -poverty funds  for them .  While 
acknowledging the fact that the impact of implementation of various 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes/programmes may not be upto the 
expectations, the Ministry have contended that these Schemes have 
brought a tangible impact in improving the standard of living of the people.   
The Committee, however, would like to emphasise that schemes must be 
well-designed and money allocated for them well -spent.  The Committee 
note that an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan 
has been set up in June, 2012 to review the methodology for measurement 
of poverty, whose terms of reference  also include linking the estimates of 
poverty proposed to be evolved to eligibility and entitlements for schemes 
and programmes under the Government of India.  The Expert Group is 
required to submit its report in a year. The Committee express their 
concern that constitution of one Expert Group after another may not 
resolve the problems.  The Committee hope that in arriving at the estimates 
of poverty  the ground realities  are reflected .  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Expert Group utilizes the data collected from the SECC-2011 
and accordingly formulate reliable criteria for identification of BPL 

 
 
population. The Committee  expect the Government to ensure that the 
Expert Group submits its report within the stipulated period.   
 
18. The Committee had a lso expressed serious concern over wide 
variation in the estimates of poverty made by Expert Groups constituted by 
the Government based on different sets of criteria. The Committee note 
that while the Planning Commission is the only nodal government agency  
entrusted with the responsibility of estimation of poverty, the Ministry  of 
Rural Development  and the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty 
Alleviation are the nodal agencies responsible for identification of BPL 
families in rural and urban areas  respectively.  The Committee have been 
informed that the estimation of poverty and identification of BPL families 
are two separate exercises which are complimentary to each other.   The 
Committee have also been informed that the problems in identification of 
BPL fam ilies are being addressed to in consultation with the experts, 
States and other stakeholders through the exercise of Socio -Economic and 
Caste Census (SECC) 2011.  The census is a comprehensive exercise 
involving the Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Office of the Registrar General and Census 
Commissioner of India a nd the State Governments/ Union Territory 
Administrations.  The Committee had, however, recommended setting up 
of a joint -mechanism comprising al l the concerned Central/State 
Government Departments including Planning Commission for a joint and 
comprehensive poverty survey. The Committee strongly feel that mere 
involvement of concerned Departments will not yield the desired results  
and the joint mec hanism as recommended by the Committee would serve 
the purpose better .  The Committee fail to understand why Planning 
Commission is not even involved in the exercise.   The Committee observe 
that the perpetual problem in arriving at estimates of poverty and  
identification of BPL families is only because of different parameters being 
adopted by the Planning Commission for estimation and the line Ministries 
i.e. the Ministry of Rural Development and the Ministry of  Housing & Urban 

 
 
Poverty A lleviation for enum eration.  The Planning Commission have 
admitted that the number of BPL families identified on the basis of proxy 
parameters used for consumption expenditure are not strictly comparable 
to the poverty estimates because poverty line is not defined in terms o f 
these parameters and no common cut -off is imposed.  The Committee are 
of the considered view that Planning Commission,  being the apex body 
entrusted with the responsibility of allocation of resources for various anti -
poverty schemes , should take a lead role and work in close coordination 
with the Ministry of Rural Development/ Ministry of Housing & Urban 
Poverty Alleviation to ensure accurate enumeration of poverty in the 
country.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation for 
setting up of a joint mechanism comprising all the concerned Central/State 
Government Departments under the overall supervision of Planning 
Commission for a joint a nd comprehensive poverty survey w ith a view to 
ensuring accurate enumeration of poverty and obviating over estimation by 
some States for garnering  more resources.   This will ensure even 
distribution of central funds available for the States.  
 In this regard, the Committee would like to emphasise that 
identification of BPL families at the ground level should  invariably be done 
and video graphed  by the Gram Sabha in every State, which should be 
checked by a Government agency of the State with a provision of random 
cross-check of say 10% by an independent agency from outside the State.  
 
19. The Committee had e xpressed surprise that there was a wide 
divergence between the aggregate BPL estimates made by Planning 
Commission and those submitted by State Governments.  The Committee 
felt that there was no need on the part of Planning Commission to rely on 
loose estimation when the Ministry of Rural Development was conducting 
household surveys, terming it as wastage of resources and duplication of 
exercise.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended that Planning 
Commission should only confine itself to formulating th e indicative criteria 
for determination of BPL population , while leaving the estimation and 
enumeration to a  better equipped machinery.  The Committee are 

 
 
constrained to note that the Ministry has not taken any tangible measure to 
implement the same. The C ommittee note that though the criteria for 
determination of poverty is yet to be fixed by  the E xpert Group under 
Chairmanship of  Dr. C. Rangarajan, Socio - Economic and  Caste 
Census(SECC 2011) has already started.  It would have been better if the 
exercise of SECC 2011 was undertaken after finalization of the criteria by 
the Expert Group so that Planning Commission is able to arrive at 
authentic picture of poverty instead of mere estimates.  The Committee 
regret to note that the Ministry is treading on the  same path, which in the 
past produced results indicating glaring mismatch in poverty figures.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that Planning Commission should confine 
itself to formulating the indicative criteria for determination of BPL  
population, while leaving the estimation and enumeration of poverty to a 
joint mechanism to be taken up subsequently.    
 
20. The Committee also note that for the identification of BPL 
households, Socio-Economic and Caste Census (SECC) 2011 is gathering 
information fro m rural/urban areas on a variety of socio -economic 
parameters including occupation; income; education; type and ownership 
of house; income tax/professional tax payees; ownership of assets such as 
two/three/four wheeler (which require registration)/refriger ator/washing 
machine/air-conditioners/ telephone/mobile phone/computer/laptop etc. 
The Committee are happy to note that most of the parameters 
recommended by it have been included .  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the present status of SECC – 2011 and the time frame by which 
the exercise is proposed to be completed. The Committee would also like 
to emphasize that t he manner and method of utilizing information for 
identification of beneficiaries for Government programmes be finalized at 
the earliest.  An action taken reply in this regard may be submitted to the 
Committee within a period of three months from the date of presentation of 
the Report.     
 

 
 
Streamlining and restructuring/re-organisation of                                          
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
21.    The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee would like to avail this opportunity to extend the discourse 
and suggest that the plethora of schemes and programmes obtaining now 
should be streamlined and rationalized to manageable proportions.  There 
is no reason why there should be a scheme seeking to touch every aspect 
of human or livestock life.  Such proliferation of schemes eventually leads 
to slipping of „plan‟ expenditure to „n on-plan‟ segment, thereby slowing 
down the process of creation of capital infrastructure or durable assets in 
rural areas.  The Committee suggest that the Central Government 
Schemes should focus on areas such as (i) rural road (ii) drinking water 
(iii) ele ctricity (iv)  irrigation (v)  housing (vi) employment (vii)  health         
(viii) education (ix) agriculture and (x) small and cottage industries.  It is 
also necessary that the variety of schemes should be harmonized and 
integrated within the ambit of a re gion-specific plan.  This approach thus 
requires that very detailed or schematic programmes should not be super -
imposed on the States and levels below.  Such a decentralized yet holistic 
approach will also ensure better utilization of earmarked funds under  the 
centrally sponsored programmes.  In this context, the Committee would 
also recommend multi -disciplinary monitoring of schemes simultaneously 
with their implementation as well as post-facto.”  
 
22.    The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply,  stated as follows: 
 
 “The Ministry of Rural Development has been implementing several rural 
development programmes such as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY) for all weather rural roads, IAY for housing for rural poor, 
MGNREGA for supplementary wage employment and NRLM for 
enhancement of livelihood opportunities for rural poor. The Ministry places 
special emphasis on monitoring of its programmes with a view that these 
are implemented effectively and the benefit reach to the targeted groups 
of the  society. The monitoring tools are (a) Periodical Progress Reports 
and web -based Management Information System (MIS), Performance 
Review Committee (PRC), Area Officer‟s Scheme, Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committee at the State/District Level, National Level Monitors 
(NLM) and National Quality Monitors (NQM). The Ministry evaluates its 
programmes, both post-facto and concurrently. The main objectives of the 
Evaluation Studies are to evaluate the performance of the schemes at the 
field level, and to assess the impact of the programmes and to identify the 
problems in course of implementation so as to make mid -course 
corrections, wherever necessary. 
 
Similarly for urban areas, revamped SJSRY guidelines specifically point 
the need for convergence in the delivery of  various programmes at the 

 
 
ULB level such as JNNURM, Rajiv Awas Yojana, Prime Minister's 
Employment Generation Programme, Aam Aadami Bima yojana, 
Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, Health Mission, Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan, 
Mid Day Meals Scheme, Integrated Child D evelopment Scheme, National 
Social assistance Programme, Skill Development Initiative etc. To ensure 
quality and effective delivery of services to the target groups, Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation has placed monitoring systems for its 
schemes. Apart from institutional monitoring machinery at various levels, 
Third Party Inspection & Monitoring (TPIM), social audit and concurrent 
evaluation of the schemes are being done to plug the loopholes in the 
implementation of the schemes. Ministry of H ousing & Urban Poverty 
Alleviation has initiated the process of evaluation study of performance of 
SJSRY Scheme during the 11 th Plan for the country as a whole in the 
context of continuation of the Scheme in the 12th Five Year Plan.” 
 
  
 23. In the context  of the restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the 
12th Plan document inter alia mentions as under : 
 
 
“In view of the scarcity of resources, it is essential to take bold steps to 
improve the efficiency of public expenditure through plan programmes.  To 
this end the Planning Commission had established a Committee under 
Member, B. K. Chaturvedi to make recommendations for rationalisation 
and to increase efficiency of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) and 
for improving their efficiency. There has been a proliferation of CSS over 
the years, many of which are quite small. The Chaturvedi Committee had 
recommended that the number of CSSs should be drastically reduced and 
the guidelines under which the schemes are implemented should be made 
much more flexibl e. The recommendations have been discussed with the 
Ministries and the States and have generally been welcomed. It is 
proposed to implement these recommendations with effect from 2013–14”. 
 
24 The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2013 -14 has also inter alia 
mentioned that Government is concerned about the proliferation of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) and Additional Central Assistance (ACA) Schemes.  
They were 173 in number at the end of the 11 th Plan.  The schemes will be 
restructured into 70 Sch emes and each scheme will be reviewed once in two 
years.    
 
25.  While the emphasis made in the Committee’s recommendation had 
been to streamline and rationalize various Centrally Sponsored Schemes  
(CSSs) to manageable proportions with a view to ensuring better utilization 
of funds earmarked, the reply of the Ministry in this regard is evasive and, 

 
 
therefore,  not acceptable. The Committee, however, note from the Budget 
Speech 2013 -14 of the Finance Minister  that 173 CSSs at the end of 11 th 
Plan will now b e restructured into 70 Schemes and each Scheme will be 
reviewed once in two years.  The Committee in their 69 th Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) have felt that further streamlining, restructuring and rationalizing 
the number of CSSs will only enhance their producti veness. The 
Committee have also emphasized that while reviewing the Schemes, an 
element of accountability be built in the mechanism . In this context, the 
Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation made in 
their 69 th Report. The Committe e also feel that frequent restructuring/re-
organisation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes would not be necessitated, if 
these Schemes are conceived empirically during the initial stage itself with 
focus primarily on a few major schemes.    
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Despite six decades of planning, a plethora of schemes and various 
measures initiated by successive governments, it remains a stark reality that 
large number of our people are forced to live in abject poverty.  It is disconcerting 
that we still have not yet arrived at a flawless and acceptable poverty estimation 
formula, which was predictably resulted in large variations of poverty estimates 
between the Planning Commission/Central government on the one hand and the 
States on the other, which again, may be at variance with the actual incidence of 
poverty.  Several States have questioned the inconsistency in the criteria 
determined by the Planning Commission and hav e termed it absurd, as it seeks 
to pre-determine state-wise poverty according to certain normative criteria super 
imposed on the States.  Such mis -match and contradictions have inevitably 
resulted in wrong targeting of different welfare schemes and consequ ent failure 
to achieve the objectives envisaged.  In the year 2008 -09 alone, the actual 
expenditure incurred in respect of centrally sponsored flagship schemes was to 
the tune of Rs. 126848.32 crore.  It is obvious that the huge amount of anti -
poverty fund s spent over the years have not yielded the desired and tangible 
results.  This obviously raises issues inter -alia about the role, mandate and 
functioning of the Planning  Commission and the efficacy of the planning process 
per se.   While not attempting a critique on the planning process as a whole at 
this point, the Committee would like to emphasise in this Report, the key concern 
areas relating to estimation of poverty, targeting of poverty alleviation schemes 
and suggest ways to overcome the discrepancie s, mis-match and distortions that 
have crept in the system over the years.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The various centrally sponsored schemes/ programmes have been in 
operation from time to time with the specific objectives. While it is acknowledged 

 
 
that the impact of implementation of these schemes may not have been upto the 
expectations, but certainly these schemes have brought a tangible impact in 
improving the standard of living of the people. For example, there has been a 
significant reduction in the headcount poverty ratio over the years irrespective of 
the methodology applied for estimation of poverty, increase in life expectancy, 
reduction in infant mortality rate, improvement in literacy rate, increased access 
to basic amenities, such as drinking water, sanitation and availability of increased 
benefits of socio-economic infrastructure in rural and urban areas. 
 
 The Planning Commission undertakes the exercise of reviewing the 
implementation of   various centrally sponsored schemes/ programmes especially 
before the commencement of a five -year plan. During this review exercise, the 
utility of the schemes is assessed for their continuation. As a part of the above 
review, the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) are restructured/ modified on 
the basis of fe edback received on their implementation. Accordingly, a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri B.K. Chaturvedi, Member, Planning 
Commission was constituted to look into the issue of restructuring of CSS to 
enhance its flexibility, scale & efficiency and the report has already been 
submitted. Presently, the Twelfth Five -Year Plan is being finalized and the 
recommendations of the B.K. Chaturvedi Committee will be taken note of. 
Therefore, it is a part of the planning process and policies are modified on a 
continuous basis keeping in view the changed situation in the country.    
 
 Similarly, the methodology for estimation of poverty including the definition 
of poverty line has been reviewed from time to time based on the 
recommendations of the experts in the field of poverty. The methodologies based 
on the recommendations of the Task Force, Lakadawala Committee and 
Tendulkar Committee are the examples. Now, a nother Expert Group has been 
set up in June 2012 to Review the Methodology for Measurement of Poverty 
under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan.  Poverty itself is a dynamic 
concept, therefore, requires a review of methodology for its estimation from time 
to time.    There is also a need to have a uniform methodology for the purpose of 

 
 
having a time-series data on poverty in the country which serves as a barometer 
to assess the success and failure of the policy interventions. Therefore, the 
Planning Commission adopts a defined methodology to estimate the poverty; 
however, the problems in identification of B PL families are being addressed to in 
consultation with the experts, States and other stakeholders through the exercise 
of Socio -Economic and Caste Census (SECC) 2011.  The census is a 
comprehensive exercise involving the Ministry of Rural Development, Min istry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Office of the Registrar General and 
Census Commissioner of India and the State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations.   
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No. (s) 17-20 of the Chapter I] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
Presently, incidence of poverty is estimated by the Planning Commission 
on the basis of sample surveys of household consumer expenditure conducted 
by the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) on a quinquennial basis.  
Accordingly, the estimates of poverty were worked out for the years 1973 -74, 
1977-78, 1983, 1987 -88, 1993-94, 1999-2000 and 2004 -05.  The latest poverty 
estimates have been made for the year 20 04-05 based on the poverty line 
adopted at all -India level as Rs. 356.30 per capita per month at 2004 -05 prices 
for rural areas; and Rs. 538.60 per capita per month for urban areas.  On this 
basis, the percentage of population below poverty line for rural,  urban and all 
India during 2004 -05 was estimated at 28.3%, 25.7% and 27.5% respectively.  
While the estimation of poverty in the country is done by the Planning 
commission, the Ministry of Rural Development conducts the Below Poverty Line 
(BPL) census to identify the BPL households in rural areas which could be 
targeted under its various programmes.  The Ministry of Rural Development has 
thus been conducting BPL census every five years since 1992 to identify the BPL 
households in the rural areas.  In the latest BPL census conducted in 2002 by the 
Ministry of Rural Development, the States were given the option to identify the 

 
 
number of BPL families equal to the poverty estimates of 1999 -2000 or the 
adjusted share worked out by the Planning Commission, whiche ver was higher,; 
an additional 10% was allowed to account for the transient poor.  However, no 
such census/survey has been conducted by the Ministry of Housing & Urban 
Poverty Alleviation for the urban areas on the plea that it is very costly and that 
the size of urban poverty alleviation programme handled by the Ministry had 
hitherto been very small.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Above is a statement of facts. However, in order to evolve a uniform methodology 
for identification of urban BPL, the Planning Com mission, in May 2010, constituted an 
Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Professor S. R. Hashim to recommend the 
detailed methodology for identification of BPL families in the urban areas. In its Interim 
Report, the Expert Group recommended to follow a broad approach to capture urban 
poverty in terms of „vulnerabilities‟ i.e. residential, occupational and social. Based on 
the aforementioned approach, the Expert Group recommended a set of questions to be 
canvassed for capturing information on indicators of these vulnerabilities.  
  
 Taking into account the interim recommendations of Expert Group, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA) has launched the Socio -economic and 
Caste Census (SECC) in June, 2011, throughout the Country, jointl y with Ministry of 
Rural Development.  The States/UTs have initiated the survey work with financial 
support from Ministry of Rural Development (RD) for both rural and urban areas while 
technical support for SECC is being provided by both the Ministries of HUPA and RD. 
Final report of the Expert Group containing the detailed methodology for identification 
of poor families in urban areas is expected very soon.   
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
During the course of examination of the subject by the Committee, 
significant lacunae came into sharp focus such as multiple indicators/criteria 
used for identification of the poor, divergence of official estimates of poverty ratio 

 
 
with the actual in cidence of poverty, no poverty census in urban areas, use of 
different methodologies for estimation and identification of BPL households, 
restricting the identification of poor in States to the cap fixed by the Planning 
Commission, variation in estimates, wrong-targeting of beneficiaries of welfare 
schemes etc.  The Committee have sought to address these issues in the 
succeeding paragraphs.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The para contains the summary of issues which the Standing Committee 
on Finance has address ed to in their report and needs no comments at this 
stage.   
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
The issue of BPL criteria and identification of people „below the poverty 
using the family based income level of Rs. 11000 per year.  However, line‟ 
assumes significance in view of its crucial role in the efficacy and functioning of 
the Public Distribution System (PDS) as also the identification of beneficiaries of 
targeted poverty alleviation p rogrammes and different welfare schemes of the 
Government.  The BPL Survey done by the Ministry of Rural Development in 
1992 used the income criterion to determine poverty.  This survey determined the 
poor the Committee notes that in the next BPL census of  1997, the consumption 
criterion was adopted to identify the poor.  Also for the first time, exclusion 
criterion was used to rule out ineligible families in the first place.  For the BPL 
census of 2002, the Ministry of Rural Development adopted a methodolo gy of 
score-based ranking of household, as suggested by an Expert Group.  In this 
process, thirteen socio -economic indicators were used to identify the poor 
families. The Committee, however, find that while using this criterion, errors of 
inclusion and exc lusion in the BPL list far exceeded acceptable limits.  Serious 
discrepancies also came to the fore as a result of the guidelines issued by the 
Ministry of Rural Development for the BPL Survey of 2002 which stipulated a 
ceiling on the number of BPL househo lds to be identified, in order to be in 

 
 
conformity with the poverty estimates of the Planning Commission.  The 
Committee find it strange that the State Governments were asked to select the 
poor households so that the total percentage of such families did n ot exceed the 
limit already fixed by the Planning Commission.  Paradoxically, this was like “the 
feet being made to fit the shoe”.  As was to be expected, several States fixed 
their BPL number in excess of the Planning Commission limit, while objecting to 
be cap imposed by the Planning Commission.  The fact that a large number of 
complaints were received on this mis-match in poverty estimates and also that “a 
part of the BPL population had been missed out” was conceded by the Secretary 
(Rural Development) in his deposition before the Committee.   In this connection, 
the Committee were astonished to learn from the Secretary that there have been 
specific findings that 86% of the APL population ended up in the BPL and almost 
17% of the richest quintile of the r ural population were provided BPL cards.  The 
committee is alarmed that such glaring inconsistencies, distortions and 
irregularities have plagued the BPL enumeration process.  It is axiomatic that the 
criteria and estimates formulated by the Planning Commi ssion have proved to be 
inadequate, unrealistic and thus eluded proper implementation at the State level.  
The Committee do not consider it prudent, practical and fair that the Planning 
Commission should impose a ceiling or limit on poverty to be strictly adhered to 
by the States.  Such a top -down approach can only yield the kind of distorted 
results evidenced so far. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Planning Commission estimates poverty at the national and State -
level, separately for rural and urban areas from  a large size sample survey of 
household consumption expenditure carried out the NSSO after every five years 
approximately.  These poverty estimates are worked out with reference to the 
State specific poverty lines defined in terms of monthly per capita co nsumption 
expenditure. The States undertake the exercise to identify the Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) households for which proxy parameters are used for household 
consumption expenditure. The reason for using proxy parameters is that the 
collection of data on household consumption expenditure on census basis 

 
 
becomes a huge exercise which requires a large number of trained enumerators 
besides being a time -consuming process. Therefore, for identification of BPL 
families, the indicators reflecting various types of  deprivations and vulnerabilities 
are taken into account. It is submitted that Planning Commission provides the 
broad poverty estimates at the State -level. So far as the ceiling on identification 
of BPL household during BPL Census 2002 is concerned, it is submitted that 
during the time of this Census, the poverty estimates for 1999 -2000 were 
available which indicated the poverty ratio as 26.1% at the National level, but this 
poverty ratio was not enforced for the purpose of identification of BPL families 
through this Census exercise. The States were given the option to identify the 
BPL households either in line with the poverty estimates of 1999 -2000 or the 
adjusted share worked out for the year 1993 -94, whichever is higher. It is 
pertinent to mention that t he adjusted share reflected the poverty ratio of 36% as 
compared to poverty ratio of 26.1% of 1999 -2000. The States were also allowed 
to permit an additional 10% in the BPL list to account for the transient poor. 
Therefore, the limit of poverty estimates worked out by the  Planning Commission 
were not arbitrary, rather were based on  State specific poverty ratios with 
reasonable flexibility. Moreover, the number of BPL families identified on the 
basis of proxy parameters used for consumption expenditure are  not strictly 
comparable to the poverty estimates because poverty line is not defined in terms 
of these parameters and no common cut -off is imposed. Further the poverty 
estimates are for proportion and number of persons whereas identification 
exercise focuses on BPL household as a unit.   Moreover, the States also have 
the flexibility of extending the benefits to a larger group of people that the State 
considers to be poor, by using their own resources.   In any case, the objective of 
BPL census undertaken by the States is to identify the eligible and potential BPL 
families under various schemes rather than estimating the poverty. The presence 
of a large number of APL households and a significant percentage of richest 
quintile of the rural population in the BPL list only reflects that BPL Census 
exercise was not strictly monitored by the States/UTs. It is also submitted that the 
guidelines of BPL Census provided a two stage appeal mechanism on a 
continuous basis to settle the claims of the eligible households  and also to 

 
 
exclude the ineligible households, etc. In order to give recommendation on 
methodology for inclusion of eligible families and exclusion of ineligible families 
from the existing BPL list, the Ministry of Rural Development constituted a multi -
disciplinary committee of experts with Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member Planning 
Commission as chairperson.  
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
With a view to ascertaining the extent of divergence  in the BPL estimates 
drawn by the Planning Commission with those identified by the State 
Governments, the Committee requested the State Governments/UTs to furnish 
the total number of BPL population identified in the States/UTs in the last BPL 
census of 20 02.  The Committee note with surprise that there is a wide 
divergence between the aggregate estimates made by the Planning commission 
and those submitted by the State Governments.  The divergence is all the more 
glaring in respect of States like Jammu & Ka shmir, Himachal Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Arunachal Pradesh.  The Committee are 
thus constrained to observe that the estimation of poverty and the consequential 
identification of BPL households which have been stated as two separate 
exercises by the Planning Commission, do not seen to have worked in tandem at 
the ground level.  This has thus resulted in unacceptably high level of divergence 
in many States, thereby defeating the very purpose of estimation by the Planning 
Commission.  The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Planning 
Commission should only confine itself to formulating the indicative criteria for 
determination of BPL population, while leaving the estimation and enumeration to 
a better-equipped machinery.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Hon'ble Committee in their report (page 31) analyzed the wide gap 
between the BPL population as identified by the States/ UTs based on BPL 
Census 2002, vis-à-vis, Planning Commission's poverty estimates. In column 2 of 

 
 
the table given at page 31 of the report indicates the total  BPL population in the 
States which has been worked out by applying the poverty ratio of  1993 -94 to 
the projected population estimated by the Registrar -General of India as on  1st 
March, 2000.   In fact, the fi gures in Column 2 in the table at page 31 of this 
report are not BPL persons, rather it is total number of BPL households. With a 
purpose to clarify the position, a table indicating the basis of calculating the BPL 
households in respect of selected States is given as under: 
 
 
It may be clarified that the number of BPL households as indicated in Col. 
7 of the above table has been arrived at by applying the poverty ratio 1993 -94 to 
the projected population of RGI as on 1 -3-2000.   These poverty estimates were 
worked out by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution for the 
purpose of allocation of foodgrains to the States at BPL prices. As per the 
information made available by the Ministry of Rural Development, the numbe r of 
BPL households identified by the States in the rural areas is indicated in Col. 8 of 
the table.   It may be observed from the table that except the State of Bihar there 
does not seem to be much variation in the poverty figures as identified by the 
States from that of estimated BPL households.   It is pertinent to mention here 
that Bihar has identified 113.41 lakh households as BPL as against the total 
118.79 lakh households of the State which means 95.4% of the State's 
population was living below the p overty line. This seems to be different from the 
S. 
No. 
State Projected  
Population of   
RGI as on 1-3- 
2000 (in lakhs) 
Average 
House- 
hold 
Size 
Total  
House- 
hold 
(In lakhs) 
Poverty 
Ratio 
(1993-94) 
BPL 
House- 
hold 
(in 
 lakhs) 
BPL 
Household 
Identified 
By the States 
In Rural Areas 
BPL  
Population 
as mentioned 
in Report 
(In lakhs) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1. J&K 99.45 5.52 18.02 40.86 7.36 6.179 37.78 
2. H.P. 67.11 5.34 12.57 40.86 5.14 2.823 23.54 
3. Karnataka 520.91 5.52 94.37 33.16 31.29 19.190 98.41 
4. Rajasthan 535.59 6.04 88.67 27.41 24.31 17.362 21.21 
5. M.P. 548.22 6.65 97.03 42.52 41.25 40.842 68.89 
6. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
11.92 4.93 2.42 40.86 0.99 0.830 40.08 
7. Bihar 731.11 6.16 118.79 54.96 65.23 113.410 113.41 
8. Kerala 322.62 5.28 61.10 25.43 15.54  20.50 
9. Chhattisgarh 249.25 5.65 44.11 42.52 18.75 17.892 34.50 

 
 
ground reality, therefore, cannot be accepted. The State of Kerala did not finalise 
the list of BPL households on the basis of BPL Census 2002.    It seems that in 
the report the total BPL population identif ied by the States is compared with the 
estimated BPL households due to which the variations look very vast. Further, 
Arunachal Pradesh is reported to have identified 40.08 lakh population as BPL 
whereas its total population based on 2011 Census is just 13. 82 lakhs. It seems 
there is some typographical error.      
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No. (s) 17-20 of the Chapter I] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee are  given to understand that the Planning Commission 
uses the poverty ratio of Assam (estimated at 19.73% in 2004 -05) for estimating 
poverty in seven States, namely, Sikkim (20.06% in 2004 -05), Arunachal 
Pradesh (17.60% in 2004 -05), Meghalaya (18.52% in 2004 -05), Mizoram 
(12.62% in 2004 -05), Manipur (17.34% in 2004 -05), Nagaland (19.05% in 2004 -
05) and Tripura (18.94% in 2004 -05).  According to the Member Secretary, 
Planning Commission, they have to rely on Assam data because the data for 
other States is either not available or the sample size of the NSSO is so small as 
to be virtually unusable.  The Committee find such a situation unsatisfactory 
where accurate poverty estimates for North -eastern States are not available at 
all.  This raises serious questions a bout the adequacy and veracity of poverty 
related statistics in the country.  The Committee are astonished that loose 
estimation is being done without undertaking proper household survey.  When 
the Ministry of Rural Development is conducting household surv ey, there does 
not appear to be any need on the part of Planning Commission to go for mere 
estimates, resulting in wastage of resources.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
such duplication of exercise, added with the issues of divergence in approach 
and mis-match in determining the incidence of poverty and the poor households 
are problem areas that need to be addressed.  The committee would thus 
recommend that a joint -mechanism may be instituted for this purpose, 

 
 
comprising of all the concerned Central Depar tments viz., Planning Commission, 
Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, NSSO under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation , Registrar General of  Census under the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Unique  Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)etc. the concerned state 
Government Departments including the Panchayati Raj Institutions, for a joint 
and comprehensive poverty survey.  Since different wings of government cannot 
be allowed to function at cross -purposes and jeopardize the goal of poverty 
eradication, the proposed survey in 2011 should thus be undertaken on a joint 
basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
It is true that the poverty ratio of Assam was applied to other North -Eastern 
States also    based on the methodology recommended by Expert Group headed by 
Prof. D.T. Lakadawala. But now the Planning Commission has already accepted the 
poverty estimates for 2004 -05 as computed by the Tendulkar Committee. The 
Tendulkar Committee   estimated the poverty for all the North -Eastern States 
separately, therefore, the issue of applying the poverty ratio of Assam is not relevant 
now. Regarding the relevance of estimation of poverty by Planning Commission in 
the context of Ministry of Rural Development's household su rvey, it is submitted that 
there is no overlapping in this exercise.    The Ministry of Rural Development is 
conducting the survey for the purpose of identification of BPL families in the rural 
areas. This exercise does not give us the total number of   BP L persons in the 
country because there is no definition of poverty in terms of proxy parameters being 
used in the survey which would make the distinction between poor and non -poor. It 
is therefore, clarified that estimation of poverty and identification of  BPL families are 
two separate exercises which are complimentary to each other. For the purpose of 
identification of BPL families, the role of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) is defined 
as the BPL list is to be approved in the Gram Sabha. The methodolog y for 
conducting the Socio -Economic and Caste Census has been finalized in 
consultation with the stakeholders.  The census is a comprehensive exercise 
involving the Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 

 
 
Alleviation, the Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India and 
the State Governments and the Union Territory Administrations. 
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No. (s) 17-20 of the Chapter I] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that various Expert Groups/agencies have indicated 
different estimates of poverty based on different assumptions and context.  The 
Expert Group headed by Prof. Tendulkar, which was consti tuted by the Planning 
Commission to review the methodology for poverty estimation, suggested moving 
away from anchoring the poverty lines to the calorie intake norm and 
incorporating the changing consumption patterns of the people which would 
reflect more accurately their nutritional status.  On the basis of their proposed 
methodology, the all -India rural poverty head count ratio for 2004 -05 was 
estimated at 41.8%, urban poverty head count ratio at 25.7% and all India level 
at 37.2%.  The Ministry of Rural Development constituted an Expert Group in 
2008 under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena to advise them on the suitable 
methodology for conducting the BPL Census for the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  
This Expert Group suggested that „the percentage of people entitled to BPL 
status should be drastically revised upwards to at least 50%, though the existing 
calorie norm of 2400 would warrant this figure to be about 80%.  This Group also 
suggested identification of poor families according to „automatic exclusion a nd 
inclusion criteria‟.  The remaining households will be surveyed according to 
specified weightages.  The Economic Survey, 2008 -09 had brought out that 
based on the calculations on data on household consumption expenditure for 
2004-05 (NSS 61 st round 2004-05), the population with less than Rs. 20 per day 
per capita consumption expenditure was 60.5%.  the National commission for 
Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) under the Chairmanship of Late 
Shri Arjun Sengupta in their report on „conditions of  work and promotion of 
livelihood in the Unorganised Sector‟ estimated that 77% of the population had a 

 
 
per capita daily consumption of upto Rs. 20 in 2004 -05, which could be 
considered as „poor and vulnerable‟.  The proposed Survey/Census to be 
conducted by the Ministry of Rural Development in 2011 may further produce 
different results.  The Committee are confounded at such a wide variation in the 
estimates of poverty made by Expert Groups constituted by the Government 
based on different sets of criteria.  These facts only add credence to the 
emphasis placed by the Committee on the need for harmonizing the criteria for 
identifying and enumerating the poor through a joint mechanism of the concerned 
central, state and local agencies.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Officially, the Planning Commission is the only nodal Government agency 
entrusted with the responsibility of estimation of poverty. The poverty estimates 
recommended by the Tendulkar Committee for the year 2004 -05 have been 
accepted as official poverty estimates. The number of BPL persons arrived at by 
other committees/ experts are based on different methodologies/ perceptions and 
may have been mentioned in a specific context. This position was explained to the 
committee in detailed written submissions.   However, for identification of BPL 
families, the State Governments and local agencies have been involved in the 
exercise of SECC, 2011 which is being carried out under the guidelines of Ministry of 
Rural Development and Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No. (s) 17-20 of the Chapter I] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee would also like to point out that the existin g poverty line 
approach has its inherent limitations and may not capture important aspects of 
the real living conditions of the people.  This is also abundantly evident from the 
fact that though States like Assam, Andhra Pradesh and J&K have a high 

 
 
malnourishment ratio, the poverty estimates of these States, as per the Planning 
Commission‟s figures are much lower.  This leads us to the key question of 
appropriate criteria to estimate poverty and its various facets.  While economic 
growth and Government welf are programmes have made some impact on the 
living standards of the people, conditions relating to basic health, nutrition, 
education and social security have not improved to the desired extent.  The 
Committee cannot help expressing regret over the fact th at the criteria/approach 
recommended by various expert groups set up from time to time for defining and 
determining „poverty‟ or „poverty line‟ thus far have only left question marks and 
have failed in capturing the actual incidence of poverty in the count ry.  Important 
aspects such as ill health, low educational attainments, geographical isolation, 
powerlessness or dis -empowerment in civil society, caste or gender based 
inherent disadvantages etc. remain to be conclusively captured in identifying and 
enumerating the poor.  The wide variation in determining the population of the 
poor is illustrated by the fact that as per one of the expert groups appointed 
recently, the BPL population in the country would be as much as 80% as per the 
existing calorie norm of 2400, while as per another norm it is only 37.2%. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is true that the poverty is a multi -dimensional and complex issue. For 
estimation of poverty, though the poverty line is defined in terms of monthly per 
capita consumption expe nditure which is considered to represent the level of living 
of the people.  However, the methodology of identification of poor households 
adopted in the successive BPL Censuses has taken cognizance of health, 
educational attainments, caste and gender base d disparities. For example, the BPL 
Census 2002 determines the socio -economic status of the rural households based 
on 13 critera, which include (a) land holding, (b) shelter, (c) clothing, (d) food 
security, (e) sanitation, (f) ownership of consumer durabl es, (g) education, (h) labour 
characteristics, (i) occupation category, (j) children‟s status, (k) indebtedness, (l) 
migration, and (m) preference towards state assistance. The Socio -Economic and 
Caste Census (SECC), 2011 is collecting information on a num ber of indicators 

 
 
relating to the socio -economic status of the rural and urban households. These are 
capable of capturing the health, educational, caste and gender based disparities in 
the identification of poor households. The data captured through the on -going SECC 
would address the concern of the Committee to a considerable extent.      
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee are sanguine that the poverty ratio needs to be esti mated 
objectively and realistically and the criteria therefore should stretch beyond the 
current norm which lays emphasis on calorific value and reflect faithfully the 
changing nutritional profile and living status of the masses.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the operational methodology for identification of the 
poor should be based inter -alia on collectible information covering aspects 
relating to access to primary health including the number of illnesses of 
household members in a period of abo ut a month which would give an indicative 
account on the extent of economic burden of households owing to poor health 
outcomes; level of indebtedness which often leads households into destitution 
and the reasons therefore; ownership and type of residence l ike kuccha, semi -
pukka and pukka; proportion of total household members to the total members 
engaged in economically productive occupation or are self employed; schooling 
status of children along with number of working children in a household; and 
proportion of dependent children and the elderly, which would indicate the extent 
of economic strain on a household.  Aspects relating to access to basic 
education, banking channels and micro credit should be suitably factored in 
operationalising the criteria for identification of the poor.  The criteria may also 
provide for automatic exclusion of specified categories like those (a) possessing 
irrigated land double that of district average, (b) possessing two/four wheel 
mechanized transport vehicle, (c) income tax payees, (d) residence in a pucca 
house more than specified covered area, say 1,000 sq. ft (e) house -holds with at 
least one person holding pensionable job etc.   Keeping in view such a broader 
approach, the Committee feel that there need not be any specifi c „automatic 
inclusion criteria‟.  In view of the Committee, it would thus be in order to have a 

 
 
more comprehensive and multi -dimensional approach to determine poverty, 
which will also take into account dynamic aspects like slipping back and forth 
across the poverty line as also issues relating to empowerment of masses.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The methodology to estimate poverty reviewed by the Expert Group headed 
by Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar recommended to move away from anchoring the  
poverty line in calorie norm.  The extracts from the report are reproduced under: 
 
“……. a conscious decision was taken by the Expert Group to move away 
from anchoring the PL in calorie norm as in the past  because (a) there is 
overwhelming evidence of downward shift in cal orie Engel curves over time 
and (b) calorie consumption intake calculated by converting the consumed 
quantities in the last 30 days as collected by NSS has not been found to be 
well correlated either over time or across States with the nutritional 
outcomes observed in other specialized nutrition outcome surveys such as 
the National Family Health Surveys (NFHS)." (pages 7-8) 
The report also mentions that:  
"Even while moving away from the calorie norms, the proposed poverty 
lines have been validated by check ing the adequacy of actual private 
expenditure per capita near the poverty lines on food, education and health 
by comparing them with normative expenditures consistent with nutritional, 
educational and health outcomes. Actual private expenditures reported by 
households near the new poverty lines on these items were found to be 
adequate at the all ‐India level in both the rural and the urban areas and for 
most of the states. It may be noted that while the new poverty lines have 
been arrived at after assessing  the adequacy of private household 
expenditure on education and health, the earlier calorie ‐anchored poverty 
lines did not explicitly account for these. The proposed poverty lines are in 
that sense broader in scope.” (page 2/ para 5)   
Recently, the Planning Commission appointed an Expert Group in 2012 „to 
Review the Methodology for Measurement of Poverty‟ under the Chairmanship of 

 
 
Dr. C. Rangarajan. The Terms of Reference of the Expert Group are: (i) to 
comprehensively review the existing methodology of es timation of poverty and 
examine whether the poverty line should be fixed solely in terms of a 
consumption basket or whether other criteria are also relevant, and if so, whether 
the two can be effectively combined to evolve a basis for estimation of poverty  in 
rural and urban areas; (ii) to examine the issue of divergence between 
consumption estimates based on the NSSO methodology and those emerging 
from the National Accounts aggregates; and to suggest a methodology for 
updating consumption poverty lines usi ng the new consumer price indices 
launched by the CSO for rural and urban areas state -wise; (iii) to review 
alternative methods of estimation of poverty which may be in use in other 
countries, including their procedural aspects; and indicate whether on thi s basis, 
a particular method can be evolved for empirical estimation of poverty in India, 
including procedures for updating it over time and across states and (iv) to 
recommend how the estimates of poverty, as evolved above, should be linked to 
eligibility and entitlements for schemes and programmes under the Government 
of India. 
 
Besides, macro level estimation of poverty, the current SECC -2011 is 
gathering the information on a host of socio -economic indicators through a door -
to-door enumeration of all the households in rural and urban areas of the country 
for actual identification of BPL households.  
 
From amongst the rural households, the SECC 2011 is gathering the 
following information; for likely use as inclusion criteria, the data are collected on: 
(a) households without shelter, (b) destitutes/living on alms, (c) manual 
scavengers, (d) Primitive Tribal Groups, and (e) legally released bonded 
labourers. 
 
The deprivation of the households is assessed from the following 
deprivation indicators. (a) Househo lds with only one room with  kucha walls and 
kucha roof; (b) Households with no adult member between age 16 to 59; (c) 
Female headed households with no adult male member between age 16 to 59; 

 
 
(d) Households with any disabled member and no able bodied adult  member; (e) 
SC/ST households; (f) Households with no literate adult above 25 years; (g) 
Landless households deriving the major part of their income from manual casual 
labour; 
 
The data on the following indicators are being gathered for use as 
possible exc lusion criteria: (a) Households owning Motorized Two/Three/Four 
Wheelers/Fishing boats (which require registration); (b) Households owning 
mechanized Three/Four wheeler agricultural equipments such as tractors, 
harvesters etc; (c) Households having Kisan C redit Card with the credit limit of 
Rs.50,000 and above; (d) Households with any member as Government 
Employee: gazetted and non -gazetted employees of Centre government, State 
government, Public Sector Undertakings, Government -aided autonomous bodies 
and l ocal bodies. (This will exclude incentive and other honorarium based 
workers like ASHA, Anganwadi workers etc;) (e) Households with Enterprises 
registered with the Government for any purpose: any non agricultural enterprise 
registered with the Central or S tate Governments; (f) Households with any 
member in the family earning more than Rs. 10,000 p.m.; (g) Households paying 
income tax or professional tax; (h) Households with three or more rooms with 
pucca walls and pucca roof; (i) Households owning Refrigera tor; (j) Households 
owning landline phones; (k) Households owning  2.5 acres or more irrigated land 
with at least one irrigation equipment such as diesel/ electric operated borewell/ 
tubewell; (l) 5 acres or more land irrigated for two or more crop seasons ; (m) 
Households owning 7.5 acres or more  land with at least one irrigation equipment 
such as diesel/ electric operated borewell / tubewell.  
 
Similarly for urban areas, the information through SECC 2011 is being 
collected on a number of parameters which includes occupation, status of wage 
earnings, caste, educational status, disability, chronic illness, type of 
house/material used, ownership of house, size of the house, access to amenities 
such as drinking water, sanitation and source of lighting besides ownership of 

 
 
assets such as refrigerator, telephone/mobile phones, computer/laptop with or 
without internet, motorized wheelers, air conditioners, washing machines, etc.  
The manner and method of utilizing this information for identification of 
beneficiaries for Government programmes have not been finalized. 
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No. (s) 17-20 of the Chapter I] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee belie ve that poverty cannot be eliminated by understating 
the figures or simply wishing away the problem.  Government programmes can 
be more effectively delivered if the multiple dimensions of poverty are recognized 
and the criteria nuanced accordingly.  The pr oposed criteria for poverty 
estimation should thus be easily defined and measurable, stable in the medium 
term and should also not become a disincentive for progress.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As mentioned earlier, the criteria for estimation of poverty i s based on the 
level of consumption expenditure and it takes into account inter -state and intra -
state price differentials to capture the real position. As mentioned in the 
preceding paras, the dynamic nature of poverty is acknowledged and in line with 
the changing situation, the methodology for estimation of poverty and the 
definition of poverty line has been revisited by the Expert Groups from time to 
time. Even now, another Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. 
Rangarajan has been set up to look into the methodology of estimation of poverty 
afresh. The information being collected through SECC, 2011 is based on 
parameters which can be physically verified. Therefore, any methodology applied 
on this information to identify BPL families for delivering benefits under different 
programmes/schemes should be more transparent and simple. 
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
  

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
As the special category or the „poorest of the poor‟ comprise a v ast chunk 
of the people, the Committee are of the view that we can make a real dent on 
poverty only by paying special attention to this category by devising and 
implementing focused and exclusive schemes/programmes for them.  The 
Committee would, therefore , emphasise that a set of exclusive criteria may be 
specially considered to identify „the poorest of the poor‟ so that Government 
schemes and programmes particularly aimed at them including the PDS are 
targeted in a fail -safe manner.  Such a strategy disti nguishing the „poorest of the 
poor‟ from the general BPL will help ensure that this particularly vulnerable 
category does not get marginalized in the scheme of things.  It will also help the 
Government devise and implement exclusive programmes to address p roblems 
of endemic hunger, starvation, acute malnourishment and agrarian distress.  The 
Committee would therefore recommend that schemes such as Indira Awas 
Yojana (IAY) with suitable modifications, should be made universal for the 
„poorest of the poor‟, while schemes such as NREGA should try to cover the BPL 
segment as well.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Rural Development has been acting as a catalyst effecting the 
change in rural areas through the implementation of wide spectrum of its 
programmes which are aimed at poverty alleviation, employment generation, 
infrastructural development, social security and sustainable development with the 
main objective of alleviating rural poverty and provide an improved quality of life 
for the rural population especially those living below the poverty line. The Ministry 
of Rural Development is implementing various poverty alleviation schemes 
namely Mahatma Gandhi National Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), 
National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)/Ajeevika and Ind ira Awaas 
Yojana(IAY).  
 
Mahatma Gandhi National Employee Guarantee Act, 2005 provides for 
the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in the rural areas of the 

 
 
country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment 
in every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, 
irrespective of his status in terms of being below or above poverty line. 
MGNREGA is demand driven and does not differentiate on the basis of socio -
economic status.  
National Rural Li velihood Mission (NRLM) aims at creating efficient and 
effective institutional platforms of the rural poor enabling them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved 
access to financial services. The agenda to cover  BPL households in the country 
through self -managed Self Help Groups (SHGs) and federated institutions and 
support them for livelihoods collectives in a period of 8 -10 years. To ensure 
inclusion of all the poor, participatory identification of the poor is to be followed. In 
addition, the poor would be facilitated to achieve increased access to their rights, 
entitlements and public services, diversified risk and better social indicators of 
empowerment. NRLM believes in harnessing the innate capabilities of t he poor 
and complements them with capacities (information, knowledge, skills, tools, 
finance and collectivization) to participate in the growing economy of the country.  
Under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), financial assistance is provided for the 
people living the poverty line. The programme positively discriminates in favour 
of marginalized sections of the society such as SCs, STs, disabled and 
minorities.   
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
With a view to avoiding a rat race to be identified under BPL category for 
availing benefits of Government schemes and programmes including the PDS, 
the Committee would like the Government to encourage more community -based 
schemes, whose benefits will accrue to the identified 
communities/hamlets/villages as a whole. The mutual compatibilities amongst the 
related schemes/programmes, aimed at a common pool of beneficiaries, will go a 
long way in minimizing their mis -use, while imparting credibility and su stainability 

 
 
to the BPL identification process.  The Committee would, therefore, recommend 
that separate criteria may be formulated for community -centric programmes 
focusing on villages having more than two-third BPL population.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development is following precisely this approach in 
the implementation of right based MGNREGA. It entitles 100 days of work to 
every rural household willing to do unskilled manual labour. The community is 
involved in planning the works through the labour budget. The new programme of 
poverty reduction, namely National Rural Livelihood Mission/ Ajeevika intends to 
follow the community centric project focusing on Self Help Groups and their 
networked federations to ensure inclusion of all eligible persons and promote the 
community based approach to poverty reduction.  
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
With a view to ensuring that every rupee reaches the person it is me ant 
for, the Committee would like the Government to examine direct cash transfer 
scheme as tried out successfully in large countries like Brazil.  The Committee 
gather that under their Bolsa Famila Programme (BFP) cash transfers via banks 
to poor Brazilian  families are made on the condition that their children attend 
school and are vaccinated.  Accordingly to a World Bank Study, the BFP in Brazil 
helped lift 20 million people out of poverty between 2003 and 2009, as the 
income of Brazil‟s poor grew seven ti mes faster than that of the rich, and three 
times the national average. There are also experiments such as that in Indonesia 
where even the entire village is identified as „poor‟ for targeted action and the 
people are incentivized to come out of the „pover ty trap‟.  The committee desire 
that the Government should evaluate such popular programmes successfully 
tried out in countries similarly placed like ours with a large population of poor and 
the marginalized.  In this context, the Committee would like to e mphasise that 
direct cash transfers to bank accounts of beneficiaries will also facilitate the 

 
 
process of „financial‟ inclusion  being attempted by the banking sector.  Such a 
scheme may also be integrated with the „Aadhar‟ project of the Unique 
Identification (UID) programme to be implemented on a national scale, which will 
go a long way in plugging the rampant leakages in the dissemination of benefits 
to the poor.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Promotion of rural livelihood is addressed through various progra mmes of 
the Ministry of Rural Development like Mahatma Gandhi National Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) and National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM)/Ajeevika. In order to minimize leakages in payments of wages under 
MGNREGA and pension disbursement under  National Social Assistance 
Programme (NSAP), steps have been initiated to utilize Aadhaar numbers. 
However, adopting Conditional Cash Transfer for enhancing livelihoods of rural 
poor is not under consideration at present. 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
During the course of their discussions with the representatives of Life 
Insurance Corporation at Mumbai, the Committee found to their dismay that the 
coverage of BPL households under s ocial insurance schemes such as Aam 
Aadmi Bina Yojana (AABY) was quite negligible and far from achieving the BPL 
target.  Considering the absolute number of poor in the country, social insurance 
products/schemes of the Government seem to be now only „scrat ching at the 
surface‟.  The Committee would therefore recommend that schemes such as 
AABY should be made universal so as to cover the entire BPL population within 
a pre-stipulated period.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Social Security Insurance Schemes nam ely Aam Aadmi Bima 
Yojana(AABY)  & Janashree Bima Yojana(JBY) for the economically backward 
section of society  are being monitored by the Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance. The schemes are being implemented through Life Insurance 

 
 
Corporation of India (LIC) in the country. The Aam Admi Bima Yojana (AABY) 
was launched to provide insurance cover to the head of family or one earning 
member of rural landless households. Under the scheme, the head of the family 
or an earning member of the fam ily is eligible to receive the benefit of Rs. 
30,000/- in case of natural death, Rs.75,000/ - for accident death,  Rs. 75,000/ - 
for total permanent disability (loss of two eyes or two limbs or loss of one eye and 
one limb in accident) and Rs.37,500/ - for partial permanent disability (loss of one 
eye or one limb in an accident). The premium under the scheme is Rs. 200/ - per 
member per annum equally shared in the ratio of 50:50 between Central 
Government and respective State Government/UT. AABY also includes S hiksha 
Sahyog Yojana (SSY), a free add -on benefit of scholarship of Rs. 100 per month 
up to a maximum of two children of the beneficiaries studying between class IX 
and XII. LIC has informed that since launch of the AABY in the year 2007, LIC 
has covered 2 ,22,85,785 (65.72%) lives as on 31.10.2012 out of a potential of 
3,39,10,346 households. The total number of lives in force as on 31.10.2012 is 
1,77,90,636 (52.46%). Besides the Aam Admi Bima Yojana, another social 
security insurance scheme i.e. Janashree Bima Yojana (JBY) is also being 
implemented through LIC in the country.   
 
JBY provides life insurance protection to the rural and urban persons living 
below poverty line and marginally above poverty line.  A person between age 18 
years and 59 years and wh o are the members of the identified occupational / 
vocational groups are eligible to participate in this policy.   Under JBY a total 
number 2,69,15,274  lives have already been covered as on 31.10.2012.  
 The persons eligible for insurance coverage i.e. Ru ral Landless households 
(RLHs) under AABY have also been covered under JBY under different 
occupational categories. LIC has informed that potential of Rural Landless 
Households for the following states have already been covered under Janashree 
Bima Yojana. 

 
 
 
  AABY is a scheme, under which State Government needs to contribute 
50% of the premium amount.  LIC has reported that some States /UTs in the 
country are yet to give their consent for implementation of AABY.  The status of 
such States/ UTs is as follows:- 
Name of the 
State 
Total No. of 
RLH 
potential 
Remarks 
Tamil Nadu 42,03,000 Consent not given as they have their own scheme 
with similar benefits 
Haryana 5,65,000 Consent given. Followup is made for 
implementation 
Tripura 1,48,000 Consent given. Not implemented 
Delhi 70,000 Only very limited potential is available 
Manipur 13,000 Consent not given.  
Meghalaya 12,000 Consent not given.  
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
8,000 Consent not given.  
Dadar & Nagar 
Haveli 
4,000 Consent given. Not implemented 
Daman & Diu 3,000 Consent given. Not implemented 
Mizoram 2,000 Consent not given as the population of RLH is very 
low and difficult to identify 
Sikkim 2,000 Consent not given. 
Total 50,28,000  
As per LIC, the AABY schem e has not been renewed in the states of 
Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab and in the Union Territory of Puducherry. 
LIC has informed that the total number of potential RLHs in these States/UTs are 
as follows: 
Name of the States Total No. of RLH 
potential  
Coverage since 
inception 
Total lives in force 
Bihar 37,12,000 19,21,604 NIL 
Name of the 
State 
Total No. of RLHs 
potential Remarks 
Rajasthan 7,38,000 All families have been covered through 
Pannadhay JBY scheme 
Uttaranchal 1,24,000 All the BPL families have been covered 
through JBY Scheme 
Goa 37,000 All the BPL families have bee n covered 
through JBY Scheme 
Total 8,99,000  

 
 
Himachal Pradesh 38,000 5,000 NIL 
Punjab 8,73,000 19,013 NIL 
Puducherry 1,48,452 1,48,452 NIL 
Total 47,71,452 20,94,069 NIL 
 
LIC has been taking up the matter with the conce rned State Government 
and is making all efforts to ensure that the Scheme is implemented in these 
states at the earliest. In a parallel development, the two schemes viz . AABY & 
JBY are being merged  to ensure better coverage, administration and smooth 
implementation of the scheme.  The Cabinet approval in this regard is already 
obtained. The State-wise coverage under AABY is at Annexure-I. 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.16) 
Keeping in view  the need to revisit the methodology for identification of 
urban poor, the Committee learn that the Planning Commission has constituted 
an Expert Group recently to recommend suitable methodology for identification of 
BPL families in urban areas under the c hairmanship of Prof. S.R.Hashim.  While 
estimating urban poverty, since it is necessary that incidence of rural -urban 
migration is taken into account, the Committee would urge the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to include 
this aspect in the terms of reference of the Expert Group, so that the rural -urban 
continuum is adequately captured in the estimates.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Hashim Committee has submitted its interim report which included a 
questionnaire for collection of information under some socio -economic 
parameters for the urban areas.   The information collected through these 
parameters is to be used for finalizing the final detailed methodology to identify 
the BPL households in the urban areas. Dur ing its deliberations, the issue of 
rural-urban migration prominently figured and empirical data available on the 
issue was also looked at. 
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.17) 
The committe e regret that no survey has so far been conducted for 
establishing head count of urban poor.  This has thus rendered infructuous the 
formulation and implementation of urban poverty schemes, which are being 
operated without any scientific basis.  This has o bviously resulted in low urban 
poverty ratio and has also led to inconsistencies such as Jharkhand having only 
about 20 per cent urban poor as compared to a much higher ratio for a State like 
Bihar.  While deprecating the Government for delay and laxity in  this matter, the 
Committee would recommend that a household surveys should also be 
conducted to determine the extent of urban poverty.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Planning Commission has been estimating the poverty separately for  
rural and urban areas of the States.   However, there has not been a common 
methodology to conduct the survey for identification of BPL families in the urban 
areas.  Now, the Hashim Committee has already submitted its interim report 
alongwith the questionnaire to collect informa tion for the urban areas.   The 
Ministry of HUPA is coordinating the exercise of the Socio -Economic Caste 
Census in the Urban Areas.   Thus, a common methodology for identification of 
BPL households in urban areas will also be in place which addresses the 
concerns of the Hon'ble Committee. 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
The Committee are also concerned about the efficacy of the proposed 
Food Security Bill when the criteria of identification of the poor remains nebulous.  
When this was pointed out to the Planning Commission, they sought to shift the 
onus to the Department of Food and Public Distribution, who are now expected 
to „address the issues of errors of inclusion and exclusion to a void anomalies‟.  
The Committee would thus urge the Government to thrash out all the issues 

 
 
relating to poverty criteria, estimation, identification and targeting before finalising 
the Food Security Bill.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has accep ted the recomputed poverty lines as 
recommended by the Tendulkar Committee for the year 2004 -05. The poverty 
estimates based on the 66th Round of NSS for the year 2009 -2010 have also 
been released. The SECC, 2011 for collection of vital statistics for the purpose of 
actual identification of BPL families both in rural and urban areas is in progress. 
Therefore, the application of the provisions of the proposed National Food 
Security Bill can be applied if so warranted. 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
-  NIL -

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee would like to avail this opportunity to extend the discourse 
and suggest that the plethora of schemes and programmes obtaining now should 
be streamlined and rationalize d to manageable proportions.  There is no reason 
why there should be a scheme seeking to touch every aspect of human or 
livestock life.  Such proliferation of schemes eventually leads to slipping of „plan‟ 
expenditure to „non-plan‟ segment, thereby slowing down the process of creation 
of capital infrastructure or durable assets in rural areas.  The Committee suggest 
that the Central Government Schemes should focus on areas such as (i) rural 
road (ii) drinking water (iii) electricity (iv)irrigation (v)housin g (vi) employment 
(vii)health (viii) education (ix) agriculture and (x) small and cottage industries.  It 
is also necessary that the variety of schemes should be harmonized and 
integrated within the ambit of a region -specific plan.  This approach thus requ ires 
that very detailed or schematic programmes should not be super -imposed on the 
States and levels below.  Such a decentralized yet holistic approach will also 
ensure better utilization of earmarked funds under the centrally sponsored 
programmes.  In thi s context, the Committee would also recommend multi -
disciplinary monitoring of schemes simultaneously with their implementation as 
well as post-facto.  
Reply by the Government 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development has been implementing several rural 
development programmes such as Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY) for all weather rural roads, IAY for housing for rural poor, MGNREGA 
for supplementary wage employment and NRLM for enhancement of livelihood 
opportunities for rural poor. The Ministry places s pecial emphasis on monitoring 
of its programmes with a view that these are implemented effectively and the 
benefit reach to the targeted groups of the society. The monitoring tools are (a) 

 
 
Periodical Progress Reports and web -based Management Information Sy stem 
(MIS), Performance Review Committee (PRC), Area Officer‟s Scheme, Vigilance 
and Monitoring Committee at the State/District Level, National Level Monitors 
(NLM) and National Quality Monitors (NQM). The Ministry evaluates its 
programmes, both post -facto and concurrently.  The main objectives of the 
Evaluation Studies are to evaluate the performance of the schemes at the field 
level, and to assess the impact of the programmes and to identify the problems in 
course of implementation so as to make mid -course corrections, wherever 
necessary. 
 
Similarly for urban areas, revamped SJSRY guidelines specifically point 
the need for convergence in the delivery of various programmes at the ULB level 
such as JNNURM, Rajiv Awas Yojana, Prime Minister's Employment Genera tion 
Programme, Aam Aadami Bima yojana, Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana, 
Health Mission, Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan, Mid Day Meals Scheme, Integrated Child 
Development Scheme, National Social assistance Programme, Skill 
Development Initiative etc. To ensure quali ty and effective delivery of services to 
the target groups, Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation has placed 
monitoring systems for its schemes. Apart from institutional monitoring machinery 
at various levels, Third Party Inspection & Monitoring (TPIM), social audit and 
concurrent evaluation of the schemes are being done to plug the loopholes in the 
implementation of the schemes. Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation 
has initiated the process of evaluation study of performance of SJSRY S cheme 
during the 11 th Plan for the country as a whole in the context of continuation of 
the Scheme in the 12th Five Year Plan. 
 
[Ministry of Planning, O.M. F. No. M-11019/1/2011-PP(Pt.), dated 7.12.2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of the Chapter – 1) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER- V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
  
- NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       YASHWANT SINHA, 
25 July, 2013                               Chairman, 
03 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Finance. 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE - II 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 17th May, 2013 from 1130 hrs. to 1450 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
2. Shri Nishkant Dubey 
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
7. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
10. Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
11. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.    Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri P. Rajeeve 
16. Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.    Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Additional Director  
3.    Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   – Under Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1200 hrs.) 
 
2. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX   

 
 
3. xxxxxx.  Thereafter, the Committee took up draft report on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 32nd Report on the 
subject  „Appraisal of BPL Criteria‟ and decided to defer consideration of the same to 
the next sitting. 
 
Part II 
(1200 hrs. to 1450 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
4.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX   
 
5.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
  XX   XX   XX   XX   
 
6.  XX   XX   XX   XX 
  XX   XX   XX   XX   
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 24th May, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1405 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
3. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
4. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
5. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
6. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
7. Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
8. Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
9. Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
11. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
12. Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
13. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
14. Shri P. Rajeeve 
15. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.    Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Additional Director  
3.    Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   – Under Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1135 hrs.) 
 
2. The Committee took up draft report on action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations/observations contained in the 32 nd Report on the subject  
„Appraisal of BPL Criteria‟ and adopted the same with some minor modifications 
as suggested by Members.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise 
the Report in the light of the modifications suggested and present the same to 
Hon‟ble Speaker / Parliament. 

 
 
 
Part II 
(1135 hrs. to 1405 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
3. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX  . 
 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX   
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE 
GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SECOND REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) ON “APPRAISAL OF BPL CRITERIA” 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
18  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(vide Recommendation Nos. 
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,15,16,17,18) 
 
17 94.45% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view o the Government‟s replies 
 
Nil - 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee (vide Recommendation  
No. 14) 
 
1 5.55% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
Nil - 
 
 
 