1 
 
80 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(Departments of Economic Affairs and Financial Services) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in                       
Seventy-Ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance on                
‘Counterfeit Currency Notes in Circulation’] 
 
 
EIGHTIETH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


2 
 
 
EIGHTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in                       
Seventy-Ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance on                
‘Counterfeit Currency Notes in Circulation’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………...... (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
 
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
 
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 20 September, 2013 and                  
29 November, 2013................ 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Seventy -Ninth Report (14 th Lok Sa bha) of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on „Counterfeit Currency Notes in Circulation ………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -   Additional Director 
3.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  -   Under Secretary 
4.     Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen             -   Committee Officer 
                                                 
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Eightieth Report on  action taken by 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventy Ninth Report              
(14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Counterfeit Currency Notes in Circulation‟.  
 2. The Seventy Ninth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2008.  Replies indicating action taken on 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government 
on 26 March, 2009.  Subsequently the Government furnished their updated action 
taken replies on 11 July, 2013.   
3. In view of the gravity of the subject, the Committee took combined oral 
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Finance (Departments of Financial 
Services and Economic Affairs), Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW), Intelligence Bureau (IB), Central 
Bureau of Investigation (CBI), National Investigation Agency (NIA), Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) on 20 September, 
2013 on the action tak en by Government on the 79 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee.  Post evidence replies were also obtained from the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 4. The Committee considered and adopted this repor t at their sitting held 
on 29 November, 2013. 
 5. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventy Ninth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
the Appendix. 
 6. For facility of reference, observations /recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
29 November, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
08 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 
Seventy ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject „Counterfeit 
Currency Notes in Circulation‟ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs & Financial Services), which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
18 December, 2008 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.    The Report contained 10 recommendations.  Updated action taken notes 
have been received from the Government on 21 May, 2013 in respect of all the 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorised as 
follows: 
 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,4,5,6,7,8,9 &10 
         (Total 8) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
 
      
     (Total Nil) 
        (Chapter- III) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:   
Recommendation Nos.  2 & 3 
(Total: 2) 
(Chapter- IV) 
  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
      
(Total : Nil) 
 (Chapter V) 
 
 
 
 
3.  In view of the gravity of the matter, the Committee decided to hold 
combined oral evidence of the representatives of all the concerned 
Ministries / agencies on the action taken replies submitted by them to the 

7 
 
Committee.  Subsequent to the evidence, written replies were also received 
from them, which have been appropriately incorporated in the Report. 
 
4. The extent of action taken by the Governmen t so far and the 
Committee’s observations thereon have been discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  The Committee desire that replies to their observations / 
comments may be furnished expeditiously.   
 
A. (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Seizure of Fake Indian Currency Notes              
 
  5.    The Committee recommended as under : 
 
“Taking note of the gravity and magnitude the problem of counterfeit 
currency notes in circulation in the country has acquired with damaging 
consequences for the Indian economy and pol ity, the Committee decided 
to take up this subject for detailed examination. By the own admission of 
the authorities, there  has been a spurt in the circulation  of fake currency 
notes in recent times with  the value of  counterfeit  currency detected 
sharply increasing from about Rs. 1.77 crore  in 2005 -06 to around  Rs. 
5.50  crore  in 2007-08. However, this figure may only be the tip of the ice -
berg, as what is seized or detected is only a small part of what might be 
circulating in the system. Further compounding the problem is the fact that 
there is no estimate either of the amount of the volume of counterfeit 
currency in circulation, which thus remains indeterminate. In the face of 
such an alarming scenario, the committee would urge the Government to 
come to grip with the reality soon and take concerted action to counter this 
growing menace”. 
 
 
6. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply, stated as follows : 
 
“To address the multidimensional aspects of the FICN  menace, several 
agencies such as RBI, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Security and Intelligence agencies of the Centre and States, CBI are 
working in tandem to check the inflow of fake Indian currency notes. 
 
One special FICN Co -ordination Group has been formed in MHA to share 
the intelligence/information amongst the different security agencies of 
State/Centre to counter the menace of circulation of Fake currency notes 
in the country.  IB, CBI, NIA, R&AW and DRI continuously share 
operational intelligence to neutralize FICN smugglers. 
 
The legal regime has been further strengthened by way of recent 
amendments in the year 2012 in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 
1967 wherein the damage to the monetary stability of India by way of 

8 
 
production or smuggling or circulation of High Quality Fake Indian Paper 
Currency, coin or any other material has been declared as „terrorist act‟.  
 
National Investigation Agency (NIA) has been empowered by NIA Act to 
investigate and prosecute offences relating to FICN.  The Government has 
also constituted a Terror Funding and Fake Currency Cell in NIA to focus 
investigation on Terror Funding and Fake currency cases. 
 
The Reserve Bank of India has also taken several measures like 
mandatory machine processing o f notes (Rs. 100 and above) by banks, 
rationalization of reporting of counterfeit note detection by banks, 
awareness campaign, etc.    
 
The statistics maintained by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) 
does not indicate the fact that circulation of fak e currency in the country 
has gone up.  The total number of fake currency notes (of all 
denominations) during the years 2010, 2011 and 2012 (upto September 
2012) is 622231, 556217 and 379231 respectively.  The State -wise/Union 
Territory wise details are enclosed as Annexure A, A-1 and A-II”. 
   
7. The Committee note that to counter the menace of circulation of fake 
currency notes, FICN Coordination Group (FCORD) has been formed and 
Government has also strengthened the legal regime and that the National 
Investigation Agency (NIA) has been empowered for investigation on terror 
funding and fake currency cases.  The Committee would however point out 
that although National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data indicates that 
the total number of fake currency notes (of  all denomination) during the 
year 2010, 2011 and 2012 came down to 622231, 556217 and 379231 
respectively, the extent of the menace should not be under -estimated.  The 
Committee would therefore expect the Government to remain alert and 
keep up the vigil in both prevention and detection of fake currency notes in 
circulation.  The FICN Coordination Group in Ministry of Home Affairs 
should thus meet more frequently, say every quarter to regularly assess 
and monitor the situation.  The Committee also desire th at the Government 
should conduct a study on the linkages of fake currency with circulation of 
unaccounted money in the economy.     
 

9 
 
B.   (Recommendation Sl. No. 2)  
Mechanism of co-ordination among the agencies concerned 
   
8. The Committee recommended as under : 
“The detection and seizure of a large quantity of forged notes of Rs. 500 
and Rs. 1000 denominations at the Domariaganj Branch (Uttar Pradesh) 
of State Bank of India in July, 2008 has been sought to be projected as an 
isolated incident by the RBI  and SBI. However, the views expressed by 
the other agencies viz. Ministries of Finance and Home Affairs suggest 
that the problems is more widespread.  They have informed that inputs 
from Intelligence Agencies indicate that the organized criminal activity of 
fake Indian Currency Notes has spread its tentacles in several parts of the 
country in a significant manner. The Ministry  of Finance  (Department of 
Economic Affairs)  have clarified in this regard that although the exact 
figure of Fake  Indian Currenc y  Notes    (FICN) in  circulation is not 
available, steep increase  in the value of FICN seized  over the years 
show that the menace continues unabated. The Committee,  however, find 
to their surprise  that the counterfeit  notes detected  at RBI  and by  bank 
branches, as well as those  seized  by  enforcement  agencies  aggregate  
to a small number only, leaving them guessing about the  magnitude  of 
the problem. Even in the information  made available  to the Committee, 
variation is seen  in the figures  furnished by RBI  and those provided  by 
Ministry of Home Affairs with  regard to counterfeit notes detected and 
recovered at various  bank  branches .  Such  contradiction in perception, 
assessment  and eventual reporting  re -in force the need for a cohe rent  
and effective coordination  mechanism among  different agencies  dealing 
with the issue  so that  a holistic response can be formulated. 
 
The Committee understand that apart from the Ministry of Finance                
(Department of Economic Affairs)  and the RBI, agencies like the CBI, 
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, the Central Economic Intelligence 
Bureau, National Bureau, National Crime Records Bureau and the State 
Police are involved in different capacities in the task of monitoring detection  
and seizure of FICNs and investigation of cases relating to counterfeit 
currency. It has also been informed that a group headed by the Joint 
Secretary (Internal Security) in Ministry of Home Affairs has been 
constituted to identify and oversee implementat ion of suitable measures to 
address the problem of FICNs. A High level committee of Experts under   
Department of Economic Affairs has also been set up to examine the whole 
gamut of problems caused by circulation of fake currency notes. With a 
view  to avo iding  multiplicity of management and  control , the Committee 
would like the Government  to constitute  a nodal Group, comprising  senior  
level representatives from all concerned agencies/ Departments and  
functioning under the overall supervision of the  RBI – the principal agency 
responsible for currency management –to oversee and monitor the 
implementation  of anti-counterfeit measures in a coordinated manner”. 
 

10 
 
9. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply, stated as under : 
“One special FICN Co-ordination Group has been formed in MHA to share 
the intelligence/information amongst the different security agencies of 
State/Centre to counter the menace of circulation of Fake currency notes 
in the country.  IB, CBI, NIA, R&AW and DRI continuously share 
operational intelligence to neutralize FICN smugglers. 
 
With a view to bringing improvement in reporting, the procedure for 
sending report to NCRB has been revised under which RBI is collecting 
data from banks and reporting to NCRB, in a consolidated manner.  
RBI is represented in all important GoI Committees e.g. Economic 
Intelligence Council (EIC), Forged Note Co -ordination Committee 
(FCORD), etc. dealing with the issue of counterfeit notes.  This has 
resulted in enhan ced co-operation for tackling the issue. Further, due to 
the efforts made by RBI, a State Level Committee on FICN, has been 
constituted in all the States. This Committee, headed the DGP of the 
concerned state, has senior police and other investigating agency officials, 
as members. This has been promoting inter agency co -ordination at the 
State level, dealing with the menace of counterfeit notes”. 
 
 To reduce the menace of counterfeit currency notes in the country, the 
Department of Economic Affairs in their post-evidence reply stated as under : 
“RBI has been taking several steps to reduce the menace of counterfeit 
notes in the country, the major ones among which include : 
 
(a) Extending support to GoI in changing security features of Indian 
banknotes to maintain  integrity of banknotes including periodical 
phasing out of old series notes. 
 
(b) Improving systems and mechanisms at banks so that any 
counterfeit note entering into the banking system is detected and 
reported and not recirculated. 
 
(c) Raising awareness of the members of public and banks through 
training / interaction programmes, where information on genuine 
Indian banknotes is disseminated for facilitating identification of 
genuine notes or otherwise. 
 
(d) Rationalising processes for detection and reporting of coun terfeit 
notes to encourage banks to report counterfeit notes and reduce 
harassment of common man. 
 
(e) Rationalising processes by which common man coming across 
counterfeit notes, unknowingly, will not be put to any loss for which 
the banks have been instructed in June 2013, to freely accept notes 

11 
 
over the counters and pass on the credit / currency chest and 
tenderers.  Thereafter, notes are to be processed at the back office 
/ currency chest and RBI will compensate the banks at 25% of the 
national value of cou nterfeit notes in denominations of Rs. 100 and 
above”.  
 
10. While noting that steps have been taken to improve coordination 
among different agencies through the instrument of FCORD, the Committee    
desire that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with its presenc e at ground level 
should strive to educate and create awareness among the public through 
multi-media options.  The legal regime should be strengthened in a way 
that the common man is not harassed for unknowingly being in possession 
of counterfeit currency.   The fact of being in possession of a counterfeit 
note should never alone be the proof of guilt.   
 
C. (Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
Smuggling of counterfeit currency 
11. The Committee recommended as under : 
 
“The Committee are alarmed to note  that the  int erdictions made  by 
enforcement agencies  raised  the suspicion that  the Fake Indian  
Currency  Notes  originated from across the borders and were smuggled 
into the country  through diverse route/ channels. Inputs also indicate  that 
transnational network s exists which use countries such  as UAE, 
Malaysia, Thailand, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Myanmar as transit 
points  for bringing fake  Indian Currency  into the  country. The Pakistan‟s 
ISI is also suspected to be involved in both printing and traff icking of fake 
currency. Inputs available with the Ministry of Home Affairs reveal that 
there is credible evidence to suggest that smuggling of Fake Indian 
Currency Notes has links with espionage and terrorist activities. The 
Committee desire that the Gove rnment should conduct a comprehensive 
inquiry into all aspects of issue including its ramifications on national 
security. The Research & Analysis wing also needs to be more involved 
and adequately sensitized in this regard for harnessing the intelligence 
channels to secure the cooperation of foreign agencies in the detection of 
overseas sources of counterfeit currency and also the verification of 
credentials of international companies engaged for supplying bank note 
paper etc.” 

12 
 
12. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply, stated as under : 
 
“A report from the Central Intelligence Agencies indicates that Fake Indian 
Currency Notes (FICN) smuggled into India mostly originate from Pakistan 
having distribution networ k from Thailand which extends in the East to 
UAE in the West, with Dubai, Dhaka, Kathmandu, Colombo and Bangkok 
emerging as major transit points.  Thailand is emerging as a safe haven 
for Pak -based FICN operatives both for production and transportation of 
FICN into India.  Pakistani nationals based in Thailand are actively 
involved in circulation of FICN which is smuggled into India through petty 
businessman, tourists and couriers visiting Thailand on leisure/business.  
The most frequently used air routes f or smuggling of FICN are Dubai -
Bangkok, Bangkok -Kathmandu, Bangkok -Dhaka, Bangkok -Kolkata and 
Bangkok-Sri Lanka routes by Thai airlines. FICN racketeers in Thailand 
work in tandem with documents forgers who facilitate clearance at Airports 
by forged travel documents for FICN carriers. 
 
All the State Governments and State Police authorities have been advised 
to keep the security arrangement on maximum alert and to adopt effective 
counter measures to counter the menace of FICN. Authorities concerned 
with the security of airports needs to be sensitized to these threats for 
adoption of necessary counter measures urgently.  
 
Based on the intelligence inputs received by it, IB has been bringing the 
seizures and route of smuggling of FICN into India through various  
countries to the notice of RAW.  MoF had recently taken up the matter 
with MEA for taking up the matter at appropriate level with Bangladeshi 
authorities to address the issue in an effective manner.  In response, 
Foreign Secretary informed that MEA had ra ised the matter at the level of 
Minister and also at his level”.   
 
13. On the issue of indigenization of banknote paper and ink, the Department 
of Economic Affairs in their post-evidence reply stated as under : 
“Presently, the bulk of Bank Note Paper and Security Printing Inks are 
being sourced from foreign companies.  The Government has decided to 
set up a paper mill through joint venture between Security Printing and 
Minting Corporation of India (SPMCIL) and Bhartiya Reserve Bank Note 
Mudran Private Limited (BRBNMPL) at Mysore to augment the production 
of paper indigenously with a production capacity of 12,000 MT per annum.  
The modernization and expansion of Security Paper Mill (SPM), 
Hoshangabad is also underway.  This would add further capacity of abou t 
6,000 MT per annum.  Thus, there will be indigenous production of 18,000 
MT of Cylinder Mould Vat Made Watermarked Banknote (CWBN) paper 
per annum after operationalisation of these two projects over and above 
the existing production capacity of 3,000 MT per annum paper at SPM, 

13 
 
Hoshangabad.  India would meet major requirement of bank note paper 
indigenously, which is being imported at present”.   
 
14. Keeping in view the rising incidence of smuggling of Fake Indian 
Currency Notes, the Committee urge the Go vernment to tighten the 
Customs/BSF/Police surveillance and gear up the enforcement machinery 
to bust networks, especially those operating from neighbouring countries.  
The Committee would like the Government to diplomatically engage the 
neighbouring count ries and involve them through International Fora and 
discourse at various levels.  The Committee desire that Central agencies 
like FCORD in addition to advising the State Government, agencies and 
police should objectively follow up important cases and help  improve 
systematization with continual inputs and updating State level mechanism 
against counterfeit currency operators. 
 
15. Since the bulk of Bank Note paper and Security Printing inks are 
being sourced from foreign companies and Fake Indian Currency No tes in 
circulation are having the same paper, ink and water mark, the Committee 
desire that in order to minimize the menace of fake currency notes in the 
country, the Government should make all concerted efforts to reduce its 
dependence on imported Bank Pa per Notes and inks and indiginise the 
production of the same in the country in a time bound manner and 
introduce new security features in Indian currency notes from time to time. 
 
D.              (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
Withdrawal of High Denomination Currency Notes- 
1996 & 2000 Series 
 
16. The Committee recommended as under : 
 
“It has come to the notice of the Committee that most of the counterfeit 
notes seized by enforcement agencies pertain to 1996 and 2000 series. 
Further about 70% of the currency d etected consists of higher 
denomination notes namely Rs. 500 and 1000. As remedial measure, the 
RBI has withdrawn the currency of 500 –rupee denomination belonging to 
1996 series. They have also stated to have drawn up a plan for withdrawal 
of currency of different denominations including that of Rs.1000 
denomination belonging to the affected series.  Keeping  in view  the fact 
that a large  volume of high denomination counterfeit  currency  is being  

14 
 
smuggled into  and put in circulation  in the country, t he committee  desire  
that  the RBI should consider phased withdrawal from circulation of 
currency of Rs.1000 denomination as well of the 2000 series ,if its  
security features are found  to have been successfully  breached  by the 
counterfeiters. The RBI should also constantly monitor the situation with 
regard to currency of the post -2000 series, although they have sought to 
assure that the security features introduced in 2005 have not been 
breached as yet. 
 
17. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Econ omic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply, stated as follows : 
“RBI has informed that during the last five years the following series of 
banknotes have been phased out : 
  
Denomination (Rs.)          Series Process   initiated in 
Rs  500 M G series 1996 
M G series  2000 
July  2008 
October 2009 
Rs 1000 M G series  2000 March 2011 
Rs 100 M G series 1996  February 2012 
 
RBI, in consultation with GoI, reviews the need for further phasing out of 
any notes series, periodically and takes action accordingly. 
DEA has written to RBI on 27.05.2013 requesting them to initiate 
withdrawal of older series of banknotes in a time bound manner”.    
 
 
18. The Committee note that their recommendation regarding phasing 
out of Rs. 1000 (MG series 2000) has been acted upon  by RBI.  The 
Committee desire such phasing out of notes periodically and as and when 
required should be continued.  
 
E.   (Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
      Detection of counterfeit currency 
 
19. The Committee recommended as under : 
“The Committee note that   with a view  to preventing  domestic printing, 
circulation and possession of FICNs, there are stringent provisions 
available in the Indian Penal Code ( IPC)  It is ironical that thought the 
existing  law is intended for the persons  found to be involved in the crime, 
in  reality, even  a common man who innocently carries  fake currency in 
the normal course suffers. It is therefore, imperative that the existing penal 
provision should be modified in a way that will protect the innocent 
common man and not bu rden him with the onus of proving his innocence. 
The Committee are of the view that ordinary people unknowingly in 

15 
 
possession of counterfeit currency should not be penalized. For this 
purpose, the existing legal provision may be appropriately modified. The  
requirement of filling an FIR in such cases should also be reviewed. 
Further, extensive awareness campaign should be conducted and 
sustained to educate the common man about the basis and recognizable 
features of a counterfeit note. In this regard, it may be appropriate to make 
available the Ultra Violet lamps in all bank branches across the country to 
facilitate easy detection of basis counterfeit features at bank cash 
counters. 
 
20. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply, stated as under : 
“RBI, in consultation with GoI, has revised the existing procedure for 
reporting of counterfeit notes by banks wherein, all cases of detection of 
counterfeit notes at the bank branches / treasuries need to be promptly 
reported to Police Authorities in the following manner: 
 
(i) For cases of detection of counterfeit notes upto 4 pieces, in a single 
transaction, a consolidated report as per the format prescribed in the 
annex should be sent to the police authorities at the end of the month.  
 
(ii) For cases of detection of counterfeit notes of 5 or more pieces, in a 
single transaction, FIRs should be lodged with the Nodal Police Station / 
Police Authorities as per jurisdiction. 
 
The above process is expected to ensure that ordinar y people 
unknowingly in possession of counterfeit notes are not penalized once 
such notes are detected by the banks.  
 
RBI through its Regional Offices regularly conducts public awareness 
programmes on Indian banknotes. The Bank also launched a multimedia,  
multi lingual awareness campaign, initially through Doordarshan channels 
from August 15, 2010. The 60 second film is titled “Paisa Bolta Hai” and 
was shown in Hindi and eleven other languages, for a year. A dedicated 
microsite www.paisaboltahai.rbi.org.in, with information on Indian 
banknote has also been hosted in RBI‟s website . Further, posters have 
been distributed to banks for display in their premises to educate the 
public on features of Indian banknotes. 
 
The banks have been advised that all notes in denominations of ` 100 and 
above should be issued through counters and ATMs, only after subjecting 
them to machine processing so as to ensure that only clean and genuine 
notes are issued to the public.  
 
On its part, the Ministry of Home Affairs, which coordinates FICN matters 
has informed that the required safeguard for misuse of 489 C of IPC 

16 
 
keeping in view that knowledge of the accused with regard to FICNs is an 
essential ingredient for proving the offence already exists. 
 
All the Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all the States and Union 
Territories have been requested that a Police Station at each District 
Police Headquarters may be designated as the nodal police station 
wherein the offences relating to FICNs recovered by Banks can be 
reported. The Banks will also correspondingly designate a nodal officers in 
each of the Districts in their respective Banks who will be vested with the 
responsibility of reporting the seizures of the FICNs in the said Dis trict. 
The system of reporting will be monthly wherein details of recovery of all 
FICNs having 1 piece to 4 pieces in a single transaction are reported by 
the Banks by their respective nodal officer in consolidated manner.  
However, seizures involving five  or more than five pieces in one single 
transaction will be reported as a separate FIR, immediately by the banks 
in the prescribed proforma”. 
 
 
 
21. The Committee note that measures have been initiated by the RBI for 
compulsorily making available Ultra Vio let Lamps and installing Note 
Sorting Machines at the High Cash Volume bank branches, branches in 
border areas, sensitive branches etc.  Considering that the problem of 
circulation of counterfeit currency notes has become widespread in recent 
years, the Committee emphasize that cooperation with State and local level 
agencies should be increased and general public be made properly aware 
of the safety features of genuine Indian currency notes.  Further, steps 
should be taken for expeditious and compulsory ins tallation of Ultra Violet 
Lamps and Note Sorting Machine at the public areas in bank branches and 
market places. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       YASHWANT SINHA, 
29 November, 2013                              Chairman, 
Agrahayana 8, 1935 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Finance. 

17 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1410 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
   Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
15.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
16.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
17.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
18.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
19.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
20.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1145 hrs.) 
 
2. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX    
3. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX    
 

18 
 
Part II 
(1145 hrs. to 1410 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)    
1. Dr. Arvind Mayaram, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary (C&C) 
3. Shri R. Gandhi, Executive Director, RBI 
4. Shri B.P. Vijayendra, PCGM, RBI 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs  
1. Shri Anil Goswami, Home Secretary 
2. Shri S. Jairaman, Secretary (IS) 
3. Shri Rakesh Singh, Joint Secretary (IS-I) 
4. Shri Satpal Chauhan, Joint Secretary (Admn) 
5. Shri P.R.K. Naidu, Joint Director, NCRB 
 
Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) 
     Shri Alok Joshi, Secretary (R) 
 
Intelligence Bureau (IB) 
1. Shri S.A. Ibrahim, Director 
2. Shri S.A. Rizvi, Joint Director 
 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
1. Shri Ranjit Sinha, Director 
2. Shri R.K. Dutta, Additional Director 
 
National Investigation Agency (NIA) 
      Shri Sharad Kumar, Director General 
 
Enforcement Directorate (ED) 
1. Dr. Rajan Katoch, Director of Enforcement 
2. Shri Balesh Kumar, Special Director of Enforcement 
 
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) 
1. Shri Najib Shah, Director General 
2. Shri Pranab Kumar Das, Commissioner (Anti Smuggling) 
 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) 
 
      Shri Praveen Kumar Tiwari, Director 
 
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB) 
 
 Shri R.K. Mahajan, Joint Secretary and Deputy Director General 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 
     Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary 

19 
 
 
 
5. The Committee took ora l evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), Reserve Bank of India, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW), Intelligence Bureau (IB), Central 
Bureau of Investigation (CBI), National Inv estigation Agency (NIA), Enforcement 
Directorate (ED) and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)  on action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in 79th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on the subject “Counterfeit Currency Not es in Circulation”. The major 
issues discussed during the sitting broadly related to gravity of the situation, 
emergence of new areas of origination, threat to national economic security, role in 
terrorism, co-relation between counterfeit currency and parallel economy, approximate 
quantity and denomination of currency in circulation and recovery, measures to 
strengthen crime detection, reporting mechanism, effectiveness of agencies to check 
ingression through airports, ports and various transit points.  The  Committee also 
deliberated upon success in tackling the menace of counterfeit currency, issue of co -
ordination within and between various Central and State agencies involved, 
improvement in systemization and detection after establishment of FCORD, steps 
taken by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in creating awareness and to check dispension 
of fake notes through ATMs, difficulties/hazards of persons unknowingly being found 
in possession of counterfeit currency, number of cases instituted, people arrested and 
convicted and modernization of SPMCIL.  The Chairman directed the representatives 
of Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), Reserve Bank of India, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW), Intelligence Bureau 
(IB), Central Bu reau of Investigation (CBI), National Investigation Agency (NIA), 
Enforcement Directorate (ED) and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) to furnish 
written replies to the points raised by the Members during the discussion within a 
period of 15 days.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

20 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th November, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
  
    PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
8.  Adv. A. Sampath 
9. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
13.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
 
2.  XX  XX   XX   XX 
XX  XX   XX   XX 
 
                                          The witnesses then withdrew. 
 

21 
 
 
 
 
Part II 
(1240 hrs. to 1320 hrs.) 
  
WITNESSES 
  
3.  XX  XX   XX   XX 
XX  XX   XX   XX 
  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
Part III 
(1320 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
 
4.     The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption :-  
 
(i)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 79 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on „Counterfeit Currency Notes in 
Circulation‟; 
 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 6th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on „Inflation and Price Rise‟; and  
 
(iii) Draft Report on a ction taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 71st Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
   
5.    The Committee adopted the above draft reports without any modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament. 
    
 
6. The Committee decided to hold their next sitting on 5 th December, 2013 subject 
to other exigencies.   
 
          The Committee then adjourned. 
 

22 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT (14TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
ON  ‘COUNTERFEIT CURRENCY NOTES IN CIRCULATION’ 
 
  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   10   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government  08  80.00 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,4, 5,    
6,7, 8, 9 and 10) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect            
of which replies of the Government have   02  20.00 
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 and 3) 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL  0.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  