10
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-10)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment)
 Bill, 2009
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)


TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGE
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................……….…(iii)
2. INTRODUCTION ..................................................……………………...... (iv)
3. Background
  4. Clause 2: Increasing the upper age limit of Members
 of SAT   (Amendment of Section 15 N of the SEBI Act)
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 4 February, 2010
10 March, 2010 …………….
II. The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill,
2009……..

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman
MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav
21.   Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara*
RAJYA SABHA
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar -  Additional Director
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP

INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorized by the Committee, present this Tenth Report on the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009.
 2. The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill,
2009, introduced in Lok Sabha on 3 August, 2009 was referred to the Committee
on 9 September, 2009 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha.
 3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions
contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs).
 4. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)) and the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI) on 4 February, 2010.
 5. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 15 April, 2010.
 6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and the
representatives of SEBI for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the
requisite material and information which were desired in connection with the
examination of the Bill.
 7. The Committee also wish to express thanks to the Securities
Appellate Tribunal (SAT) for furnishing their written views on the Bill.
 8. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
New Delhi;                 DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
 15  April, 2010                                         Chairman,
  25 Chaitra 1932 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance.

Report
   I.   Background
The Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) was set up under Section 15K of
the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Act, 1992 to adjudicate upon
appeals against decisions of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
The Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal hold office for a term of five
years and are eligible for re-appointment.  The upper age limit for the Presiding
Officer and Members of the Tribunal is sixty-eight years and sixty-two years
respectively.
2. The SEBI Act 1992 inter-alia specifies the tenure of office of the
Presiding Officer (PO) and other Members of the SAT.  Section 15 N of the Act,
stipulates that:-
“The Presiding Officer and every other Member of a Securities Appellate
Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re-appointment:
Provided that no person shall hold office as the Presiding Officer of the
Securities Appellate Tribunal after he has attained the age of sixty-eight
years:
Provided further that no person shall hold office as a Member of the
Securities Appellate Tribunal after he has attained the age of sixty-two
years.”
3. The Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill,
2009 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 3.8.2009 to amend Section 15 N of the Act
so as to enhance upper age limit of the Members of SAT from Sixty-two to Sixty-
five years.  The Bill was referred to the Standing committee on Finance on 9
September, 2009 by the Speaker for examination and report thereon.
 4. The intended purpose of seeking to increase the retirement age of
Member of SAT as per the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the
Bill is as follows:
“Normally, retiring or retired officers of the level of Additional Secretary
or Secretary to the Government of India are the applicants for the post
of Members to the Tribunal and they are on the verge of completing or
have completed sixty years of age at the time of selection.  Thus with
the stipulated sixty-two years of age for Tribunal Members, a
maximum of two years of service is available for such officers.  In
addition, the selection process too is time consuming and as a

consequence, on average a Tribunal Member holds office for about
twelve to eighteen months only.  As a result the work of Tribunal is
suffering.  It is therefore proposed to increase the upper age limit of
the Members of Tribunal from sixty-two years to sixty-five years by
amending Section 15 N of the Act.”
5. As per the information furnished to Committee by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), a separate policy proposal move by
the Ministry of Law seeking to increase the age limit of Members of all Tribunals,
including the SAT is in the anvil.  The information furnished by the Ministry in this
regard states:
“The proposal to increase the age limit of Members of the
Securities Appellate Tribunal along with Chairpersons and Members of
other Tribunals and Statutory Authorities performing adjudicating and
regulatory functions is covered in the policy document of the Ministry of
Law which was discussed in a meeting convened by the Principal
Secretary to the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 29 th April, 2008 associating
the Cabinet Secretary, Secretary (Personnel), and Law Secretary. On the
basis of the meeting, the Ministry of Law is separately moving a Bill
namely “The Tribunals, Statutory and Other Authorities (Conditions of
Service) Amendment Bill 2008”. The Bill however, seeks to amend a
number of other provisions also relating to 45 Acts of all
Tribunals/Statutory Authorities  performing adjudicating and regulatory
functions in the country. As such it is expected that the Bill may take
some time before becoming law, necessitating repeated selections for
Members of SAT and keeping SAT positions vacant most of the time. It is
accordingly proposed to amend Section 15 N of the SEBI Act 1992
relating to the raising of age limit of Members of SAT only.”
 6. The Committee invited memoranda from various stock exchanges,
Appellate Tribunals, SEBI as well as SAT on the Securities and Exchange Board
of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009.  While these bodies have expressed agreement
with the amendment proposal of the Bill seeking to increase the retirement age of
Members, the Securities Appellate Tribunal proposed an additional suggestion
pertaining to the necessity of overcoming the existing procedural hurdles in the
conduct of inquiry proceedings as per the provisions of the SEBI Act, 1992.
7. In examining the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Amendment) Bill, 2009, the Committee also took cognizance of the information
furnished earlier by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in
the course of the examination of the Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry that as proposed by SEBI comprehensive amendments to the SEBI Act
1992 as well as the other Acts pertaining to the Securities market [The Securities
contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and the Depositories Act, 1996] were in the

anvil.  The comprehensive amendments proposed, as informed by the Ministry,
inter-alia include:-
“1.     Reorganizing SEBI Board delineating its powers and functions.
2.   Strengthening provisions relating to insider trading, prohibition of
manipulative and deceptive devices, substantial acquisition of
securities or control.
3.       Dispense with the requirement of sub-brokers with SEBI.
4.     Empowering SEBI to specify different combinations of
intermediation services that an intermediary may be allowed to
undertake or to allow such combinations with such terms as it
may consider appropriate.
5.      To extend the power to regulate certain intermediaries who
though do not buy/sell or deal in securities but may assume
importance as an intermediary and to specify the combination of
intermediation services which an intermediary can undertake.
6.   To extend the power of SEBI to call information from any person
including telecom operators in relation to an enquiry or
investigation and to vest SEBI with the powers of the Civil Court in
such matters.
7.    To explicitly empower SEBI to direct any person to disgorge
amount equivalent to disproportionate gain or unfair advantages
or loss averted.
8.    To expressly empower SEBI to cancel illegally allotted securities, to
debar a person from serving in the securities market or in a listed
company, to freeze voting powers on the shares acquired in
violation of securities laws.”
 8.   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and the SEBI in connection
with the examination of the Bill.

9. While the intended purpose of seeking to increase the upper
age limit of the Members of SAT from 62 years at present to 65 years is to
enable the Members in performing their duties efficiently by ensuring a
reasonable length of term in office and thereby address the problem of
delays in disposal of cases presently faced, the Committee can not help
noting that the proposal has been brought in an isolated and piece-meal
manner.  This is so because a separate Bill titled the ‘The Tribunals,
Statutory and other Authorities (Conditions of Service) Amendment Bill’
which inter-alia seeks to increase the retirement age of Members of the
Tribunals, Statutory Authorities etc. including the SAT as mooted by the
Ministry of Law is in the anvil.  More importantly, comprehensive
amendments to the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
aimed at strengthening the role of SEBI in capital market regulation, which
include proposals for addressing procedural infirmities in the conduct of
inquiry proceedings pertaining to SAT as well as re-organising the
composition and functioning of SAT are also in the anvil since long.  With
these proposals being in the anvil, the necessity of seeking to increase the
retirement age of Members of SAT with the Securities and Exchange Board
of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009 is, in the opinion of the Committee not very
appropriate.
10.      Issues that emerged out of the Committee’s examination of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009 are dealt
with in the subsequent sections of this report.

II. Clause 2: Increasing the upper age limit of Members of SAT
(Amendment of Section 15 N of the SEBI Act)
 11.  Clause 2 of the Bill reads as under:
“In section 15 N of the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992, in the second proviso, for the word “sixty-
two”, the word “sixty-five” shall be substituted.”
12.  The rationale behind the proposal to increase the age limit of only
Members, as furnished by the Ministry in their Background note, is stated as
below:
“While the tenure of five years is long enough for effectively
utilising the services of a  Presiding Officer (PO)  (who can
hold office up to 68 years) and Members,  the  limit of 62
years as the upper age limit for Members  is  effectively
restricting this objective.  Given the fact that securities
market is a specialised and technical subject, full utilisation
of the skill of the Members selected need   a reasonable time
frame.  As such, 62 years is felt to be on the lower side…
When retiring / retired officers at the level of Additional
Secretary / Secretary to the Government of India are the
applicants for the posts, they would have completed 60
years of age at the time of selection.  In the stipulated age
limit of 62 years only a maximum of two years of service will
be available to the organisation while the selection process
itself is a long one.  This, coupled with the fact that the
expertise in the specialised / technical area of securities
market gained by these officials will not be available for a
longer tenure, itself will be a limiting factor in the qualitative
up-gradation of the SAT, which is highly needed in the
context of SAT being proposed (in the Bills) also as the
Appellate Authority for other financial sub-sectors such as
insurance, pension and commodity futures markets.”
13. Elaborating on the rationale of the amendment proposal, the
Finance Secretary, while tendering evidence before the Committee stated:-
“The average length of the service of the Members on the
Tribunal has been about 1 and half years which, we feel,
given the technical nature of the job, given the expertise
which they should bring to bear at the level of the Tribunal
and given the fact that there should be a reasonable length
of service which should be available on the Bench that they
sit on, is too short and that is why the proposal has been
made to increase the upper age limit to 65 Years.”
14. In response to a question on the status of pending cases before
SAT and the average time taken to settle the same vis-à-vis the time limit

stipulated in the SEBI Act,1992,  the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs) in a written reply stated as follows:
“Since inception of SAT 1803 appeals have been filed before
it till date, of which 1619 appeals have been disposed off
and 184 appeals are pending. Time stipulated for disposing
off the appeal filed before SAT as specified in Section 15T
(6) of SEBI Act, 1992 is that the SAT shall deal with the
appeal cases as expeditiously as possible and endeavor to
dispose off the appeals finally within 6 months of the date of
receipt of the appeal. The average time taken for disposal of
a case varies from case to case depending upon the nature
of the appeal.  However, efforts are always made to settle
the cases as expeditiously as possible and within six months
as provided under Section 15T (6) of SEBI Act, 1992.”
 15. The reasons for occurrence of backlog of cases, as submitted by
the Ministry, in a written reply is stated as below:-
“In January 2009 mere 98 appeals were pending before
SAT. However, when one Member retired on 14.1.2009,
SAT could not function for want of quorum and therefore, the
backlog of cases shot up from 98 in January–2009 to 170 in
June- 2009. Principal reason for delay in settlement of cases
is attributed to delay in appointment of Members. One
Member could be appointed in the month of June-2009
where after the Tribunal became functional.”
16.  Section 15 L of SEBI Act, 1992 stipulates the composition of
Securities Appellate Tribunal. It consists of a Presiding Officer and two Members.
Details of the Members, their tenure, etc. as furnished to the Committee are
shown in the table below:
Sl.
No.
Name /Designation Period Cases
disposed
1. Shri C. Achuthan
Presiding Officer
4.11.1997 to
3.11.2003
194
2. Justice Kumar Rajarathnam
Presiding Officer.
20.3.2004 to
20.12.2005
3. Shri B.Samal
Member
4.11.2003 to 1.3.2005
4. Shri N.L.Lakhanpal
Member
10.11.2003 to
15.2.2005
5. Shri Chandan Bhattacharya
Member
30.5.2005 to 7.5.2007
6. Shri R.N.Bhardwaj
Member
7.6.2005 to 12.1.2007
7. Justice. N.K.Sodhi.
Presiding Officer.
21.12.2005 till date
1425 *

8. Shri. Arun Bhargava
Member
30.4.2007 to
15.10.2008
9. Shri. Utpal Bhattacharya
Member
24.5.2007 to
15.01.2009
10. Shri Samar Ray
Member
10.6.2009  till date
* Ever since the constitution of the multi member bench of SAT in 2002, disposal
of appeals cannot be shown against any individual Presiding Officer/Member as
the appeals are heard and disposed off by the bench consisting of PO and two
Members.”
 17. While taking evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), the Committee inter-alia took
cognizance of the observation made in the Department of Personnel and
Training (DOPT) office memorandum dated 29 December, 2008, which states
that ‘in many cases, vacancy notification for recruitment through open
advertisement for senior level posts in different autonomous institutions/ statutory
bodies/ societies was either not well publicised or if published, at times, sufficient
time for inviting applications is not allowed’.   Asked whether the Ministry initiates
the recruitment process well in advance in anticipation of occurrence of a
vacancy, the Finance Secretary, in  reply stated:-
“On the issue whether any vacancy is likely to arise in the
near future and whether we have taken the necessary action
or not, I would submit that the earliest vacancy is in
December, 2010. Generally, we start the process six months
before that. The process to be initiated is not due as of
today.”
18.    The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have
informed in their post-evidence reply that the two posts of Member, SAT held by
Shri Arun Bhargava and Shri Utpal Bhattacharya fell vacant w.e.f. 16.10.2008
and 16.1.2009 respectively.  Pending selection of the new Members, the SAT
could not function for want of quorum during the period 16.1.2009 to 9.6.2009.
Regarding the pendency of cases, the Ministry have furnished the following
details:
(i) No of case filed………………..1965
(ii) No of cases disposed…………1821
(iii) No of cases pending…………. 144
19.      The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in the
post evidence reply have also furnished inter-alia the process adopted for

appointment of Members, SAT for filling the vacancies that arose in 2009 as
follows:
“The post of Members SAT fell vacant on 15.10.2008 and
15.1.2009.  the selection process for filling up both the posts
was initiated on 9.7.2009 ……..
A circular, inviting applications was accordingly issued to
the aforesaid on 18.9.2008……….
The Selection Committee met on 20.11.2008 and
19.12.2008 and based on short listing of the candidates and
personal interaction with shortlisted candidates and their views
on a case study and individual response sheets thereto,
selected two candidates.
The names of the selected candidates for filling up two
posts was sent to the Deptt of Personnel and Training (DOPT)
for seeking approval of the ACC on 7.1.2009.  The DOPT
sought certain queries including whether Central Vigilance
Commission (CVC) clearance was obtained in respect of the
two candidates.  The Ministry replies to the queries on
29.1.2009 and opined that since CVC clearance was time
consuming and involved consultation with the CBI, it may not
be necessary, as one of the candidates proposed had recently
retired from a Secretary level post in the CBDT and the
second was also holding a Secretary level post in the C&AG
Office.  The DOPT however, vide their letter dated 16.2.2009
insisted that CVC clearance may be obtained.  CVC clearance
was accordingly requested vide letter dated 18.2.2009 and
received and communicated to the DOPT on 9.4.2009.  In the
said letter, the DOPT was also informed that one of the two
candidates selected for the post, had joined as Insurance
Ombudsman in the Office of the governing Body of the
Insurance Council and as such the proposal now existed for
filling up one post only.  The DOPT conveyed the approval of
the ACC for filling up one post of Member, SAT on 5.6.2009.
The incumbent joined the post on 10.6.2009.  One of the two
posts of Member SAT has thus been filled up.
Circular inviting applications for the 2 nd post was issued
on 22.4.2009.  the circular was posted on the website of the
Ministry of Finance and the Deptt of Personnel and Training
also.  The last date for receipt of applications in the circular
was 6.6.2009.  In view of the fact that the DOPT had insisted
on open advertisements for inviting applications for such
posts, the post was advertised in the newspapers on
18.6.2009.  In line with the closing date for receipt of
applications as per the advertisement, the last mentioned in
the circular for receipt of applications was also extended to
8.7.2009
   46 applications were received.  8 candidates were
shortlisted for calling for personal interaction on 22.9.2009.
The search cum selection Committee met on 16.10.2009 for a
personal talk with the candidates.  A case study was also
given to the shortlisted candidates for assessing their

competence.  The file for approval of FM of the recommended
candidate was put up on 18.10.2009 and approved on
15.12.2009.  Proposal was sent to DOPT for approval of ACC
on 5.1.2010.”
20. Questioned on the selection procedure and age criteria of Members
of other Appellate Tribunals vis-à-vis SAT and reasons for delays if any, in the
appointment, the Ministry, in a written reply informed as follows:-
“In the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) the upper age
limit of the Chairman is 68 years and that of Members 65
years.  In the case of Telecom Disputes Settlement and
Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) the upper age limit of Chairman
is 70 years and that of Member is 65 years.  These
examples highlight that the age limit of the Chairman and
other Members has been kept at high level taking into
account the fact of their seniority and status for joining these
positions. The qualifications prescribed for the posts of
Members in other Tribunals are different as they may not
require knowledge of securities markets, special knowledge
of finance etc.
As regards the selection process of the Members of other
Tribunals is concerned it may vary from case to case and
even for each recruitment year in the same Tribunal,
depending on availability of candidates. The process is
generally long drawn one. As per the guidelines of the
Department of Personnel and Training, applications need to
be invited through open advertisement, setting up of Search
cum Selection Committees and getting the
recommendations of the Selection Committee approved by
the Appointment Committee of the Cabinet.”
21. Questioned as to why preference was given only to retired people
for appointment as Members of SAT, the Finance Secretary, while deposing
before the Committee stated:-
“whether retired people are chosen or younger people are
chosen, the idea is that they should have longer tenure. So,
it is not as if only somebody from the service or Audit and
Accounts or any particular service has to be chosen.
Whoever is chosen, will stay up to the age of 65”.
22. Asked to express SEBI’s view on the proposed amendment
seeking to raise the retirement age of Members of SAT from 62 to 65 years, the
Chairman, SEBI while tendering evidence before the Committee stated as
follows:
“from the SEBI’s perspective, more than 62 to 65, if the
Members are given slightly longer duration, it would be
helpful. What we have found is that the Members get

appointed for a period of one and half or two years because
generally retired officers are appointed and since the
retirement age is 60 and by the time the appointment
process goes through, their age of 62 comes up very fast.
We would support this if it results in greater continuity in the
SAT bench…
we would prefer that there is continuity. If a younger person
is recruited and given five year term, I think, that serves the
purpose. We are not saying that only retired officers must be
recruited. This being an appellate body, it is difficult for us to
have  too many opinions.”
23. When pointed out whether it would not be preferable to prescribe a
fixed tenure of five years for the Members of SAT, the Chairman, SEBI
expressed agreement with the suggestion.
 24. In their written memorandum furnished to the Committee, the
Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT) sought to draw the attention of the
Committee to the existing procedural hurdle under the SEBI Act, 1992, which
allows parallel proceedings under same set of facts which results in increasing
the number of cases before SAT and thus delay the disposal of cases. The views
expressed by SAT reads as under:-
“The Securities and Exchange Board of India enables the
Board to initiate parallel proceedings under same set of facts
against the delinquent under the enquiry regulations framed
by the Securities and Exchange Board of India u/s. 11B or
u/s 11D as the case may be, on the one hand and
adjudication proceedings under Chapter VIA for the
imposition of monetary penalties on the other. Orders under
the enquiry regulations, directions u/s 11B of an order u/s
11D are passed by the Board whereas the proceedings
under Chapter VIA are conducted by an Adjudicating Officer
who is a subordinate officer of the Board and it is he who
passes the final order. Since the two sets of proceedings are
independent of each other, the possibility of conflicting views
on the same set of facts cannot be ruled out and that would
not be in the public interest. If only one inquiry is held
against the delinquent and on the basis of that enquiry the
same body is given the power to impose penalties under
both sets of proceedings, it would not only expedite matters
but also avoid conflicting views and multiple proceedings.”
 25. Questioned on the lacuna in the procedure, as pointed out by SAT,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in a written reply,
submitted as follows:-

“… The government is aware of this issue and this, inter alia,
will be addressed while moving another round of
comprehensive amendments to the SEBI Act.”
26. On this issue, the Chairman, SEBI submitted as follows before the
Committee:-
“Sir, I think, it has been correctly pointed out that the SEBI
Act has these two parallel provisions – one for inquiry and
one for adjudication. I would submit to the Committee that
this is probably because the SEBI Act was amended at
different points of time. What has happened is that under the
inquiry proceedings, there is the power to suspend or cancel
the registration of an intermediary whereas under the
adjudication procedure, the power is only to impose the fine.
I am entirely in agreement with the Committee’s view or the
view that you read out just now that we should not have two
parallel proceedings against any entity for the same set of
facts…You are right that earlier there have been instances
like that, but we are now not initiating two parallel
proceedings against the same entity on the basis of same
facts…in the amendments that we have proposed, this is
one of the things that both adjudication and inquiry can be
brought under one section whereby there will be the ability to
decide as to what is the gravity of the offence committed and
then accordingly either cancel or suspend registration or
impose a fine. So, we would be entirely in agreement with
this proposal.”
27.  The Committee also desired to know the details of the composition of
the High Powered Advisory Committee (HPAC) for finalizing the terms of consent
orders.  In this regard, SEBI, in a post evidence reply inter-alia submitted as
follows:
“As per the circular dated April 20, 2007, all the consent and compounding
matters are to be placed before a High Powered Advisory Committee
(HPAC) for appropriate recommendations.  In order to ensure
transparency and objectivity into the consent and compounding process,
the HPAC comprises with the following persons:
a. Justice Mr. Hosbet Suresh, Retired Judge of the Bombay High
Court.  Justice Suresh was a part time Professor of Law at the
Government Law College and designated Senior Advocate of
Bombay High Court before his elevation to the Bench of Bombay
High Court.  Shri Suresh was also appointed as a an administrator
of M/s Arrow Global Agrotech Ltd., a Collective Investment
Company by the Bombay High Court to administer the properties of
the company/its subsidiaries/group companies etc.,  He has also
been appointed as arbitration member in many arbitration cases.

b. Mr. M. Balachandran, former Chairman & Managing Director of
Bank of India, who has held various positions in the Public Sector
Banks for the last three decades.
c. Mr. Ketan Dalal, Leader, Tax Regulatory Services of Price
Waterhouse Coopers (PWC), India.  Shri Ketan Dalal is a fellow
Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and has
extensive experience on cross-border tax issues and investment
structuring.  He was a member of the working group on non-
resident taxation formed by Ministry of Finance.
After the episode of Global Trust Bank, the Reserve Bank of India has
instructed the Commercial Banks not to appoint PWC as auditors for the
banks.  The said instructions are further extended consequent to the
involvement of the partners of PWC in Satyam case.  In both the episodes
the auditing firms under the umbrella of PWC were allegedly found
involved.  Shri Ketan Dalal is Leader of Tax Regulatory Services of PWC,
India which is a different entity though under the umbrella of PWC.  The
firm which Shri Ketan Dalal represents is not involved in the auditing
business.  Further, wherever PWC is engaged with any of the applicant
under the consent and compounding, Shri Ketan Dalal recuses himself
from the case and the other two members of HPAC viz., Justice Hosbet
Suresh and Shri M. Balachandran recommends the settlement terms.”
28.   As per the additional information furnished by SEBI in this regard, the
expert member, Shri Ketan Dalal had, during the period 8 September, 2007 to 17
March, 2010 recused himself from the proceedings of the HPAC in as many as
55 cases of applicants engaged with the firm to which he belongs.

29. The Committee agree with the need for ensuring a greater
element of continuity in the functioning of SAT by enabling the Members to
have a reasonable length of term in office.   Nevertheless, as pointed out in
the earlier section of this report, the modus operandi adopted to achieve
this end with the amendment proposal of the Bill seeking to raise the
retirement age of Members is questionable.  Besides the short stint of
tenure the Members of the Tribunal have owing to the retirement age being
62 years at present, certain other issues which impinge on the efficient
functioning of SAT also came to light in the course of the Committee’s
examination of the Bill.
  30.  There have been instances where the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) took unjustifiably long time for selecting
the Members of SAT, owing to which, the incumbents were left with a short
term in office, which in turn adversely affected the disposal of cases by the
Tribunal.   For instance, during the period 16 January to 9 June, 2009 a
piquant situation arose when SAT could not function for want of quorum,
which was owing to the delay in the selection/appointment process.  The
Committee desire to be furnished with a detailed report on the reasons for
the undue delay in the selection process which led to the stalling of
functioning of the Tribunal.    Such instances also add credence to the
Department of Personnel and Training’s circulars which, with reference to
the selection process of Members of various Tribunals and Statutory
bodies pointed out inter-alia that lack of wide publicity of the vacancies
hinder and delay the selection process of the Members.

31.   From the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the
Bill as well as the submission made by the Ministry of Finance it is seen
that selection of Members of SAT is by and large restricted to or weighed
towards selecting retired civil servants, or civil servants on the verge of
retirement.  Moulding the selection process of members of SAT to include
and consider younger persons with requisite qualifications and experience
from a wider arena of fields will enable greater continuity and efficiency in
the functioning of SAT.  The Committee thus are of the view that apart from
the induction age of Members the question of timely completion of the
selection process and widening the arena of choice for selecting the
Members also need to be addressed in right earnest by the Government.
    32.  The Committee are of the view that the objective of ensuring a
greater element of continuity in the functioning of SAT by amending
Section 15N of the SEBI Act, 1992 could be better achieved by providing for
a fixed tenure of five years instead of increasing the maximum age limit to
65 years and according preference to retired/retiring civil servants.  The
Committee would, however, reiterate here that it will be preferable to
address this issue in ‘The Tribunals, Statutory and other Authorities
(conditions of Service) Amendment Bill’ which is in the anvil since 2008,
or/and alongwith the comprehensive amendments proposed to the SEBI
Act, 1992, which include proposals for re-organising the composition and
functioning of SAT.
33. The Committee also wish to point out in this regard that they
find merit in the suggestion given by SAT and as also agreed to by both the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and SEBI that the
existing provisions of the SEBI Act, 1992 which provide for initiating

parallel proceedings by the SEBI Board and the investigating officer
concerned under the same set of facts needs to be rectified. The
Committee expect that this issue would be addressed suitably by bringing
in appropriate amendments.
34. The Committee also find the prevailing practice whereby an
expert member of the High Powered Advisory Committee (HPAC) is to
recuse himself in the consent proceedings involving applicants engaged
with the firm he works for to be undesirable.  The Committee would,
therefore, expect that in such instances, an alternate member, who fulfills
the requisite qualifications and experience be co-opted   to the Advisory
Committee in deciding on the terms of the consent orders.   The Committee
also recommend that the eligibility criteria as well as the process of
selection of members of the HPAC be reviewed inter-alia with a view to
streamlining the process and avoiding instances where the Committee has
to finalise the terms of consent in the absence of an expert member.
       New Delhi;                   DR.  MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15 April, 2010                                           Chairman,
  25 Chaitra,1932 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Finance

Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4th February, 2010 from 1135 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram
3 Shri C.M. Chang
4.     Shri Harishchandra Chavan
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri N. Dharam Singh
9. Shri Manicka Tagore
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
RAJYA SABHA
11.   Shri Raashid Alvi
12.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
13.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
14.   Shri Moinul Hassan
15.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
16.   Shri S. Anbalagan
17.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
18.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri R.C. Ahuja  - Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary
3.     Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Director
4.     Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan - Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. B. Visala  - Deputy Secretary
Part –I
(1135 hrs. to 1245 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla, Finance Secretary
2. Dr. K.P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary
3. Shri C.K.G. Nair, Director

    Ministry of Law (Legislative Department)
1.  Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
2.  Shri P.B. Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
3.      Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
4.  Shri K.V. Kumar, Deputy Legislative Counsel
Ministry of Law (Department of Legal Affairs)
 Shri M.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor
 2.   The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) on the various provisions of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009.  Major issues discussed included
composition of Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT), appointment of Members of SAT,
length of their service, preference being given to retired bureaucrats in appointment as
Members of SAT, existing lacunae in the appointment procedure, issue of appointment
of younger people with desired experience etc.  The Chairman asked the
representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by Members within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part –II
(1310 hrs. to 1400 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
1. Shri C.B. Bhave, Chairman
2. Shri J. Ranganayakulu, Executive Director
 3.   The Committee heard the representatives of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI) in connection with the examination of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009.  The issues discussed mainly related
to appointment of retired bureaucrats as Member of SAT, desirability of fixed tenure as
against stipulation of maximum age for SAT Members, provisions enabling parallel
proceedings under same set of facts, investor protection, tracking sources of
unaccounted money entering into stock market, multi lingual publication of investor
protection oriented literature, disposal of cases under ‘consent terms’ under the SEBI
Act etc.  The Chairman asked the representatives to furnish written replies to the points
raised by Members within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th March, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.   Shri C.M. Chang
3.   Shri Harischandra Chavan
4.   Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5.   Shri Khagen Das
6.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7.  Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
8.   Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
9.   Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
10.  Shri N. Dharam Singh
RAJYA SABHA
11.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
12.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
13. Shri Moinul Hassan
14. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
15. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary
 2.   Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar   - Additional Director
 3.   Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary
 4.   Smt. B. Visala    - Deputy Secretary
    2.  X X X X X X X
3.     X X X X X X X
4.  The Committee decided to defer consideration of the draft report on the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009 because of non-
receipt of the information desired by the Committee in connection with the examination
of the Bill.  The Committee also decided to take further oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance and other institutions/Intelligence Agencies
concerned in connection with the Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in 79 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on “Counterfeit Currency
Notes in Circulation”.  .
      The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours.