1 
 
78 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation]  
 
 
 
SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                              
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


2 
 
SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Seventieth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation]  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 18 October, 2013 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09  December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


3 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                                                      PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......     (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………    1 
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
 
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
 
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 27 September, 2013................ 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
Contained in the Seventieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance 
on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation ………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14) 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  -  Under Secretary 
 
                                                           
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised by 
the Committee, present this Seventy Eighth Report on acti on taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventieth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation  
 2. The Seventieth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) w as presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2013.  Replies indicating action taken on all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 15 July, 2013.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report a t their sitting held on 27 
September, 2013. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Seventieth  Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of t he Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
27 September, 2013                                                          Chairman, 
05  Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) deals 
with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in their Seventieth Report on the Demands for  Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Porgramme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 22 April, 2013. 
 
2.   The Report contained 9 recommendations.  Action taken notes have been 
received from the Governmen t in respect of all the recommendations contained in the 
report. These have been categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 
                                                                                                         Total: 5 
(Chapter II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
                                                                                                                  
                                 Total:    Nil 
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Nos. 3,7,8 and 9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         Total:  4 
 (Chapter IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
                                                                                                   Total :     Nil 
(Chapter V) 
 

7 
 
3.   The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments contained in   
Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them expeditiously, in any case no t later 
than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
4.   The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
 Budgetary Allocation 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 5. The Committee recommended as under: 
“The Committee note with concern the persistent underutilization of 
allocated Plan funds in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) during the last three years.  During the preceding 
three years the actual plan expenditure of the  MOSPI was less than 50 
percent of the allocated Budget of each year.  The actual expenditure of 
MOSPI (excluding MPLADS) in 2010 -11 was Rs. 114.03 crore as 
compared to Budget Estimates of Rs. 268.08 crore.  In 2011 -12 actual 
expenditure was Rs. 262.47 crore whereas BE was Rs. 600.00 crore.  The 
expected expenditure in 2012-13 was about Rs. 340.00 crore whereas BE 
was   Rs. 631.00 crore.  Now for the year 2013 -14, again the BE is Rs. 
631.00 crore.  The Committee are not convinced with the routine reply of 
the Ministry that the shortfall in the plan expenditure was on account of 
lesser expenditure under the Economic Census, Indian Statistical 
Strengthening Project (ISSP), postponement of Organisation of Economic 
Corporation and Development Conference and unde rutilization of 
allocated funds in NSSO etc., as gross under -utilisation has become a 
persistent feature.  Such a trend only indicates that the funds allocated for 
plan side were not consistent with the capacity of the Ministry to spend the 
funds. The Comm ittee are dismayed to note that repeated 
recommendations made by the Committee in their earlier reports for 
prudent and effective budgetary formulation went unheeded.  The 
Committee are thus constrained to reiterate that the Ministry should devise 
an effective mechanism for identifying and overcoming the deficiencies in 
the existing system of budgetary planning for assessment of funds 
required and proper utilisation of allocated funds through prudent 
management of funds, close monitoring and timely implemen tation of plan 
schemes.” 
 

8 
 
 6. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
“The Plan schemes of MoSPI are somewhat of different nature as in most 
of the cases, the Ministry has to depend on various state Governments 
and other Central Ministri es /Departments to fully implement its Plan 
schemes. India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP), Economic 
Census, Basis Statistics of Local Level Development (BSLLD)are some of 
the Plan Schemes of the Ministry where there is heavy reliance upon the 
State Governments and other agencies which are predominantly 
responsible for the implementation. Under the aforesaid Plan Schemes of 
the MoSPI, the funds are given to the State Governments/ other agencies. 
It is the slow pace of utilization of funds by State Governments etc. that 
ultimately results in the under-utilization of Plan fund of MoSPI. 
 The Ministry has been consistently following up with the State 
Governments at various levels to ensure the utilization of plan funds. 
Within the Ministry we have put in place a two tier mechanism where the 
utilization of plan funds of  various schemes  are monitored on monthly 
basis by all the Divisional Heads and then it is being closely monitored on 
quarterly basis by the Secretary (S&PI). The observations of the Stand ing 
Committee on Finance have been noted for realistic assessment of future 
budget requirement and also for proper utilization of plan funds.” 
 
7. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have 
furnished a  routine reply regarding under -utilisation of plan funds , just as their 
budget formulation itself, wherein they have kept their  BE at the same level (i.e. 
Rs. 631 crore) since 2012-13 without any regard to actual expenditure.  They have 
now sought to shift the onus  on the state governments an d ho ld them 
responsible for the slow pace of utilization of funds. The Committee are, however, 
of the view that it is the responsibility of the Ministry to follow -up and constantly 
monitor the utilisation of plan funds and implementation of related program mes 
at the state level. Thus the Ministry has to squarely assume responsibility in this 
regard, as these schemes have been formulated and funded by them .  The 
Committee desire that the identification of States should be done , which are 
lagging behind in utilization of funds and that corrective steps be taken to identify 

9 
 
the problem areas and difficulties encountered by these States and apprise the 
Committee in this regard within 3 months from presentation of this Report. 
  
Basic Statistics for Local Level Development (BSLLD) Scheme 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3) 
 
8. The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that for proper planning, monitoring and 
implementation of social sector programmes at local level and for 
making available basic statistics  at village and panchayat level, 
„Basic Statistics for Local Level Development (BSLLD) Scheme‟ was 
launched way back in 2008 -09.  This Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
is in operation in 30 States/UTs (51 district across the country) with 
the objective to ascert ain the availability of data on about 250 
indicators from various village records and to identify their sources.     
As pointed out in their earlier reports, the Committee are not happy 
with the persistent underutilization of budgetary allocation under thi s 
scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that realistic projection of 
funds for the scheme should be made so as to achieve the intended 
objectives.” 
 
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply submitted as under:-   
 
“The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.” 
 
 10. The Committee had observed that they were not happy with the 
persistent under utilisation of budgetary allocation under Basic Statistics for 
Local Level Development ( BSLLD) Scheme and therefore desired that realistic 
projection of funds for the scheme should be made so as to achieve the intended  
objectives.  In their response, the Ministry have simply stated that “the 
recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance .” As this is not a 
satisfactory reply, particularly considering the large deficit in utilisation of funds 
amounting to just about half of the allocations year after year, the Committee 

10 
 
would like the Ministry  to furnish comprehensive action taken replies indicating 
the specific action taken or proposed  to be taken by them as per extant action 
taken procedures, which has been intimated to them while forwarding copy of the 
Committee’s Report.  
Collection and dissemination of reliable and credible statistics 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 6) 
 
11. The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee are dismayed to note the growing concern, in particular, 
the views coming from the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance 
about the deficiencies with respect to credibility, timeliness and adequacy 
of statistics available at present. The Committee feel that the major thrust 
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation during the 
12th Five Plan should be towards reforming the administrative and 
technical structure of Indian Statistical System and upgra ding its capacity. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should put in place Data Validation 
Mechanism checks at various levels in order to improve data quality and 
obviate the release/occurrence of faulty data/statistics.”  
12. The Ministry in their action taken reply submitted as under:-   
 
“It is informed that data validation checks are already a part of the 
procedures followed in this Division for the compilation of National 
Accounts and the Consumer Price Indices. However, often the estimates 
of National Accounts undergo revision due to revision in the data received 
from source agencies. Therefore, it needs to be ensured that the data 
received from the source agencies, is duly validated, which is only 
possible if there is a well -augmented Statistical D ivision in each of these 
source agencies. Some of the agencies which supply data for this 
Division, but do not have an established Statistical Division are - 
1. Department of Shipping 
2. Department of Financial Services 
3. Railway Board, M/o Railways 
4. Department of Public Enterprises 
5. Department of Heavy Industries 
6. Department of Power 
7. Department of Revenue 

11 
 
Further, there is a need to set up a Division in the Department of 
Economic Affairs so that the National Accounts data which is used for 
various economic policy pur poses may be optimally and effectively 
utilized. 
To take care of concerned raised, Ministry is taking several steps. 
However, the most important step for reforming administrative and 
technical structure of Indian Statistical System is to carry out the cadr e 
review of the service by suitably equipping all relevant 
Ministries/Departments with statistical personnel at appropriate level. 
Ministry has already initiated the proposal of next comprehensive Cadre 
Review of Indian Statistical Service. 
The cadre revie w will ensure establishing of statistical division in above 
Ministries/Departments and it is expected that the quality of data furnished 
by these Ministries/ Department will improve.” 
 
 13. While appreciating the administrative measures taken by the Ministry 
to strengthen the statistical cadre, the Committee would reiterate that Data 
Validation Mechanism should be put in place at various levels in order to improve 
data quality and reliability .  In this connection, t he setting up of a Division in the 
Department of Economic Affairs as well as establishing Statistical Divisions in all 
the other important Departments which have been enumerated in the action taken 
replies of the Ministry,  along with cadre review of the Statistical Services should 
be expedited. This will help to ensure better implementation of programmes and 
projects and effective monitoring thereof. 
 
Shortage of Manpower 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 7) 
 
14. The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“In their Outcome Budget 2013 -14 the Ministry of Statisti cs and 
Programme Implementation has stated that shortage of manpower in 
Statistics Wing of the Ministry may affect the quality of data collected. The 

12 
 
implementation of the prestigious scheme of „India Statistical 
Strengthening Project‟ will also depend upo n the availability of qualified 
manpower. The Committee are of the view that shortage of manpower 
cannot always be an alibi for non -performance in this era of IT and its 
applications. Since the shortage of manpower in Statistics Wing of the 
Ministry is a p erennial problem, it could be overcome by qualitative and 
optimum utilisation of available manpower and by outsourcing the work of 
conducting survey, collection of data etc. which would be a practical 
solution as well. The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat the Ministry 
should explore the feasibility of outsourcing the work of conducting of 
survey, collection of data etc. so as to overcome the persistent shortage of 
manpower. Simultaneously, the Ministry should continue to recruit 
requisite manpower for their Statistics Wing.” 
 
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply submitted as under:-   
 
“With respect to shortage of manpower in Subordinate Statistical Service, 
it is informed that M/o Statistics & Programme Implementation have taken 
necessary action  to minimise the number of vacancies. As on 1 st May, 
2013 there are 156 Vacancies in Statistical Investigators Gr. I and 838 
vacancies in Statistical Investigator Grade II. After approval of revised  
Recruitment Rules all vacant posts in Statistical Invest igator Grade-I  will 
also be  filled up by granting  promotions to S.I Gr.II. Besides, 496 posts in 
Statistical Investigator Grade-II were filled up by direct recruitment through 
Staff Selection Commission during 2012 -13 and for the year 2013 -14 it is 
proposed to recruit 456 candidates recommended by SSC through 
Combined Graduate Level Examination 2012 as against intimated 
vacancies of 712.  Further about 550 vacancies against CGLE 2013 are 
being conveyed to SSC against CGLE 2013 and hopefully this will arr est 
the issue of shortage of manpower.  The Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation is also taking up all the steps to reduce the 
rate of attrition in S.I Gr.II.One of the reasons for higher rate of attrition 
has been lower grade pay in SSS and  the matter was taken up with 
Cabinet Secretariat through a COS note for granting higher grade pay to 
SSS functionaries and presently the matter is under consideration of 
DOPT.  By adhering to Strategic Action Plan 2012 -15, M/0 Statistics & 
Programme Imple mentation shall overcome the problem of manpower 
shortage in the next few years.” 
 
 16. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry has not yet taken 
effective steps to overcome shortage of manpower.  Therefore, t he Committee 

13 
 
would like to recommend tha t energetic steps may be taken by the Ministry to 
overcome this constraint within a period of one year.   
Infrastructure and Project Monitoring 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8 and 9) 
 
17. The Committee recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Infras tructure and Project Monitoring 
Division of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
monitors the implementation of Central Sector Project costing more than 
Rs. 150 crore in 16 sectors. It is supposed to act as an independent 
monitor for tim e and cost overruns in the implementation of projects and 
flag the slow/wayward projects for corrective action. The Committee note 
that as on 1st January, 2013, there were 566 projects on the monitor of 
the Ministry. Of these, it is a matter of great conce rn that as many as 103 
projects have reported delay of more than 47 months. Total original cost of 
these 103 projects was Rs. 82,877.93 crore which is now anticipated to be 
a whopping Rs. 1,52,928.14crore, leading to massive cost overruns of 
84.53%. The Co mmittee also note that with a view to minimize time and 
cost overruns in Central Sector Projects, the Central Sector Projects 
Coordinating Committees (CSPCCs) headed by the Chief Secretary of the 
respective State have been constituted in 18 States on the a dvice of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should impress upon the remaining States to 
constitute CSPCCs so as to clear the bottlenecks at the earliest. Since a 
special report is brought out by the Ministry on monthly basis on projects 
costing Rs. 1000 crore and above for the information of the Prime 
Minister‟s Office, the Committee also desire that the Government should 
constitute a High Powered Committee to resolve the issue of minimizing 
time and cost overruns in the Central Sector Projects costing Rs. 1000 
crore and above particularly the projects of Coal, Power, Railways, and 
NHAI, where delays seem to be endemic ranging between 47 months to 
235 months. The Committee may be apprised of the ac tion taken in this 
regard.” 
 
18. The Ministry in their action taken reply submitted as under:- 
   
“The States where Central Sector Projects Coordination Committees 
(CSPCCs) have not yet been constituted have been  apprised of the 

14 
 
observations made by the St anding Committee on Finance and requested 
to take appropriate action for constituting CSPCCs. 
A Cabinet Committee on Investment (CCI) has been recently constituted 
in December 2012 to review and monitor the implementation of major 
projects which are delaye d beyond stipulated time -frames, including 
issues affecting grant of clearances/approvals. To assist the CCI in its 
functions, a Committee of Secretaries (COS) has also been formed, 
comprising of Secretaries of concerned Ministries and  having Secretary 
MoS&PI as one of its members.It is therefore felt that a separate High 
Powered Committee to monitor time & cost overruns, as recommended by 
the Standing Committee on Finance, might not be required.” 
  
19. As already observed by the Committee as on 1 January, 2013, more 
than 18% of the projects under the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry have 
recorded an average delay of nearly 4 years , which has corresponding ly led to a 
staggering cost overrun of about 85% . In the light of this glaring fact, the 
Committee hope that pending issues on project approvals, sanctions etc. will be 
expedited.  The Committee also desire that the formation of Central Sector 
Projects Coordination Committees (CSPCCs) in the concerned states should also 
be done without any delay. 
20. Further, on Infrastructure and Project Monitoring, the Committee 
recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee believe that there would be several projects less than Rs. 
150 crore entailing time and cost overruns and thus in order to effectively 
monitor and ensure ti mely implementation of all such projects, the 
Committee recommend that the monitoring ambit of the Ministry needs to 
be widened so as to cover even those projects country -wide costing Rs. 
20 crore and above, which they are stated to have been monitoring earlier. 
In this context, the Committee further recommend that the Minis try of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation should also be mandated to 
compile/prepare a comprehensive report on the status of various 
infrastructure projects across the country inclu ding those implemented by 

15 
 
State Governments and place the same through the Planning Commission 
before the National Development Council (NDC) for a complete overview.”  
21. The Ministry in their action taken reply submitted as under:- 
“After due consideration, in the year 2010 it was decided to raise the limit 
to monitor the Central Sector Infrastructure Projects from ` 20 crore to ` 
150 crore. On the one hand, this brought the number of projects on the 
monitor of the Ministry to manageable levels and, on th e other hand, this 
ensured more attention towards the comparatively larger projects,  within 
the available resources. The limit of ` 150 crore is felt to be appropriate for 
the present.  
State sector projects are implemented by the State Governments, and fa ll 
in the domain of the State Governments and not of the Central 
Government. This Ministry monitors Central Sector Infrastructure Projects 
costing `150 crore  or more on time and cost overruns on the basis of 
information provided/fed by the concerned projec t implementing agencies 
on the Online Computerised Monitoring System (OCMS)of the Ministry  .It 
might not be readily feasible, within the available resources, to obtain 
information in alike manner in respect of state sector projects from all the 
various project implementing agencies spread across all the states in the 
country.” 
 22. The Committee had suggested that there would be several projects 
of less than Rs. 150 crore entailing time and cost overruns, which would require 
to be monitored by the Ministry.   The Committee are not convinced with the reply 
of the Ministry that in the year 2010 it was decided to raise the limit to monitor the 
Central Sector Infrastructure Projects from Rs. 20 crore to 150 crore , so as to 
bring the number of projects on the moni tor of the Ministry to manageable level.  
Considering that a huge chunk of the developmental programmes fall in the sub  
Rs. 150 crore bracket involving huge volume of funds, the Committee would 
suggest that at least projects of Rs. 50 crore and above shoul d be overseen and 
monitored by the Ministry of Statisti cs and Programme Implementation, as this 
Ministry has been created specifically for this purpose with the mandate to 

16 
 
monitor implementation of Central sector programmes .  Further, the  Ministry 
should also compile information on State s ector p rojects, so that a 
comprehensive national view on development projects as a whole emerges. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                     YASHWANT SINHA 
 27 September, 2013                                                                                   Chairman, 
 05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Finance. 

17 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1310 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
                 Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Baliram  
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
   
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
16.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 
   2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Subodh Kant Sahai and congratulated 
him on his nomination to the Committee for the year 2013 -14.  The Committee thereafter 
took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption :-  

18 
 
 
(i)  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(ii)    XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(iii)   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by th e Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
 
(v)    XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
  
3.     The Committee adopt ed the above draft reports with minor modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the 
modifications suggested and present these Reports to Hon‟ble Speaker/Parliament. 
             The Committee then adjourned. 

19 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTIETH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations    09   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government    05         55.55 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.  1,2,  
 4,5 and 6) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the    NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect       
 of which replies of the Government have   04  44.45 
 not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.  3,7,  
8 and 9) 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL  0.00 
 of which final reply of the Government is  
 still awaited  
 
 