1 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
  (2012-13) 
  
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services)  
 
 
 
 
THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT 
BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
66 


2 
 
 
   SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services)  
 
 
THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT 
BANK OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon‟ble Speaker on 16 February, 2013 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  5 March, 2013 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on  5 March, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
                                         Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............….………………………..                  (iii) 
  
INTRODUCTION .................................…………………….…………………                (iv) 
                                                      REPORT 
 
 
1. Introductory          1 
2. Salient features of the SIDBI (Amendment) Bill, 2012    2 
3. Capacity building of SIDBI as a Development Financial              5 
Institution (DFI) for MSME Sector       
4. Amendment of the long title                                                        6 
5. Substitution of references to certain expressions by certain   7  
other expressions 
6. Amendment of Section 19        11 
7. Difficulties / constraints faced by SIDBI in performing its functions              12 
 as a Development Financial Institution (DFI)   
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I.     Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 9th November, 2012 
       and 11 January, 2013                  
 
II.    The Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012     

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2012-13) 
 
  
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay* 
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
17.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh           -   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -   Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  -    Under Secretary 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen             - Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  13th December, 2012 

5 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by the 
Committee, present this Sixty -sixth Report on the Small Industries Development Bank of India 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012. 
2. The Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012  introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2012, was referred to the Committee on 28 May, 2012 for examination 
and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in the 
aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
4. The Committee, at their sitting held on 9 November, 2012 took evid ence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) and Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).   
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 11 January, 2013 considered and adopted the 
draft report and auth orized the Chairman to finalise the same and present it to the             
Hon‘ble Speaker/Parliament. 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) and the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information which 
were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.      
7. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        YASHWANT SINHA 
23  January, 2013                                                 Chairman, 
03  Magha, 1934 (Saka)                                                      Standing Committee on Finance  
 

6 
 
 REPORT  
1. Introductory 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) was established under Small 
Industries Development of India Act, 1989 (SI DBI Act) on April 02,1990 as a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) to operate as the 
principal financial institution for the purpose of promoting, financing, development of 
‗industrial concerns in the small -scale sector‘ and coordinating the functions of the 
institutions engaged in promoting, financing or developing the small-scale sector.  SIDBI 
Act was amended vide SIDBI Amendment Act 2000 wherein the authorized share 
capital was enhanced, shareholders base enlarged and board of directors restructured. 
Consequent to this, the shareholding was dispersed among various public sector banks 
and insurance companies by way of transfer of majority of shareholding by IDBI. 
Industrial Development Bank (Transfer of Undertaking and R epeal) Act, 2003, while 
repealing Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964, also amended the definition 
of ‗industrial concern in the small scale sector‘ in the SIDBI Act and incorporated the 
activities mentioned in section 2(c) of IDBI Act in section 2(h) of SIDBI Act.  
The MSMED Act, 2006 introduced the concept of ―enterprise‖ with further 
classification into micro enterprise, small enterprise and medium enterprise (MSME). 
The definition of the micro enterprise, small enterprise & medium enterprises  provided 
in MSMED Act is notwithstanding anything contained in section 11 -B of Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act 1951 (IDR Act) and is for the purpose of that Act 
only. Also, subsequent to the introduction of MSMED Act, Ministry of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MoMSME) requested that since SIDBI is the apex financial 
institution for financing the sector for its promotion and development, it was desirable 
that SIDBI Act be in consonance with MSMED Act.  
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (De partment of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion), vide notification S.O. 563(E) dated February 27, 2009, has rescinded the 
Government notification dated December 10, 1997 which specified the basis on which 
any industrial undertaking was regarded as Small Scale  Undertaking and was relevant 
for the definition of ‗Industrial concern in the small scale sector‘ in terms of section 2(h) 
of the SIDBI Act. Consequently, the definition of ‗industrial concern in the small scale 

7 
 
sector‘ under section 2 (h) is no more vali d, as also the relevant provisions relating to 
business, powers and other matters which are directly linked to the definition. 
 The Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012 seeks 
to amend Small Industries Development of India Act, 1989 (SIDBI Act).  Amendment in 
the SIDBI Act have been necessitated by the enactment of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprise Deve lopment Act, 2006 (MSMED Act) and rescinding of Government 
notification under Industries (Development and Regulation) Act 1951 (IDR Act), which 
provided the basis of definition of small sector industrial undertaking.  There are certain 
other proposed amend ments, which are based on the (i) authorizations given by the 
Government of India to SIDBI from time to time for undertaking various lending 
activities, including lending to medium enterprises; (ii) those based on present position 
and circumstances after c ertain court pronouncements; and (iii) alignment with current 
accounting practices for foreign currency transactions to align the provisions with other 
statutes and developments having bearing on the provision of the Act.   
2. Salient Features of the Bill  
The Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012 inter-
alia provides :- 
(a) substitution of the words ‗Industrial concern(s) in the small scale sector‘ with 
‗industrial concern(s) or micro enterprise(s) or small enterprise(s) or mediu m 
enterprise(s)‘ wherever appearing in the Act [(except in section 2(h) and sub -section (4) 
of section 38]. This will bring SIDBI Act in consonance with MSMED Act.  
 
(b) to substitute in section 2(h) the words ‗ ―industrial concern‖ means any concern with 
an investment limit, as may be specified, by unanimous resolution, by the Board. This 
will enable SIDBI Board to specify investment limit for industrial concerns. This has 
been necessitated because of rescinding of relevant notification under IDR Act.  
 
(c) to incorporate the definitions of terms ―enterprise‖, ―micro enterprise‖, ―small 
enterprise‖ and ―medium enterprise‖ as given in MSMED Act. {insertion of new Clauses 
(ea), (hb), (hc) and (ld) in section 2 }  
 
(d) to incorporate the definition of ―micro f inance institution‖ {insertion of new Clause 
(hd) in section 2}  

8 
 
 
(e) incorporation of such activities in sub -section 2(h) itself, which have already been 
permitted under section 2(h) vide Notification No. SO 2861 dated 05/11/2004. {Insertion 
of new sub-clauses (xvi a) to (xvi f) in Clause (h) of section 2}  
 
(f) to incorporate micro finance institutions in the list of organizations - (i) to whom SIDBI 
can grant loans and advances by way of refinance for loans or advances or micro 
finance services granted by  them to MSMEs; (ii) whose stocks, shares, bonds or 
debentures SIDBI can subscribe / purchase; (iii) to whom SIDBI can grant lines of credit 
or loans and advances; and (iv) to whom SIDBI can grant loans and advances by way 
of refinance of loans and advance s granted by them for purposes of Export. SIDBI has 
already been authorized vide authorization F.No.17(13)2001 -IF.II dated 14/09/2001 to 
offer assistance by way of equity support to micro finance institutions and vide 
authorisation F. No. 17/16/2003 -IF.II dated 24/02/2004 to lend to Micro Finance 
Institutions (MFIs) . This will incorporate the authorizations granted to SIDBI into the Act 
and broad base the activities and institutions {sections 13(1) (i), 13(1)(iv) & 13(1)(vii)}  
 
(g) to insert in section 13 (1) new clauses (xxix a), (xxix b), (xxix c), (xxix d), (xxix e) and 
(xxix f) specifying various business activities which SIDBI can undertake. This will 
incorporate various Government authorizations already granted to SIDBI after modifying 
them in consonance with MSMED Act. {section 13(1)}  
 
(h) to amend section 19(3) allowing repayment of Foreign Currency loans in Foreign 
Currency and maintaining Foreign Currency loan accounts as required under any law or 
Accounting Standards. {section 19(3)}  
 
(i) to include the charging clause in section 37A to the effect that the securities charged 
to borrowing institutions availing refinance from SIDBI shall be treated as charged to 
SIDBI also. This will enable SIDBI to enforce such securities under SARFAESI Act. 
{section 37A (2)}  
 
(j) to include the right of takeover of possession of the properties of the guarantors & 
third party mortgagors also under section 38 of SIDBI Act. This will address the 
concerns arising from a Supreme Court decision relating to section 29 of State Financial 
Corporation Act 1951 ( pari materia with existing section 38 of SIDBI Act wherein it has 
been held that the section is not applicable to collateral securities). {section 38}  
 

9 
 
(k) amendment of section 39 so as to, enable the District Magis trate or the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate to authorize any officer subordinate to him to take possession 
of property, etc. This will facilitate speedier disposal of cases. {section 39(3) & Insertion 
of new sub-clauses (1A) in section 39} 
 To sum up, once the Bill is enacted  
 
 This will effect consequential changes in SIDBI Act to bring in the concept of 
Micro Enterprise, Small Enterprise and Medium Enterprise in consonance with 
MSMED Act, in addition to the list of activities already allowe d to SIDBI and 
certain other changes to align the provisions with other statutes and 
developments.  
 
 The Bill shall enable SIDBI to finance, promote and develop all industrial 
undertakings in the micro, small and medium sector irrespective of the fact that  
the same are engaged or not engaged in manufacturing of goods pertaining to 
Industries specified in the First Schedule of IDR Act. The Bill proposes to allow 
SIDBI to continue to finance, promote and develop industrial concerns based on 
the activities (as provided in section 2(h) of SIDBI Act) with an investment limit as 
may be specified, by unanimous resolution, by the Board, in addition to financing, 
promoting and developing micro, small & medium enterprises (as defined in the 
MSMED Act).  
 
 This will enable SIDBI to enforce such securities under SARFAESI Act which are 
charged to the borrowing institutions availing refinance from SIDBI as the same 
shall be treated as charged in favour of SIDBI.  
 
 The Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 nd May, 2012 and referred to the Standing Committee on 
Finance by the Hon‘ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 28 th May, 2012 for examination and 
Report thereon. 
3. Capacity building of SIDBI as a Development Financial Inst itution (DFI) for 
MSME Sector 
 
Responding to the query whether the proposed amendment Bill would help in 
capacity building of SIDBI as a development financial institution for the MSME sector.  
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) inter-alia furnished their 
reply as under : 
 
―The Bill proposes to incorporate the definitions of micro enterprises, small 
enterprises and medium enterprises as defined in the MSMED Act in the SIDBI 
Act, bringing SIDBI Act in consonance with the MSMED Act, whi ch would enable 
SIDBI to promote, develop and finance all the MSMEs as provided under the 

10 
 
MSMED Act. The proposed amendments further provide for retention of the 
concept of eligible activities as provided under section 2(h) of SIDBI Act which 
shall enable SIDBI to promote, develop and finance such concerns which are 
engaged in such activities as provided in section 2(h) or such other activities 
which may be notified under section 2(h) of SIDBI Act by the Central Government 
from time to time, with an investm ent limit as may be specified, by unanimous 
resolution, by the Board. With the majority of Board members (including three 
whole-time directors) being appointed / nominated by Govt. of India, or by the 
institutions owned or controlled by the Central Governm ent, SIDBI would be able 
to leverage provisions of this Act and support / supplement the developmental 
objectives of the State.   
The Bill also addresses certain gaps in the matter of recovery of loans and advances 
granted to the MSME against third party a ssets as also refinance provided to PLIs.  
Besides, as stated above, a number of notifications / authorizations granted to SIDBI by 
Government of India from time to time with regard to expansion of its business and 
activities are being incorporated into th e Act, with suitable modifications incorporating 
benefit of such activities for MSME as against only SSI, provided earlier.  Thus, 
provisions of the Bill would help in capacity building of SIDBI and enable it to serve the 
sector better‖. 
 
3.1 The Committee note that Small Industries Development Bank of India 
(SIDBI) was established under Small Industries Development of India Act, 1989 
(SIDBI Act) on April 02, 1990 to operate as the principal financial institution for 
the purpose of promoting, f inancing, development of „industrial concerns in the 
small-scale sector‟ and coordinating the functions of the institutions engaged in 
promoting, financing or developing the small -scale sector .  SIDBI Act was 
amended vide SIDBI Amendment Act 2000 wherein t he authorized share capital 
was enhanced, shareholders base enlarged and board of directors restructured.   
3.2 The Committee further note that t he Bill proposes to incorporate the 
definitions of micro enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises as 
defined in the MSMED Act in the SIDBI Act, bringing SIDBI Act in consonance 
with the MSMED Act, which would enable SIDBI to promote, develop and finance 
all the MSMEs as provided under the MSMED Act. 
3.3 The Committee hope that proposed amendments would help to address the 
problems faced by borrowers graduating from micro -finance dispensation to 
larger loan sizes, promotion of self -employed ventures capable of generating 

11 
 
employment opportunities, especiall y in rural areas and targeting women, SCs, 
STs, minorities and economically as well as educationally backward classes.  The 
Committee desire that special thrust should also be given towards the extension 
of micro -finance in backward districts and North -eastern region to help 
unemployed youth, budding entrepreneurs, women and minorities  to create 
awareness amongst the small units on technological advancements and process 
modernization to induce the units to upgrade their technological level and 
consequently move towards capacity building.  Since the proposed Bill seeks to 
expand the scope and jurisdiction of SIDBI, the Committee desire that in view of 
its significant role, it is an opportunate time to evaluate its performance. 
 
4. Amendment of the long title 
(i) In the Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words ―industry in the small-scale sector‖, 
at both the places where they occur, the words ―industrial concerns and m icro 
enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises‖ shall be substituted. 
 
4.1  On being asked as to whether by bringing the SIDBI Act in consonance with the 
MSMED Act, positive outcomes are expected, the Small Industries and Development 
Bank of India submitted their written reply as under : 
 
―The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development Act, 2006 was passed 
with no consequential amendments in the SIDBI Act nor the criteria of SSI under 
Section 11B of IDR Act was changed.  A new concept of ―en terprise‖ was 
introduced with further classification into Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise. 
Further, the definition of the MSME provided in the Act is notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 11-B of IDR Act.  
The definitions of MSME under MSMED Act  are not ipso facto  applicable to 
SIDBI and the definitions of MSME provided in the MSMED Act are for the 
purpose of that Act only.  By bringing the SIDBI Act in consonance with the 
MSMED Act, SIDBI shall also be able to finance, promote and develop the micro 
enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises as defined in MSMED Act 
without any limitation.  Further, businesses and activities as authorized / notified 
under Section 2(h) (xvii) and Section 13(1) (xxx) from time to time are being 
incorporated into the Act with  suitable modifications to align them with the 
concept of MSME as against SSI earlier.  The Act also enables Central 
Government to authorize any activity as eligible activity for support by SIDBI, 
considering the national priorities‖. 
 

12 
 
4.2 As the Bill main ly proposes to enlarge the scope of operations of SIDBI by 
aligning the basic provisions with the definitions provided in the MSMED Act, as 
also by widening the range of activities / vocations under SIDBI‟s credit ambit, the 
Committee hope that the propose d Bill serves the desired purpose of addressing 
the issues of financial and logistic impediments in the small scale and tiny sector 
and facilitate the sector to adapt to changing global trends and technological 
changes while maintaining its vibrancy for co ntribution to the economic growth 
of the country. 
5. Substitution of references to „industrial concern(s)/industry(ies) in the 
small-scale sector‟  
 
To substitute throughout the Principal Act (except in clause (h) of section (2) and 
sub-section (4) of section 38), 
(a) for the words ―industrial concern in the small -scale sector‖, wherever they occur, 
the words ―industrial concern or micro enterprise or small enterprise or medium 
enterprise‖; 
 
(b) for the words ―industrial concerns in the small-scale sector‖, wherever they occur, 
the words ―industrial concerns or micro enterprises or small enterprises or 
medium enterprises‖; 
 
(c) for the words ―industries in the small -scale sector‖, wherever they occur, the 
words ―industrial concerns or micro enterprises or sm all enterprises or medium 
enterprises‖; 
 
(d) for the words ―industry in the small -scale sector‖, wherever they occur, the words 
industrial concerns or micro enterprises or small enterprises or medium 
enterprises‖. 
 
5.1 The Committee enquired whether substituting SSI with MSME would not limit the 
mandate and scope of SIDBI, leaving out of its ambit activities as currently provided 
under section 2(h), thereby diluting the overall object of creation of SIDBI.  The Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in a written note stated as under :  
 
―That if SSI were replaced with MSME and section 2(h) were omitted, it would 
limit the mandate and scope of SIDBI.  It is for this reason that the Bill proposes 
to retain Section 2(h) so that the ambit of activities covered under it continues to 
be serviced by SIDBI.    
To elaborate, in terms of MSMED Act, an enterprise means that which is 
engaged in manufacture or production of goods pertaining to industries specified 
in First Schedule of Industrial (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951 (IDR Act) or 

13 
 
is engaged in providing or rendering of services. On the other hand, in terms of 
Section 2(h) of SIDBI Act, a concern engaged in any of the activities as 
mentioned therein, irrespective of the fact that whether or not it pertains to 
industries mentioned under Fir st Schedule of IDR Act or is a service, is 
considered as an ‗industrial concern‘. Further, the intention of the legislature has 
also been to allow earlier IDBI (1964) and thereafter SIDBI (1989) to finance 
promote and develop ‗Industrial concerns‘ based on  the list of activities as 
incorporated in the respective Acts, despite there being already in existence the 
concept of Industrial undertakings/ industries under the IDR Act. 
Therefore, it is necessary to retain Section 2(h) of SIDBI Act so that it continu es 
to perform the functions and carry on the activities that it has been doing 
hitherto‖.   
 
 
5.2 Classification of Enterprises : Regarding classification of enterprises the 
Section 7 of MSMED Act 2006 reads as under : 
―Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, the Central Government may, for the 
purposes of this Act, by notification and having regard to the provisions of sub -
sections (4) and (5), classify  any class or classes of enterprises, whether 
proprietorship, Hindu undivided family, association of persons, co -operative 
society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever name called,  
(a)     in the case of the enterprises engaged in the ma nufacture or production of goods 
pertaining to any industry specified in the first schedule to the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951, as – 
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery does not 
exceed twenty five lakh rupees; 
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more than 
twenty five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees; or 
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is more than 
five crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees; 
(b)  in the case of the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services, as – 
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in equipment does not exceed ten lakh 
rupees; 
 
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment  in equipment is more than ten lakh 
rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees; or 
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than two crore 
rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees‖. 

14 
 
5.3 The Committee note that the proposed amendment to widen the scope of 
SIDBI by bringing in more activities or vocations, read with the definition of 
industrial concerns in Clause 4 of the Bill, will bring in even larger concerns / 
enterprises within its credit ambit.  The Committee are apprehe nsive that the 
focus and original mandate of SIDBI to promote and assist the small scale sector 
could be lost sight of and bigger concerns may end up cornering more benefits 
in deviation from the original mandate of SIDBI.     
5.4 The Committee are of the view that the credit policies and practices of 
SIDBI should be well delineated so that the micro/tiny enterprises, which do not 
have adequate access to credit and related extension services, do not get 
overshadowed by the access enjoyed by bigger  units.  T he Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that preferential treatment should be accorded by SIDBI 
to micro and small enterprises by compulsorily earmarking for them not less 
than 50% of the total disbursals.  SIDBI could meanwhile keep on financing such 
small and medium enterprises say upto 3 or 5 years until their transition into a 
larger concern and consequently moving towards regular financing options.   
The Committee believe that micro -credit, being a neglected area, should be 
accorded priority and thus d esire that SIDBI should evolve a pro -active and 
coherent policy for the development of micro enterprises. 
5.5 The Committee note that Clause 4 (b) of the Bill seeks to align the definition 
of “enterprise” with that in the MSMED Act.  However, Clause 4 (c) in the Bill 
states that the words “industrial concern in the small -scale sector” means any 
“concern with an investment limit, as may be specified by unanimous resolution 
by the Board…”  In this connection, the Committee however, note that Section 7 
of the MSMED Act provides for investment limits in plant and machinery as 
criteria of classification of enterprises.   
 
5.6 In this context, the Committee would also like to point out that 
classification of “enterprises” based on investment in plant and machinery limits 
is too rigid, as it does not take into reckoning inflationary trends and 
technological changes and therefore requires modification in MSMED Act 2006 to 
make it more contemporary and in sync with the changing mandate particularly of 
the SIDBI and otherwise.   The Committee thus are of the view that the 

15 
 
classification and criteria should be left to the professional competence of the 
SIDBI Board as proposed in Clause 4 (c) for „industrial concern‟ based on a 
coherent lending policy oriented towards the small and micro enterprises.  The 
Committee desire the  Government to address such issues while making 
amendments to the SIDBI Act.   
 
6. Amendment of Section 19 
 
In section 19 of the principal Act, — 
 
(a)  in sub-section (1), for the words and figures ―Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 
1973‖, the words and fig ures ―Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999‖ shall 
be substituted; 
(b)  in sub-section (3), for the words ―prevailing at the time of grant thereof, and the 
amount due thereunder shall be repayable in equivalent Indian currency‖, the 
words, figures and lett ers ―prevailing at the time of such grant and thereafter, 
based on the exchange rate prevailing as on the 31 st March, every year or as 
may be required under any law for the time being in force or accounting 
standards, as referred to in subsection ( 3c) of section 211 of the Companies Act, 
1956, as the case may be, and the amount due thereunder shall be repayable in 
foreign currency or in equivalent Indian currency‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(c)  in sub -section ( 4), in clause ( a), for the words ―repayment thereof by the 
concern‖, the words ―repayment thereof by the concern or micro enterprise or 
small enterprise or medium enterprise‖ shall be substituted. 
 
6.1 While replying to the query as to why there is need for alignment with current 
accounting practice of foreign currency transactions as compared to the earlier position, 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in a written reply stated as 
under :- 
―Modification in Section 19 (3) relating to foreign currency (FC) loans, is 
proposed as under :   
 As per the existing clause, loans given in FC are to be maintained in the 
respective currency at the exchange rate prevailing at the time of grant thereof 
which conflicts with the requirement of Indian Accounting Standard 11 of Institute 
of Chart ered Accountants of India.  The proposed modification would align 
SIDBI‘s accounts with these standards.  This will have no impact on the terms of  
individual loans granted to MSMEs and would only result in a more accurate 
description of foreign loans for the purpose of SIDBI‘s balance sheet. 
 With the liberalization of FC regime in the country, exporting MSMEs are 
permitted to retain a part or whole of their earnings in FC.  Permitting them to 
utilize such currency for repayment of FC loans from SIDBI would  save them the 
cost and risk of conversion of instalments into rupees and thus make the FC 
loans more efficient.  It is only enabling provision allowing repayment of foreign 
currency loan in foreign currency, which will help the borrowers‖. 

16 
 
 
6.2 The Committee have been informed that the modification in Section 19 (3) 
relating to foreign currency loan would align SIDBI‟s accounts with the Indian 
accounting standards and would result in more accurate reflection of foreign 
loans for the purpose of SIDBI‟s bala nce sheet.  The Committee expect that this 
enabling provision would not adversely impact on the terms of individual loans 
sanctioned by SIDBI and would help the borrowers in repayment of their foreign 
currency loan in foreign currency whenever required. 
7. Difficulties / constraints faced by SIDBI in performing its functions as a 
Development Financial Institution (DFI) 
 
To the query regarding difficulties/constraints faced by SIDBI in performing its 
function as a development financial institution and specif ic measures they would 
propose for overcoming these difficulties and enhance their capacity to foster and 
promote the MSMEs, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in a 
written note commented as under :- 
 
 ―As a Development Financial Ins titution SIDBI is an instrument of the State to 
help it attain its objectives relating to healthy and well -rounded growth of the 
sector it serves through its various activities. SIDBI has been playing the role of 
financing, development and promotion of ind ustries and businesses belonging to 
its mandated sector as per the directions and guidance from its Board of 
Directors and Government of India.  The sector SIDBI serves faces several 
challenges due to the nature of its business and size.  These include acc ess to 
credit, access to markets, technology, energy efficiency, risk capital, availability 
of skilled manpower and high vulnerability to changes in market conditions.   
 
 To have a holistic approach to addressing these, SIDBI has recently reoriented its 
business model to focus on addressing financial and non financials gaps in the 
MSME eco system.  To this end, SIDBI‘s business strategy includes upscaling 
availability of risk capital to MSME,  energy efficiency and sustainability finance,  
financing of Service Sector - particularly where intangibles are involved, factoring 
and Receivable financing, opening of Credit Advisory Centres at various industrial 
clusters to render advice to MSMEs, Loan Syndication Services, etc. 
 
  In addition, SIDBI has two subsidia ries, viz., SIDBI Venture Capital Limited 
(SVCL) and SIDBI Trustee Company Limited (STCL) and four associates, viz., 
Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro Enterprises (CGTMSE), India SME Asset 
Reconstruction Company Limited (ISARC), India SME Technology Se rvices 

17 
 
Limited (ISTSL) and SME Rating Agency of India Limited (SMERA). These 
entities are also engaged in providing their services to facilitate growth of MSME 
sector.   
 
 MSME sector is sensitive to cost.  In order to enable SIDBI to perform its function 
as Development Financial Institution (DFI) and in line with new business strategy 
which aims to fulfill the gaps in non -financial and financial support to MSME 
sector, SIDB I needs continuous budgetary support in terms of allocation out of 
RIDF / tax free bonds in larger measure.   
 
In order to enhance the refinance capabilities of SIDBI, Government of India has 
already been requested to convert Government bonds (` 2173 crore  together with 
interest accrued thereon) into equity to enable SIDBI to leverage higher 
borrowings. 
 In the Budget of FY 2012 -13, an announcement of setting up of India Opportunity 
Venture Fund (IOVF) of `5000 crore was made.  RBI, while advising allocation  of 
`2000 crore under IOVF for FY 2013, has indicated the maturity of deposits out of 
RIDF as three years. This will result in mismatch in the investments which take 
overall 7 to 10 years after factoring the financial closure period, commitment 
phase and disbursement thereafter.  Hence, a request has already been made to 
RBI to increase the maturity from three to seven years at least. 
 
 In view of contribution of 40% of industrial production by MSME sector,   
Government of India/RBI should facilitate banks b y setting aside certain 
percentage of capital market exposure towards investment in equity and equity 
related instruments of MSME by banks, viz., 40% of 20% direct CME exposure, 
i.e. 8%. 
 
 As a DFI, SIDBI had in turn supported state level DFIs such as SFCs and SIDCs 
since its inception.  Over a period of time, these institutions are finding difficulties 
in view of competition and unavailability of low cost resources. Almost 10% of 
SIDBI‘s outstanding portfolio is towards such institutions.  In order to ring fence 
SIDBI‘s balance sheet, the proposal for setting up Stressed Assets Stabilisation 
Fund (SASF) has been made. 
 
 SIDBI should be made a nodal agency for all Government Schemes and   
programmes which are designed for the benefit of the MSME sector‖. 
 
7.1 The Committee in the course of examination of the Bill, felt that there could 
be a more comprehensive and broad based amendment encompassing and 
addressing important issues like access to credit, access to markets, technology, 
energy efficiency, risk capit al, availability of skilled manpower, vulnerability to 
changes in the market conditions, cap / ceiling on the lending rate etc. faced by 
MSME Sector. 

18 
 
7.2 The Committee desire that a representative of SIDBI should be present 
during the District Level Review  Committee meetings to facilitate better interface 
among district level institutions / agencies.  Similarly, there should also be better 
coordination between the State Finance Corporations (SFCs) and SIDBI.  
7.3 With a view to ensuring balanced regional de velopment, the Committee 
recommend better institutional accessibility of SIDBI for traditional cottage 
industries and the  NE region with focus on bamboo cultivation and processing 
that has picked up as a major movement there and has capacity to play a catalytic 
role in the development of NE region. 
7.4 The Committee would also expect that this Bill would be able to address 
the issue of cost -sensitivity of MSME Sector and enable SIDBI to fill the existing 
gaps in non-financial and financial support to MSME sector.  
7.5 The Committee, having dealt upon the various provisions off the Bill, 
recommend for enactment of the Bill, with modifications as recommended in the 
above paragraphs. 
 
 
New Delhi;               YASHWANT SINHA 
 23    January, 2013        Chairman 
03     Magha, 1934 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Finance 

19 
 
OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
         The Committee sat on Friday, the 9th November, 2012 from 1100 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
   PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
                                                        MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
15.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
16.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
17.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
19.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary       
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
   WITNESSES 
 
 
2. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
3. XX   XX   XX   XX 

20 
 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
       Part II 
(1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs.) 
        WITNESSES  
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 
1. Shri D.K. Mittal, Secretary 
2. Shri Sunil Soni, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 
National Housing Bank (NHB) 
1. Shri R.V. Verma, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri R.S. Garg, Executive Director 
 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
1. Shri Sushil Muhnot, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri N.K. Maini, Deputy Managing Director 
3. Shri T.R. Bajalia, Deputy Managing Director 
 
 
5. The Committee thereafter took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services), National Housing Bank (NHB) and Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) on the (i) National Housing Bank 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 and (ii) Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012.  The major issues discussed regarding the National Housing Bank (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012 included the rural housing, performance of NHB in the north eastern region, credit 
facility to the economically weaker sections of the society for housing construction, housing 
price index, land acquisition, minority housing schemes, reasons for clause on foreign 
currency in the Bill, state of NPAs pertaining to housing loans, secondary mortgage market, 
etc.   

21 
 
6. The major issues that came up during the discussion regarding the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012 included overall functioning of SIDBI, 
problems of Small Scale Industries (SSI) , assistance to Micro and SSI in rural areas and 
their indebtness, institutional accessibility in the North Eastern region, sufficiency of this 
amendment Bill to address various issues.  Members also raised questions on percentage 
of sick units which are a waiting assistance from SIDBI, relevance of repayment of foreign 
currency loans in foreign currency and co -ordination of SIDBI with the State Governments, 
etc. The Chairman then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Financi al Services), National Housing Bank (NHB) and Small Industries Development 
Bank of India (SIDBI) to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the 
discussion within a week‘s time. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
     The Committee then adjourned. 

22 
 
OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 11th January, 2013 from 1130 hrs to 1440 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Dr. Baliram   
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
5.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
8.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
9.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
11.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
12.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
13.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh    –  Joint Secretary  
2.     Shri Sanjay Sethi  –  Under Secretary 
       
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1220 hrs.) 
2.    The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:  
(i) Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012; 
and. 
(ii) National Housing Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2012. 
 
3.  The Committee adopted the above draft reports with some minor modifications as 
suggested by Members.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports 
in the light of the modifications suggested and present the s ame to Hon‘ble Speaker / 
Parliament. 

23 
 
Part II 
(1230 hrs. to 1440 hrs.) 
   WITNESSES 
 
 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
5. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
  
                A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
      The Committee then adjourned.  