11
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-10)
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure,
Financial Services and Disinvestment)
Demands for Grants
(2010-11)
 ELEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)


ELEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial
Services and Disinvestment)
Demands for Grants
(2010-11)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)


CONTENTS
    PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………………….(iii)
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………...(v)
PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
I Budgetary Allocation……………………………………………………..
II Department of Economic (Affairs)……..………………………………...
A. Under-utilisation of funds…………………………………………..…
(i) National Social Security Fund (NSSF)…………………
(ii) Assistance for Infrastructure Development-Lump sum
provision…………………………………………………...
B. Debt Burden of the Government……………………………………..
C. Regulation of Unit Linked Insurance Products(ULIPs)…………….
III      Department of Financial Services………………………………………..
A. Under-utilisation of the corpus of Financial Inclusion Fund and
Financial Inclusion Technology Fund………………………………..
B. Financial Inclusion……………………………………………………...
C. Bank Lending to Agriculture and Weaker Sections………………...
D. Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in Banks………………………..…..
  IV      Department of Expenditure………………………………………………..
A. Surrender of Unutilised Funds by the Ministries/Departments……
B. Decline in Capital expenditure of the Central Government………..
     V      Department of Disinvestment……………………………………………..
Utilisation of Disinvestment Proceeds……….…………………………..
PART – II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee……………………………
APPENDICES
 Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 29 March, 2010

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman
MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara*
RAJYA SABHA
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Director
3. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  -  Deputy Secretary
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorized by the Committee, present this Eleventh Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on
the ‘Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of
Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment)’.
2.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial
Services and Disinvestment) on 29 March, 2010.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting
held on 15 April, 2010.  Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are given in
appendix to the Report.
4.    The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial
Services and Disinvestment) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing
the material and information which the Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the Demands for Grants (2010-11).
       New Delhi;                  DR.  MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15  April, 2010                                                 Chairman,
  25 Chaitra,1932 (Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Finance.

PART I
BACKGROUND ANALAYSIS
CHAPTER I
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
1.1 The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the administration of the
finances of the Central Government. It is concerned with economic and financial
matters affecting the country as a whole, including mobilization of resources for
development. It regulates the expenditure of the Central Government, including
the transfer of resources to States. The Ministry comprises of the five
Departments namely:
(i) Department of Economic Affairs
(ii) Department of Expenditure
(iii) Department of Revenue
(iv) Department of Disinvestment; and
(v) Department of Financial Services
1.2 The Ministry of Finance is responsible in all for 13 Demands for
Grants, which cover the above 5 Departments. These Demands are namely:
(a) Demand No. 32 –Department of Economic Affairs
(b) Demand No. 33 – Department of Financial Services
(c) Demand No. 34 – Appropriation – Interest Payments
(d) Demand No.35 – Transfers to State and Union Territory
Governments
(e) Demand No. 36 – Loans to Government Servants etc.
(f) Demand No. 37 - Appropriation – Repayment of Debt
(g) Demand No. 38 – Department of Expenditure
(h) Demand No. 39 – Pensions
(i) Demand No. 40 – Indian Audit and Accounts Department
(j) Demand No. 41 – Department of Revenue
(k) Demand No. 42 – Direct Taxes
(l) Demand No. 43 – Indirect Taxes
(m) Demand No. 44 – Department of Disinvestment

The Detailed Demands for Grants and the Outcome Budget of the Ministry for
2010-11 were laid on the Table of the House on 12 March, 2010.
1.3 This Report deals with four out of five Departments under the
Ministry of Finance covering 10 Demands. Matters relating to one Department
viz. Department of Revenue and three Demands for Grants concerning the
Department are dealt with in a separate report.
(A) Department of Economic Affairs
1.4 The Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) deals with four
Demands. These are: (i) Demand No. 32, Department of Economic Affairs, (ii)
Demand No. 34, Appropriation— Interest Payments, (iii) Demand No. 36, Loan to
Government Servants etc., and (iv) Demand No. 37, Appropriation—Repayment
of Debt. The DEA Demands for Grants predominantly cover interest payments
and repayment of debt.
(i) Demand No. 32: Department of Economic Affairs
1.5 Total Budget provision for 2010-11 is Rs. 8,671.48 crore.  The
break-up is for Plan Rs. 3,233.72 crore and Non-Plan  Rs. 5,437.76 crore.
 1.6 Demand No. 32 deals with the number of items where payments
are made for specific activities within the country as also to the international
organizations. It also caters to the following:
• Secretariat/establishment expenditure of the Department of Economic
Affairs, National Savings Institute and its network of regional offices,
Securities Appellate Tribunal (SAT), Investment Commission and the
Thirteenth Finance Commission, establishment expenditure of the
Economic wing of the Embassy of India Washington and Tokyo.
• Lumpsum provision for transfer to unorganized labour (Rs. 1000
crore).
• Assistance for Infrastructure Development through Public Private
Partnership (PPP) through provision of   Viability Gap Funding (Rs.
480.26 crore).
• Subsidy to Railways towards dividend relief  (Rs. 2829.88 crore).

• Interest Equalisation support to EXIM Bank of India for Government of
India supported lines of credit extended to developing   countries (Rs.
130 crore).
• Purchase of coins from Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India
Ltd. for supply to Reserve Bank of India (Rs. 1063.20 crore).
• Subscription to the International Monetary Fund  (IMF) towards Quota
increase and for meeting the Maintenance of Value (MOV) obligation
arising out of IMFs revaluation of its holding of Indian Rupees with
India.
• Other expenditures include contribution to various international bodies
i.e. UNDP; Technical Assistance Scheme of Asian Development
Bank(ADB) /India Trust Fund in ADB; Global Environment Facility
(GEF) etc., Grants in Aid to institutions, Technical Aid to South and
South East Asia under the Colombo Plan.
(ii) Demand No. 34: Appropriation— Interest Payments
1.7 Interest Payments cover payment of interest on Central
Government debt obligations e.g. treasury bills and connected securities issued
to RBI, other internal debts, external debts of Government of India, State
Provident Funds, Insurance and Pension Funds, Special Deposits with the
Government and payments on account of other contractual services.  Total
budget provision under Non Plan is Rs. 2,51,664 crore for this demand.
(iii) Demand No. 36 : Loans to Government Servants etc.
1.8 The budget provision under this grant includes the requirement of
all the Ministries and Departments and their subordinate organizations and Union
Territory administrations for release of loans and advances like, House building,
motor vehicles, computers.  It also includes provisions for advances to Members
of Parliament for purchase of motor conveyance. Total budget provision under
Non Plan is Rs. 300 crore for this demand.
(iv) Demand No. 37: Appropriation—Repayment of Debt
1.9 Repayment of Debt is a charged expenditure.  This caters to the
repayment of borrowings of the Central Government both internal and external as
well as for discharge of treasury bills of different maturities, ways and means

advances, etc. Total budget provision under Non Plan is Rs. 33,82,664.56 crore
for this demand.
(B) Department of Expenditure
1.10 The Department of Expenditure oversees the expenditure
management in the Central Ministries and Departments through the interface
with the Financial Advisors. The overall coordination of the Outcome Budget of
different Ministries/Departments, release of funds to State Governments for
implementing developmental works and matters relating to Central Plan are the
important activities of the Department which provide the entire canvas of
developmental activity of the Central Government.
 1.11 One of the main functions of the Department of Expenditure is to
appraise projects which come before the Expenditure Finance Committee and
the Public Investment Board.
 1.12 There are three Demands directly administered by the Department
of Expenditure. The most important Demand is Demand No. 35 which is about
transfers to States and Union Territories. The other Demand is Demand No. 38
about administrative expenditure of the Department of Expenditure and Demand
No. 39 which relates to pensions. Demand No. 35 relates to the two main
transfers. One is the Central Assitance to States for Plans and the other one is
the Grants to States under the proviso of Article 275 (1) of the Constitution on the
recommendations of the Finance Commission. These are known as the Finance
Commission Grants.
1.13 Demand No. 38 deals with the administrative expenditure of the
Department of Expenditure which comprises the Department of Expenditure,
Central Pension Accounting Office, Controller General of Accounts, Pay and
Accounts Office.  The total budget provision under this demand is Rs. 120.85
crore, of which Rs.10.50 crore is under Plan and Rs. 10.35 crore is under Non
Plan.
 1.14 Demand No. 39 is about pension which is payment of pension and
gratuity to civilian pensioners, including provision for payment of pensions and
gratuities including those charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, which are

later recovered from the State Governments.  Provisions have also been
included in this Demand for contributions to Contributory and other Provident
Funds, Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme, Central Government Employees
Insurance Scheme and for meeting expenditure on medical treatment of
pensioners under CGHS facility.  Total budget provision under Non Plan is Rs.
15930.29 crore for this demand.
(C) Department of Financial Services
1.15 The Department of Financial Services has only one Demand viz.
Demand no. 33.  The total budget provision   for 2010-11 is Rs 49,609.10 crore
which includes   Rs 50 crore  under Plan and Rs 49,559.10 crore under Non-
Plan.
 The provision under this Grant caters to the following  :
• Secretariat / establishment expenditure of the Department of Financial
Services ; office of Custodian and Special courts set up for
investigating irregularities involving transactions in securities, Appellate
Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction(AAIFR) , Board for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and Debt Recovery
Tribunals. It also includes grants to Pension Fund Regulatory
Development Authority   (PFRDA) and expenses related to office of the
Court of Liquidator, Kolkata.
• Contribution for constitution of Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF) and
Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF) (Rs. 10 crore each).
• Payment of subsidy towards interest subvention of 1 per cent on
Housing Loans up to Rs. 10 lakh (Rs. 700 crore).
• Payment to LIC for implementation of pension Plan for senior citizens
scheme (Rs 209.32 crore).
• Payment to Farmers Debt Relief Fund for implementation of
Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008 (Rs 12,000.00
crore).
• Assistance to Public Sector Banks for opening bank branches in
unbanked blocks (Rs. 50 crore)
• Payment of subsidy towards interest subvention for providing short
term credit to Farmers (Rs 3000.00 crore).

• Revival of Long Term Co-operative Credit structure in the country (Rs
1000.00 crore).
• Subscription to the share capital of Export-Import Bank of India(Rs
300.00 crore.
• Equity support to India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd.(IIFCL) (Rs
500.00 crore)
• Contribution to Securities redemption Fund for redeeming SLR
Marketable Securities issued against subscription in the rights issue of
equity shares of State Bank of India (Rs.625.00 crore).
(D) Department of Disinvestment:
 1.16 Demand No. 44 pertains to the Department of Disinvestment. This
Department has no Plan or Non-Plan Scheme.  The entire Budget Provision is
under Non-Plan for salary/wages, payment for professional/special services and
for other administrative expenses.  BE under Revenue Section for the year 2010-
11 is Rs. 63.36 crore.
 1.17 The Government has in November, 2005 constituted “National
Investment Fund” (NIF) to be maintained outside the Consolidated Fund of India
into which the proceeds from disinvestments of Central Public Sector Enterprises
would be channelized.

CHAPTER II
Department of Economic Affairs
A. Under-utilisation of funds
(i) National Social Security Fund (NSSF)
2.0 As a follow up to the Unorganised Sector Workers Social Security
Act, 2008, it has been decided to set up a National Social Security Fund for
unorganized sector workers. A provision of Rs. 1000 crore has been kept in BE
2010-11 for transfer to National Social Security Fund for Unorganised labour.
This fund will support schemes for weavers, toddy tappers, rickshaw pullers, bidi
workers etc.
2.1 Asked about the schemes/programmes to be supported out of this
fund, the Finance Secretary, during his deposition before the Committee stated
as below:
“Once the budgetary process gets the approval of
Parliament, the architecture of this scheme will be finalized”.
2.2 The Secretary, Expenditure, further clarified as under:
“This fund has been kept in the Ministry of Finance, but the
various schemes will be of different Departments which deal
with the subject. For example, if there is a scheme of some
unorganised sector like domestic servants or people like
thelawalas then that particular Ministry will have to formulate
the scheme and then come for appraisal.  The money will
again pass through the Budget.”
2.3 When the Committee pointed out, that without conceptualising the
schemes in advance, there is a possibility of money remaining unutilised, the
Secretary, Expenditure, stated as follows:
“The idea is that it would not lapse since it would go into the
public account.  There is one scheme where it is thought of
using the Fund.  In the Budget Speech mention has been
made that Government will contribute a certain amount per
year for unorganised workers who join the new pension
scheme.”

2.4 The Finance Secretary, while tendering evidence, also informed the
Committee that the Ministry of Finance has communicated to all the Ministries
concerned about all the items in the Budget speech including the NSSF and
advised them to prepare the schemes even before the approval by the
Parliament to ensure that the funds are utilised in the current financial year. In
this regard, he stated:
“On time frame, what I can say is that we will do our best to
put the architecture in place at the earliest.  But let me
honestly say that it will have to go through the normal
process which the hon. Chairman outlined. The Ministries
prepare the Schemes. The Schemes are approved by the
competent authorities and then they are implemented by the
agencies concerned.  As this is an important part of the
programme and agenda, we will put in place a coordination
mechanism at a senior level to ensure that the Scheme
takes off in the intention with which it has been announced.”

(ii) Assistance for Infrastructure Development- Lump sum Provision
 3.0 The budgetary allocation of funds, revised estimates and actual
expenditure under this head for the last four years is as under:
             (Plan- Rs. In crore)
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actuals
2007-08 100.00 23.00 23.00
2008-09 92.10 61.67 54.07
2009-10 150.00 45.95 33.72
2010-11 480.26 - -
3.1 Explaining the reasons for continuous under- utilization of funds
under this head, the Ministry, in one of their written replies stated as below:
“(i) Viability Gap Funding Scheme (Plan): PPP
projects, which have economic and social justification but
are not commercially viable, need support from the
Government to cover the viability gap. DEA has notified the
Scheme for Financial Support to projects that are to be
implemented in the PPP format. Under the Scheme, Viability
Gap Funding is provided by Government of India and
accordingly provisions are made in the Budget of Ministry of
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs.
(i) A provision of Rs.150 crore was made in BE 2008-09
and after careful monitoring and review, the Revised
Estimates 2008-09 have been made to Rs.45.95 crore and
final requirement of Rs.45.95 crore based on the
requirement proposed by sponsoring authority. However,
Projects did not get a bid response to the prevalent
economic conditions and the bid process got extended. The
reduction is due to proposals of Government of
Maharashtra (where the bidding has been completed) have
not been granted  f inal approval and bidding in respect of
proposals of Government of Karnataka has failed.  Hence,
there is no requirement against these projects in 2009-10.
The reasons for variations is less expenditure than
anticipated due to less demand by Sponsoring Authority.

(iii) The Budget Estimates were formulated based on the
approved projects where ‘in principle’ approval was granted.
However, since the scheme was new, the sponsoring
authorities did not have any prior experience in implementing
the scheme.  They were also unfamiliar with implementation
of projects in the PPP framework.  Hence, in-spite of grant of
‘in-principle’ approval by the Department of Economic
Affairs, there were delay in completion of the bidding
process by the Project authorities.
In 2007-08, a Budget provision of Rs.100 crore was made in
MH 5475-Assistance for Infrastructure Development at BE
stage.  The Budget Estimates were framed based on the ‘in
principle’ approval given to the projects submitted by
sponsoring authorities.  Revision was made only for projects
which were in an advanced stage of bidding.  It was found
that some of the projects, on completion of the bidding
process, had received ‘negative grant’ and the State
Governments did not require Viability Gap Funding for those
projects.  Accordingly a provision of  Rs.23 crore was made
in  Revised Estimates  2007-08.  The entire amount of Rs.23
crore was disbursed in 2007-08.
A provision of Rs.92.10 crore was made for VGF proposals
as per the requirement of Sponsoring Authority in 2008-09.
A review was done. It was found that many projects on
bidding had received negative grant premium, and therefore
did not require the VGF approved for the project. The
Revised Estimates was reduced to Rs.61.67 crore. During
2008-09, Rs.54.07 crore were disbursed.  The balance of
Rs.7.60 crore was surrendered due to the reasons that
Government of Maharashtra earlier asked for VGF
assistance of Rs.12.18 crore during this year and their final
requirement indicated in March, 2009 was Nil.  ”
3.2 On the mechanism of Public Private Partnership projects, the
Committee were informed that the PPP is one of the instrumentalities to address
the deficit in infrastructure. It entails incurring of about one-third of the total
expenditure on infrastructure by the Government. The Planning Commission
appraises the overall architecture of the projects. These projects are reviewed by
a Empowered Committee, chaired by the Finance Secretary.
3.3 While tendering evidence, the Finance Secretary explained the
shortfall in expenditure as follows:

Sir, the main Scheme here is, what is called, a ‘Viability Gap
Funding Scheme’ in relation to Public Private Partnership
projects.  The Scheme’s basic framework is that the projects
which are economically and socially important and justified
but not fully commercially viable are to be supported by the
Government.  So, Centre’s mechanism for the Viability Gap
Funding Scheme is 20 per cent.  The Public Private
Partnership projects have taken off essentially in the last two
or three years and they have not yet been able to reach a
stage where they are in a position to draw because the
expenditure actually goes after sufficient amount of
expenditure has incurred.  There are various stages of pari
passu with which the Funding Scheme operates and the
money is given…”
 3.4 Replying to a query on proposing higher budgetary provisions each
year despite insufficient utilisation of the budgeted funds, the Secretary stated:
“We hope every time that the funding under this Scheme will
increase.  It has not increased to the extent that we would
wish it to.  For the current year, we have provided again a
substantial amount but as we go along we shall see. The
reason is that now the projects are in a position to move
ahead and, therefore, the Budget Estimate has been
provided for that but we shall see as it moves ahead… the
broad basis that we have is that a large number of projects
for road sector under PPP have been awarded in the last
few months.  These are the two main sectors which will take
up the funding under the Viability Gap Funding Scheme.  But
beyond that it is not possible to predict very precisely what
would be the actual off-take under the Viability Gap Funding
Scheme… Once the project is given, in principle approval by
the Committee, there is an understanding that perhaps it will
need Viability Gap Funding, subject to the parameter let us
say of 15 per cent of the amount translating into Rs. 100
crore by way of example. But it is not something, which is
predetermined…But the project is competitively bidded out.
Very often, we have found cases where instead of VGF, we
get negative grant in the sense that the bidder for that
particular infrastructural project has to pay the Government
because it is competitively bid.”
 3.5 However, recognising the need to be more prudent and pragmatic
in formulating the budgetary provisions, the Finance Secretary stated as under:
“It cannot be the intention of the Ministry or the hon.
Members  that we must make sure that we give more
viability gap funding and therefore, we merely take  steps to

fulfil whatever is the Budget allocation.  Yes, we should
frame the Budget on realistic grounds based on what is likely
to come up.”

B. Debt Burden of the Government
4.0 Public debt of the Central Government has witnessed continuous
growth due to persistent recourse to deficit financing, albeit at a moderated pace
during last few years. Over time, the pattern of financing fiscal deficit has
undergone a significant change. More than 90 per cent of the deficit is being
financed through domestic resources, greater reliance is being placed on the
market loans with market determined rates of interest. Two other items included
in the domestic debt/liabilities of the Central Government are Net accretions to
National Small Savings Fund (NSSF) and borrowings under Market Stabilization
Scheme. Financing of deficit, to a smaller extent is also being financed through
external debt and other internal liabilities or through cash draw down.
4.1 The Economic Survey 2009-10 states that under the Fiscal
Responsibility Budget Management Act (FRBMA), the rule focuses on
incremental assumption of liabilities. By and large, this rule was adhered to in the
post FRBMA period; since 2008-09, there has been a rise in the assumption of
net incremental liabilities as a result of the expansionary fiscal policy stance. As a
result, the ratio of outstanding liabilities to the GDP after falling from a level of
61.6 per cent in 2004-05 to 56.3 per cent in 2008-09 (RE) has risen marginally to
56.7 per cent in 2009-10 (BE). Internal debt, mainly market borrowings,
continued to be the main component of outstanding liabilities.  The trend of
internal and external debt as percentage of GDP as reported in the Economic
Survey 2009-10 for the last five years is as given below:
       (As per cent of GDP)
Year
(end March)
Internal
debt
Other internal
liabilities
External debt
(Outstanding)*
Total Outstanding
Liabilities
2004-05 39.4 20.3 1.9 61.6
2005-06 37.5 20.9 2.5 61.0
2006-07 36.1 20.8 2.4 59.3
2007-08 36.5 18.5 2.3 57.3
2008-09(RE) 36.1 17.9 2.2 56.3
2009-10(BE) 38.2 16.2 2.2 56.7
*External debt figures represent borrowings by Central Government from
external sources and are based upon historical rates of exchange

4.2 As per the Economic Survey 2009-10, the interest payments
appropriated substantial proportions of revenue receipts and the efforts in the
FRBMA period were to reduce the level of deficits and incremental assumption of
debt to contain the interest burden. Interest payments as a proportion of revenue
receipts declined from a level of 52.1 per cent in 1998-99 to a level of 31.6 per
cent in 2007-08. They were at the 35 per cent level in 2008-09 (provisional) and
were budgeted at 36.7 per cent in 2009-10 (BE). The data on debt servicing as
given in Budget papers for the last six years is as given below which shows that
around 36 to 38 per cent of revenue receipts continue to be paid as interest  or
for servicing of debt :
       (In crores of Rupees)
Year Total Interest payments Revenue receipts Interest payments as % of
revenue receipts
2005-06(RE) 1,30,032 3,48,474 37.3
2006-07(RE) 1,46,192 4,23,331 34.5
2007-08(RE) 1,71,971 5,25,098 32.8
2008-09 1,92,204 5,40,259 35.6
2009-10(RE) 2,19,500 5,77,294 38.0
2010-11(BE) 2,48,664 6,82,212 36.4
4.3 In reply to a query on total debt burden of the country, the Finance
Secretary stated as follows while deposing before the Committee:
“I would submit that the debt burden of the Central Government is
in the region of about 55 or 56 per cent of GDP. If you take the debt
burden of the State Governments also, which is about 25 per cent,
it comes to the about 80 per cent of the GDP for the country as a
whole.”
 4.4 As per the Economic Survey 2009-10, the combined finances of the
States exhibited a faster than anticipated turnaround in 2005-06, reporting a
fiscal deficit level of 2.4 per cent of GDP, following adoption of the fiscal
responsibility legislation. This was facilitated by the growth in their own revenues
as a result of implementation of Value added tax (VAT), buoyancy in Central
taxes, the higher levels of transfers and the Scheme of Debt Consolidation and
Waiver linked to fiscal consolidation. However with relaxation given to States to

obviate the impact of the global crisis the fiscal deficit of the States has been
budgeted at 3.2 per cent of GDP in 2009-10.
4.5 The Thirteenth Finance Commission, in their report have observed
that the debt-GDP ratio for 2009-10 is estimated to reach 82 per cent well above
the previous Finance Commission target of 75 per cent owing largely to adverse
macroeconomic situations in 2008-09. The Commission has specified the target
for combined debt GDP ratio to be 68 per cent of GDP (net of Central loans to
States) in 2014-15, with States’ debt GDP ratio projected at 25 per cent, based
on targets of fiscal deficit for Centre and States as fixed by the Commission.
4.6 In the Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement, presented with the
Union Budget, 2010-11, it is stated that the estimated debt GDP ratio for Central
Government would be 51.5 per cent in RE 2009-10 and 51.1 per cent in BE
2010-11 respectively. With the projected level of fiscal deficit of 4.8 per cent of
GDP in 20110-12 and 4.1 per cent of GDP in 2012-13, the estimated debt  GDP
ratio would be 50 per cent and 48.2 per cent respectively. These estimates
indicate that the Government would be able to bring down the debt GDP ratio for
Central Government to the recommended level of 45 per cent by the 13th Finance
Commission by 2014-15.
4.7  However the Finance Secretary, while explaining the measures for
reducing the debt GDP ratio expressed apprehension about adherence to the
targets of fiscal deficit, fixed by the Commission, given the limitations in
contracting expenditure, stated as below:
“The objective is to reduce this. The Finance Commission has
mentioned that for the Central Government it should be brought
down to 50 per cent by the year 2012-2013. So, the objective is as
fiscal deficit and revenue deficit will contract correspondingly, quite
logically, the debt burden of the Central Government will also come
down.
As the Committee is aware, the Central Government had enacted,
and thereafter most of the State Government also enacted, what is
called Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, which
enjoined upon the Central Government, so far as the Central Act is
concerned, to reduce the revenue deficit to zero and then there
were rules which said that fiscal deficit has to be brought down over
a period of time and there were numbers mentioned. It is true that
in the last two years or so, because of high level of spending, those

targets have not been achieved and they have been breached. This
has been reported to Parliament.
We have received the recommendations of the 13 th Finance
Commission and as required under the FRBM Act, we have placed
before the Parliament Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement… It is
not likely that we will be reaching the three per cent fiscal deficit
target by 2012-13. It will go beyond that because there are limits to
contracting expenditure which may also not be good because
spending is required to a certain extent for creating various assets
and social security programmes. Similarly, the revenue deficit is
nowhere near zero in terms of Medium Term Fiscal Policy
Statement.”

C. Regulation of Unit Linked Insurance Products (ULIPs)
5.0 ULIPs were introduced in life insurance sector in India as far back
as 2001 but they became popular only from 2004 onwards because of boom in
the stock market. As on 31.3.2009, the number of linked policies in force in life
insurance sector stood at over 7.02 crore on a total sum assured of Rs. 8.5 lakh
crores.
5.1 Section 2 (11) of Insurance Act, 1938 defines Life Insurance
Business and Section 26 of IRDA Act, 1999 confers power upon the IRDA to
frame regulations to carry out the purpose of the Act. Accordingly, in exercise of
the said powers, IRDA has notified IRDA (Registration of Insurance Companies),
2000 under which life insurance includes contracts of both linked and non-linked
type. However SEBI is of the view that ULIP products have a investment
component and these products are for the sale to general public and it is the
mandate of SEBI to regulate the sale of products as the members of public are
exposed to market risks. SEBI had issued Show Cause Notices to 14 insurance
companies asking them to explain why appropriate action should not be taken
against these companies under relevant provision of SEBI Act, 1992 for
launching products that are akin to mutual fund schemes without obtaining
requisite certificate of registration from SEBI.
5.2 Asked to explain the current status in resolving issues of regulatory
overlap between SEBI and IRDA, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Economic Affairs), in a written reply, stated as below:
 “At the instance of Ministry of Finance, SEBI and IRDA
agreed to discuss and resolve the issue. These discussions
are under way.”
5.3 Questioned on the issue of any commonality in the disclosure
norms etc. for mutual fund and ULIP products, the Department of Economic
Affairs, submitted as below:
“There is no clear commonality in the disclosure norms
presently prevalent for mutual fund products and ULIPs. The
current norms regarding loads, annual recurring expenses,
calculation of Net Asset Value, Know Your Client (KYC),
advertisement and disclosures are made very stringent and
transparent for mutual funds to protect the interest of
investors.”

 5.4 In a news report dated 11 April, 2010, the ban imposed by SEBI on
14 private life insurance companies and stand taken by IRDA has been reported
as under:
“The SEBI banned 14 private life insurers, unless they registered
with SEBI and took its permission to sell these products.  The
decision followed show cause notice to these entities asking them
to explain why action should not be taken against them for selling
ULIPs without SEBI permission.  The IRDA is satisfied that the
order of SEBI will bring the insurance industry to a stand still which
would not be in public interest and would be detrimental to the
interests of the policyholders and prejudicial to the interests of the
insurers.  Hence, IRDA directed to note all the insurance
companies that they shall continue to carry out insurance business
as usual including offering, marketing and servicing ULIPs in
accordance with the Insurance Act, 1938, Rules, Regulations and
Guidelines issued thereunder by the IRDA.”

Chapter III
Department of Financial Services
A.  Under utilization of the corpus of Financial Inclusion Fund
(FIF) and Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF)
 6.0 The Union Minister of Finance, in his Budget Speech for 2007-08,
announced the constitution of the Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF) and Financial
Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF), with an overall corpus of Rs. 500 crore each,
to be contributed by the Central Government, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) in the ratio of
40:40:20. These funds were constituted with a view to ensuring access to timely
and adequate credit and financial services to vulnerable groups, such as weaker
sections and low income groups, at an affordable cost.  The objective of FIF is to
support promotional and developmental activities with a view to securing greater
financial inclusion while FITF aims at promoting financial inclusion, stimulating
the transfer of research and technology in financial inclusion.
 6.1 The Government of India has released Rs. 20 crore to each of
these Funds in 2007-08. As on 31 March 2008, GOI contributed Rs.10 crore
each in the funds and NABARD Rs.5 crore each. RBI indicated that they would
contribute on reimbursement basis. A provision of Rs. 10 crore for each fund was
made in RE 2009-10 and similarly a sum of Rs. 10 crore for each fund has been
provided in BE 2010-11. The projects under these funds have been sanctioned
for a period of 3-5 years, mostly sanctioned/disbursed during the later half of
2009-10 and the utilization under these projects and results achieved thereunder
would be monitored during 2010-11. The status of utilization and unspent
balances for the last three years have been given in the following table:

 (Rs. In crore)
Fund As on 1.4.2008 During 1.4.08 to 31.03.09 During 1.4.09 to 31.1.2010
 Contribution@ Contribution Contribution Utilisation
 GOI NABARD Unspent
Balances
GOI NABARD
&
Interest
credited
Utilisa-
tion
(Released)
Position
As on
31.3.2009
GOI NABARD
&
Interest credited
Committed/
Under
consideration
Released Total Position
As on
31.3.200
9
FIF 10 5 15 0 19.45 0.36 34.09 0 0 12.24 7.54 19.78 14.31
FITF 10 5 15 0 33.46 0.09 48.37 0 0 91.3 0.93 92.23 $
@ RBI contribution to be received on reimbursement basis.
$ As on 31.1.2010, the commitment made under FITF exceeds the balance in the Fund.

  6.2 Responding to a query on reasons for non utilization of funds during the
last two years, the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted as below:
“So far the Advisory Committee has approved around 23 projects
involving Rs.18.65 crore (FIF) and Rs.8.77 crore (FITF).The
sanctioned amount (out of FIF/FITF) is generally released on
reimbursement basis in accordance with identified project
deliverables.  Hence there is a process time lag between sanction
and release of funds.  The provision of Rs.10 crore available in
BE 2009-10 in each fund is being released to NABARD in March,
2010.
Reasons for low disbursal are:
(a) The releases to the projects sanctioned are on
reimbursement basis.  Banks have to implement project and seek
reimbursement for NABARD for funds after implementation.
(b)  The projects are sanctioned over a period of 3-5 years,
mechanism based on the viability gap funding, funds will then be
released after assessment.
© NREGA project payments are ineligible under FIF/FITF.
(d) CBs are discouraged as per the policy of advisory Board-
they are eligible for  only 25% in most of the areas (except North
Eastern regions).
(e) RRBs/Coops take time to sink the projects, due to lack of
perspective and technically qualified staff.
(f) Individuals to be encouraged as BCs in lieu of sec 25
companies.  This will take time to sink in,   due to low margins.
(g) Big NGOs/NBFCs are not being encouraged to be supported
as BCs directly, as per RBI policy.
(h) RBI has advised that the FIF / FITF proposals have to come
from banks only.
(i)  The role of Coops in FI is not yet clear. RBI has been
referred to relax criteria in the matter.
(j) Advisory Board encourages pilots, not scalability, in view of
constraints regarding funds receipt  from others.
It is to be mentioned that there is necessity of having sufficient
corpus in the funds in order to make commitments.  Inadequate
corpus, limits the commitments.”

B. Financial Inclusion
7.0 Financial Inclusion has gained the main focus of the policy in view
of the still existent significant sections of unbanked population and regions. The
Trend and Progress of Banking in India, published by the Reserve Bank of India
states that despite the expansion of the banking network during the last four
decades, a sizeable proportion of the households, especially in rural areas, do
not have a bank account. Thus, it has been the endeavour of the Government
and the Reserve Bank to facilitate providing formal financial services to the
hitherto unbanked/under banked areas. The Reserve Bank used the term
‘financial inclusion’ for the first time in its Annual Policy Statement of 2005-06.
Since then, the Bank has taken several measures for promoting financial
inclusion such as advising banks to open ‘no frills’ accounts, introduction of
Business Correspondent (BC)/Business Facilitator (BF) model, promotion of
financial literacy, and adoption of Information and Communication Technology
solutions for achieving greater outreach.
 7.1 The Union Budget for 2009-10 stated that the SLBCs will identify
the under-banked or unbanked areas in their respective States/ UTs and
formulate an action plan for providing banking facilities to all these areas within
the next three years . I t has been announced by the Government in the Union
Budget 2010-11 that there is a need to extend the geographic coverage of banks
and improve access to banking services for which RBI will consider giving some
additional banking licenses to private sector players and Non Banking Financial
Companies who fulfill its criteria.
 7.2 As per the information furnished by the Ministry, banks have
employed 1,761 BCs covering 48,446 villages as in February, 2010. Of this
public sector banks have employed 1,580 BCs, private sector banks have 180
BCs and foreign banks have 1 BC. Recently based on the recommendations of
the Working Group set up for the purpose of reviewing the Business

Correspondent model, certain additional entities such as (i) individual
kirana/medical/fair price shop owners (ii) individual public call office (PCO)
operators (iii) Agents of small savings schemes of Government of India/
Insurance Companies (iv) individuals who own petrol pumps (v) Retired teachers
and (vi) authorized functionaries of well known self help groups (SHGs) linked to
banks have been permitted to be engaged by banks as BCs.
7.3 When the Committee desired to know that how the branch
authorization policy will ensure opening of new branches in unbanked areas by
the private players, the Secretary, Department of Financial Services, stated as
below during his evidence:
“The guidelines for new banks are yet to be framed. It is
being thought upon by the RBI. RBI is yet to come up with
the guidelines to be framed for new banks. We are awaiting
the guidelines to be brought out for opening new banks. We
think it will take a couple of months perhaps.”
 7.4 Queried on the measures being taken by the Government/RBI to
increase the reach of banking facilities to rural and unbanked areas, the Ministry,
in one of their written submissions, stated as under:
 “ To provide adequate outreach of banking facilities, the following
steps have been taken by the Government of India and Reserve
Bank of India:-
 (i) Branch Authorisation Policy  - RBI, vide its circular dated 1 st
December, 2009, has permitted all scheduled commercial banks,
(excluding Regional Rural Banks) to open branches in Tier 3 to Tier
6 centres (with population upto 49,999 as per Census 2001) without
having the need to take permission from RBI in each case, subject
to reporting.  Further banks have been permitted to open branches
in rural, semi-urban & urban centres in the North Eastern States &
Sikkim, without prior permission from the RBI.  RBI has also
relaxed its Branch Authorisation policy under which SCBs including
are permitted to install offsite ATMs at centres / places identified by
them without having the need to take permission from the RBI.
This is expected to result in further expansion of banking network.
(ii) Use of Business Correspondents (BC) by banks  - The BC
Model ensures a closer relationship between poor people and the
organized financial system. Reorganizing this, in 2006, RBI

permitted banks to use the services of non-governmental
organizations, micro-finance institutions, retired bank employees,
ex-servicemen, retired government employees, Section 25
companies, and other civil society organizations as Business
Correspondents in providing financial  and banking  services.    In
addition to the entities presently permitted, RBI has also permitted
banks to appoint the following entities as BCs (i) Individual
kirana/medical /fair price shop owners (ii) individual Public Call
Office (PCO) operators (iii) Agents of Small Savings schemes of
Government of India/Insurance Companies (iv) Individuals who own
Petrol Pumps (v) Retired teachers and (vi) Authorised functionaries
of well run Self Help Groups (SHGs) linked to banks.
Further, with a view to ensuring the viability of the BC model, banks
(and not BCs) have been permitted to collect reasonable service
charges from the customer, in a transparent manner under a
Board-approved policy.  It is expected that these measures would
go a long way in scaling up the efforts towards financial inclusion.
(iii)    Mobile Banking  - Considering the penetration of mobile
phones and their ever increasing usage, Mobile Banking guidelines
have permitted the banks which are licensed and supervised in
India and have a physical presence in India to conduct banking
through mobile phones. For mobile banking transactions banks are
now permitted by RBI to offer this service to their customers subject
to a daily cap of
(iv)    Rs.50,000/- per customer for both funds transfer and
transactions involving purchase of goods/services. Mobile banking
transactions up to Rs.1000/- can now be facilitated by banks
without end-to-end encryption. The risk aspects involved in such
transactions may be addressed by the banks through adequate
security measures.
(v)    North-east Region  - The State Governments in the North-
East Region have been requested to identify and facilitate
availability of suitable premises or land preferably in the
Block/Tehsil Headquarters for setting up a bank branch with
necessary security and infrastructure including road and digital
connectivity, housing facility for banking staff etc.
(vi)  Lead Bank Scheme  - The High Level Committee on Lead
Bank Scheme constituted by RBI under the chairmanship of Smt.
Usha Throart, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India submitted
its report on 20.8.2009. RBI has accepted the recommendations of
the Committee and issued a Notification in this regard on
27.11.2009, whereby the Chief Executives of all State Level
Bankers’ Committee(SLBC) convener banks have been advised to
constitute a sub- committee of District Consultative Committee
(DCCs) to draw up a road map to provide banking services through
banking outlets in every village having a population of over 2000 by

March, 2011. The banks have also been advised to draw up a
monitoring review mechanism for periodic assessment and
evaluation of the progress made in achieving the roadmap.
(vii) Use of Technology  - In May 2007, banks were advised
about the use of appropriate technology in their financial inclusion
efforts in order to lower the transaction costs to make small ticket
transactions viable.  Banks were therefore encouraged to use ICT-
enabled models for scaling up their financial inclusion efforts.
Reserve Bank of India has, vide its circular dated 12 th June, 2009,
permitted Scheduled Commercial Banks to install Off-site ATMs at
centres/places identified by them, without having the need to take
permission from the Reserve Bank in each case . This would,
however, be subject to any direction which the Reserve Bank may
issue, including for closure/shifting of any such Off-site ATMs,
wherever so considered necessary by the Reserve Bank.  The
banks should report full details of the Off-site ATMs installed by
them in terms of the above general permission to the Regional
Office concerned of Department of Banking Supervision/ DBOD,
CO (in respect of Off-Site ATMs in Maharashtra and Goa)
immediately after operationalisation and in any case not later than
two weeks.”
7.5 In response to a specific question on the status of implementation
of recommendations of the various Committees, to enable increased reach of
institutional finance, the Ministry stated inter-alia as follows in their written reply:
“(a)To implement the recommendation of the Committee on
Financial inclusion that commercial banks (including RRBs) may
provide access to credit to at least 250 hitherto excluded rural
households at each of their existing rural and semi-urban branches,
IBA had advised commercial banks and NABARD advised RRBs to
provide access to at least 250 excluded rural households. Upto
March 2009, more than 3.3 crore no-frill accounts had been opened
by the banks.
(b)The Committee on Financial Sector Plan (2006) had specified
banks to open branches in the 19 identified centres in North
Eastern Region (NER) by March 2007. Banks have already opened
branches in the above identified centres. The number of bank
branches in NE Region increased by 59 or 3.06% from 1928
branches as on March 31, 2009 to 1987 as on June 30, 2009.  Of
the 59 branches, 56 branches were opened in Assam. Incidentally,
57% or 1127 of the 1987 branches in the NE Region are in Assam
state. The number of ATMs has increased from 178 in March 2009

to 349 in June 2009. With 199 ATMs, the state of Assam has
highest number as compared with other states in the NE Region.
There has not been significant growth in the number of ATMs in
Manipur and Mizoram as they have only 5 ATMs and 8 ATMs
respectively up to the quarter ended June 2009.  SBI has already
been extending forex money changing facilities at two branches viz.
Dawki and Dalu in Meghalaya.
The Committee also recommended that the banks can use BC/BF
model effectively for increasing their outreach. Ideally, for the North
Eastern Region, local community based organizations (CBOs) like
Village Development Boards (VDBs), Anchal Samitis etc. may be
used as business correspondents.
Status: Expanding the outreach through BC/BF model in NE
Region as on June 30, 2009 is given below:
No. of BC/BFs appointed by@State
Commercial
banks
RRBs
Total
Assam 562 1 563
Arunachal
Pradesh
3 - 3
Manipur 180 - 180
Meghalaya 4 - 4
Mizoram 2 - 2
Nagaland - - -
Tripura 19 7 26
Total 770 8 778
@ Separate figures for BC & BF models- not available.
(c )On the basis of recommendations of the High Level Committee
to review Lead Bank Scheme (2009) and as announced in
Paragraph 147 of the Governor's statement on Second Quarter
Review of the Monetary Policy 2009-10, the lead banks have been
advised to constitute a Sub-Committee of the District Consultative
Committees (DCCs) to draw up a roadmap by March 2010 to
provide banking services through a banking outlet in every village
having a population of over 2000, by March 2011. Such banking
services may not necessarily be extended through a brick and
mortar branch but can be provided through any of the various forms
of ICT-based models, including through BCs.
RBI has, vide its letters dated 27.11.2009 and 26.02.2010, advised
Chief Executives of all SLBC Convener banks to initiate action for

speedy implementation of the recommendations and also closely
monitor the progress made by Lead Banks / commercial banks in
this regard.  The actions, inter-alia, include conduct of SLBC
meetings regularly, constitutions of sub-committees of SLBCs for
specific tasks, discuss, evaluate and monitor the progress made in
Financial Inclusion as a regular agenda item in SLBC meetings,
increased banking penetration for achieving 100% financial
inclusion, greater role for private sector banks, preparation of
district credit plan / annual credit plan, quarterly public meeting and
redressal of grievances, capacity building /training / sensitized
programs, effective liaison with State Government authorities, etc.
RBI has also circulated a performa for monthly monitoring of
progress in the finalisation of Road Map and providing banking
services in un-banked villages. Government has also requested all
public sector banks to indicate the progress made in this regard to
the Government on a regular basis.”
7.6 However as per the action taken note furnished on the
recommendations of the Committee in their 1 st Report on the Demands for
Grants (2009-10), there are still 375 underbanked districts and 99 unbanked
blocks in the country which clearly points out the little progress has been made
so far by private sector banks towards greater financial inclusion. The role of
private sector banks in adding new rural household accounts as recommended
by the Committee on Financial Inclusion has been very poor. The data given
below, on opening of rural household accounts as furnished by IBA does not give
a clear picture of total number of new rural household accounts added:
        (As on 31.12.2009)
S. No. Name of
the Bank
No. of
Rural/Semi
Urban
Branches
No. of Rural
Household
accounts
opened as
on
31.12.2009
1. Karnataka
Bank
184 11078
2. Tamilnadu
Mercantile
132 23642
3. HDFC
Bank
414 240767
4. Axis Bank 243 100724
5. Karur
Vysya Bank
34788

Vysya Bank
6. South
Indian Bank
63105
7. Kotak
Mahindra
Bank
56 466
IBA has reported that the Private Sector Banks have lesser number
of branches in the rural areas and are not actively involved in
handling Government sponsored schemes, disbursement of
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) payments,
etc.”
7.7 When the Committee pointed out that the last year’s budgetary
allocation for setting up new banks in the rural areas was Rs. 100 crore, as
against current year’s provision of Rs. 50 crore, a representative of the
Department of Financial Services, explained the reason as follows:
“That Rs.100 crore was earmarked by the Planning Commission for
opening bank branches  in un-banked blocks. We did a very
exhaustive survey and most of the blocks are in North East and
only 13 blocks are falling in non-North East States. We have taken
it up with these States and requested them to provide some land,
some space if possible, security or road, if it is needed and we have
tied it up with them and these 13 blocks are being covered by some
branches of some public sector banks. But in the North East, RBI is
already  running a viability gap funding scheme  If some bank goes
there and establishes a branch there, RBI in fact, compensates the
banks for the loss if it it makes for the next three years. That
scheme is already there. We thought that we would not be able to
make use of this Rs.100 crore and next year the Government has
reduced it to Rs.50 crore.”
7.8 When the Committee asked whether extant infrastructure like
pigmy/tiny deposit collectors involved by a large number of public and private
sector banks have also been found suitable to be engaged under BC/BF model,
the Ministry in their post evidence replies, stated as under:
“RBI has reported that though Pigmy/tiny deposit collectors are not
presently figuring in the list of permitted entities who can be
engaged as BCs of banks. However, based on the experience
gained in respect of engaging the additional entities and the
feedback from the stakeholders, RBI proposes to review the BC
model again with a view to effecting changes, if any, required in the
guidelines relating to BC model.”

 7.9 Further responding to a query on effectiveness of the banking
correspondent model in increasing banking facility to all the areas, the Secretary,
while tendering evidence, stated as under:
On the business correspondents, it is a thing which is now
launched for the financial inclusion programme.  It has been going
on in certain areas.  The idea is that the business correspondent,
whether it is an individual or a Kirana shop or petrol shop or LIC
agent, instead of having a brick and motor branch in areas where
the habitation is more than 2000 can be covered through this kind
of a banking model which will take into account the deposit, credit,
remittance through NREGA Programme and extending slowly into
insurance and pension products.  In that way the cost of banking
can be reduced to a considerable extent… He operates as an
addendum to the rural branch.  So, he takes the responsibility…
There are close to about 35,000 habitations in this country out of
600,000 villages having the physical bank branches.  The idea in
the financial inclusion is that all habitations having more than 2000
population must be provided banking facility through the business
correspondent model by March 2012.  We are making an
assessment and we find that that number will be somewhere
around 60,000 to 70,000 habitations which will have to be
additionally provided with banking facility.”
 7.10 Asked whether the Government has evolved any system of
incentives to the business correspondents/facilitators to provide such services,
he informed the Committee as under:
 “Some kind of an incentive will be provided to him to deal with this
product.”
7.11 Further in a post evidence reply, the Ministry has informed as under
on this issue:
“with a view to improving the viability of the BC model, banks have
also been permitted to collect reasonable charges in a transparent
manner from the customers to whom banking services are provided
through the BC model. As these changes in the guidelines have
been effected very recently, it is expected that the implementation
of BC model would be scaled up in the days to come.”

 7.12 When the Committee raised the issues of possible exploitation of
BC/BF model giving rise to middleman, system of mobile banking etc. the
Secretary stated as below:
“We are also conscious of some of the many of these problems
which Members have identified.  Mobile banking is already part of
the system.  Now the question is that it is not that there is any one
system that is going to be successful.  It is going to be a mix of a
number of things.  Mobile banking is one such area and some
banks have already started doing it.  UCO Bank has started doing it
in West Bengal and in certain other places.  So, this has happened
in a number of places.  So, we cannot have any one system.  We
have to have a mix of these systems.  We are confident that the
banks would be in a position to motivate all these channels to see
spread of banking culture.  We will be in a position to do it.  It will
have some hiccups.   I am not saying it will not but as we go along,
we will be in a position to perfect this system.”

C. Bank Lending to Agriculture and Weaker Sections
 8.0 As per the extant guidelines, the domestic banks (both public and
private sector banks) have to disburse 18  and 10 per cent of their Adjusted Net
Bank Credit (ANBC) or credit equivalent amount of off-Balance Sheet Exposure,
whichever is higher  to agriculture and weaker sections respectively. The list of
the banks which achieved the mandated target during the last three years is as
under:

NAMES OF DOMESTIC SCHEDULED COMMERCIAL BANKS WHICH HAVE ACHIEVED THE PRIORITY SECTOR
LENDING TARGET AND SUB-TARGETS FOR LENDING TO AGRICULTURE SECTOR AND WEAKER SECTIONS
Agriculture lending target (18 per cent) Weaker Sections lending target (10 per cent)
Public Sector Banks Private Sector Banks Public Sector Banks Private Sector Banks
2007 2008 2009 2007 2008 2009 2007 2008 2009 2007 2008 2009
S B B J S B I S B I
Lakshmi Vilas Bank
Ltd
Catholic Syrian Bank
Ltd
Catholic Syrian Bank
Ltd S B I S B I S B I Nil Nil
Catholic Syrian
Bank Ltd
S B Saurashtra  S B B J S B B J Sangli Bank Ltd Dev. Credit Bank Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd S B B J S B B J S B B J
Dhanalakshmi
Bank Ltd
All 'Bad Bank S B Hyd S B Hyd Yes Bank
Dhanalakshmi Bank
Ltd Icici Bank @ S B Indore S B Hyd S B Hyd     Indusind Bank
Andhra Bank S B Indore S B Indore Nainital Bank Indusind Bank S B Mysore S B Indore S B Indore     J & K Bank
B O India S B Mysore All 'Bad Bank
Tamilnadu Merc.
Bank Lakshmi Vilas Bank LtdS B Patiala S B Mysore S B Mysore
Indian Bank State Bank Of Patiala  Andhra Bank Yes Bank Nainital Bank All 'Bad Bank S B Patiala
All 'Bad
Bank
I O B S B Saurashtra  B O India Tamilnadu Merc. Bank Andhra Bank All 'Bad Bank Andhra Bank
P N B All 'Bad Bank Canara Bank Yes Bank B O Baroda Andhra Bank B O India
Andhra Bank Indian Bank B O India B O Baroda Canara Bank
B O India I O B B O MaharashtraB O India
Central Bank
Of India
Indian Bank P N B Canara Bank  B O Maharashtra Indian Bank
I O B Syndicate Bk Central Bank Canara Bank  I O B
P N B Uco Bank Dena Bank Central Bank P N B
Syndicate Bk Idbi Ltd. # $ Indian Bank Dena Bank Syndicate Bk
I O B Indian Bank Uco Bank
O B C I O B Idbi Ltd. # $
P N B O B C
P & S Bank P N B
Syndicate Bk P & S Bank
Union Bank Syndicate Bk
United Bank Union Bank
Vijaya Bank United Bank
Idbi Ltd. # Uco Bank
Vijaya Bank
Idbi Ltd. # $

8.1 It is seen that so far only 14 public sector banks and 8 private
sector banks have been able to fulfill the mandate of 18 percent target of
agricultural lending. However, with regard to weaker section lending, while the
performance of public sector banks has fallen considerably with only 16 of the
banks achieving the target vis-à-vis of 25 banks in the year 2008 in case of
private sector banks only 4 of the banks have achieved the target in 2009.
 8.2 During the course of oral evidence, while responding to a query on
system of penalty on banks on incurring shortfall in lending targets, the
Secretary, Department of financial services, stated as below:
“The question is, if the targeted lending for priority sector lending is
not reached or if the shortfall is taken away from the banks, that
money goes to RIDF scheme, about which the hon. Members are
familiar with, for refinancing for small scale sector, through
NABARD for other kinds of programmes, through National Housing
Bank for housing programmes and that goes at a much lower rate
of interest, which means, at about 3-5 per cent, depending on the
extent of shortfall from the priority sector target.
To that extent the banks are penalised.  Be it a public sector,
private sector or foreign bank they have to make payments for the
shortfall in targeted lending.  To that extent, we are able to ensure
that for certain important programmes like Bharat Nirman or RIDF
we are able to get money.  If direct lending is not done through
indirect lending the shortfall is taken.“
 8.3 As per standing guidelines vide RBI Master Circular dated 1 st July,
2009, on priority sector lending, domestic scheduled commercial banks having
shortfall in lending to priority sector lending target are to be allocated amounts for
contribution to the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) established
with NABARD or funds with other financial institutions, as specified by the
Reserve Bank.
8.4 The Committee raised the issue of effectiveness of disincentive
mechanism of RIDF and four other funds viz. the Short Term Cooperative Rural
Credit (STCRC) Fund, MSME Refinance Fund, MSME Risk Capital Fund and
Rural Housing Fund in persuading banks in achieving mandated lending, to
which the Secretary, during his deposition before the Committee replied as
under:

“The obligation to make good the shortfall still remains. The States
take their time to draw up a plan and ask for the money. The money
has to be given; RBI allocates the money to NABARD. NABARD is
one component; NHB is one component, then SIDBI is another
component. These people have to make plans draw the money
through RBI. I am taking RIDF programme where the plans would
have to be made by the States. The projects would have to be
drawn up by the States. Then they get in touch with NABARD and
NABARD gives them the money.”
8.5 The Committee have been informed that on the basis of
recommendations of the High Level Committee to review Lead Bank Scheme
constituted by RBI, the RBI has advised Lead Banks to constitute a Sub
Committee of the District Consultative Committees (DCCs) to draw up a roadmap
by March 2010 to provide banking services through a banking outlet in every
village having a population of over 2000, by March 2011. The services of BCs will
also be used for extending banking facilities in such villages.  The Lead Bank
Scheme makes specified banks in each district the key instruments of local
development by entrusting them with the responsibility of locating growth centres,
assessing deposit potential, identifying credit gaps and evolving a co-ordinated
approach to credit deployment in each district, in concert with other banks and
credit agencies. The State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC) and District
Consultative Committee (DCC) have been recommended to a play major role in
undertaking development activities. The Committee has also recommended
Private sector banks to actively involve themselves with the DCC and Action
plans where they have a presence and extend their services through permitted
channels in under-banked and unbanked areas  As at the end of March 2009, 26
banks (public and private sector) have been assigned lead responsibility in 622
districts of the country. However the metropolitan cities of Mumbai, Delhi,
Kolkata, Chennai and certain Union Territories are not covered under the
Scheme.

D. Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in Banks
9.0 The Net Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) of Public Sector Banks and
Private Sector Banks for the past three years and also as on December 2009 is
given as follows:
Net NPAs pertaining to Public and Private Sector Banks  (in Rs. Crore)
Bank
Group
Bank Name March
07
March
08
March
09
December
09
Allahabad Bank 470 418 437 149
Andhra Bank 54 54 80 88
Bank of Baroda 999 1009 970 422
Bank of India 603 557 834 1457
Bank of Maharashtra 277 254 272 649
Canara Bank 1026 898 1350 1721
Central Bank of India 878 1060 1063 638
Corporation Bank 152 106 144 266
Dena Bank 365 215 313 335
IDBI Bank Limited 887 925 949 1554
Indian Bank 100 96 81 68
Indian Overseas Bank 244 339 946 1428
Oriental Bank of Commerce 198 518 494 634
Punjab & Sind Bank 77 67 78 103
Punjab National Bank 801 754 264 842
Syndicate Bank 391 621 631 835
UCO Bank 1006 1092 813 657
Union Bank of India 601 126 193 573
United Bank of India 333 306 525 704
Vijaya Bank 144 182 292 512
State Bank of Bikaner &
Jaipur
223 209 253 309
State Bank of Hyderabad 59 160 227 97
State Bank of India 5217 7252 8850 10201
State Bank of Indore 159 134 193 318
State Bank of Mysore 66 81 114 228
State Bank of Patiala 217 197 247 527
State Bank of Saurashtra 78 111 # #
Public
Sector
Banks
State Bank of Travancore 268 268 188 294
Public Sector Banks 15892 18009 20801 25610
Axis Bank Ltd. 265 248 327 311New
Private
Sector
Centurion Bank Of Punjab 142 267 # #

Development Credit Bank
Ltd
44 27 100 136
HDFC Bank Ltd. 203 299 628 533
ICICI Bank Ltd. 1987 3476 4488 4178
IndusInd Bank Ltd. 274 291 179 129
Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. 217 276 397 468
Sector
Banks
Yes Bank Ltd 0 8 41 16
Bank of Rajasthan Ltd. 14 31 57 84
Catholic Syrian Bank Ltd. 60 53 88 84
City Union Bank Ltd. 37 45 61 72
Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd. 33 19 29 40
Federal Bank Ltd. 65 43 68 137
ING Vysya Bank Ltd. 114 103 206 292
Jammu & Kashmir Bank Ltd. 194 204 270 55
Karnataka Bank Ltd. 116 106 116 234
Karur Vysya Bank Ltd. 16 17 26 24
Lakshmi Vilas Bank Ltd. 57 60 65 91
Lord Krishna Bank Ltd. 44 # # #
Nainital Bank Ltd. 0 0 -1 0
Ratnakar Bank Ltd. 10 6 5 9
SBI  Commercial &
International Bank Ltd
1 0 0 0
Sangli Bank Ltd. 15 # # #
South Indian Bank Ltd. 78 34 134 57
Old Private
Sector
Banks
Tamilnad Mercantile Bank
Ltd.
39 19 21 21
Private Sector Banks 4021 5632 7305 6972
* Data sourced from Off-site Returns submitted by banks (Audited and domestic)
# Since merged with another bank
 The data on Net NPAs of banks for the last three years shows that Net NPAs as
a whole have increased over the last three years with public sector banks
reporting an increase from Rs. 15892 crore in March 2007 to Rs. 25610 crore in
December 2009  and private sector banks showing increase from Rs. 4021 crore
to Rs. 6972 crore in December 2009 over the same period. Except a few banks
all public sector banks have shown rising NPAs consecutively in the last three
years. However the performance of private sector banks has been comparatively
better with only Development Credit Bank Ltd.,Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd.,ING
Vysya Bank Ltd., and Karnataka Bank Ltd. showing persistent rising trend of
NPAs.

 9.1 Explaining the reasons for rise in NPAs, the Ministry in their written
reply, submitted as follows:
“The rise in NPAs of the banks during 2008-09 was due to slippage
of accounts in various sectors, mainly due to global economic
recession, vagaries of monsoon affecting mainly the agricultural
loans, apart from factors like bird-flu affecting poultry loans etc.,
thereby affecting the asset quality across the banks.”
9.2 The Secretary, Department of Financial Services, further explained
the reasons, in his deposition as follows:
“Rs. 25,000 crore is because of the fact that there are stressed
assets and economic downturn was there.  The point remains that
our NPAs, the gross NPAs and the net NPAs, have been coming
down.  We are including NPAs as one of the aspects which is
looked into very seriously.  Each Bank Board has to look into these
assets which are going bad and see that what better monitoring can
be done to see that these accounts are nursed and brought back to
proper health. There is a separate set of marks allocated for
reduction in the NPA.  That has got a serious weight in terms of top
managements’ performance.  At the Board level they are looking
into some of these accounts and how these can be nursed and
brought back into health.”
9.3 Asked to detail the measures taken by RBI to arrest the growth of
NPAs, the Ministry, in their written reply, furnished following:
“RBI had taken regulatory measures to improve asset quality and
better NPA management in banks from time to time, including the
discussions held with banks on the Annual Financial Inspection
Reports and also quarterly discussions. Various steps like,
tightening of credit appraisal standards, introduction of prudential
norms for improving the quality of assets of banking sector,
proportionate reductions in riskier retails loans, utilisation of credit
information about the history of borrowers available with Credit
Information Bureau of India Ltd (CIBIL), corporate debt
restructuring, sale of NPAs to asset reconstruction companies, etc
are taken by the banks as part of better NPA management.
Further, various means for recovery through legal course like Lok
Adalats, Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) etc and provisions under
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 are being
used.”

Chapter IV
Department of Expenditure
A. Surrender of Unutilised Funds by the Ministries/Departments
10.0 The data on surrender of funds for the last three years show huge
amounts of surrenders by various Ministries/Departments, details of which have
been furnished in the Annexure . Briefly, the amount of surrenders vis-à-vis total
allocation (Budgetary estimate and supplementary) work out to 1.59 per cent,
1.30 per cent and 2.40 per cent in the financial year 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-
09 (provisional) respectively.
 10.1 When the Committee desired to know the steps taken by the
Ministry for ensuring proper and timely utilization of funds, the Secretary,
Expenditure, while tendering evidence, stated as below:
“One of the things which we tell them is that we will take the
monthly spending. If they are not spending then we will divert the
amount to other Departments which will spend more. That is why,
we also review it in October-November. Many times we cut down
on their REs so that they are forced to spend more in the earlier
months. Otherwise, they will find that their allocations are slashed.
Then, we have tried to give them as much additional powers as
possible. But there is an insistence that they must get utilisation
certificates to show that the money which has been released
through the States or through para-Statal agencies – for instance,
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan is done through societies – is actually spent
on the ground. The complaint that we are getting is not that the
money is not available, but its actual impact is not there on the
ground, that it is not really being spent at the field level. As the hon.
Member was saying, although money was there, it has actually not
been released till the last mile.”
 10.2 Asked about a mechanism to ensure that funds which are voted for
particular purpose are utilised in time, the Secretary stated as follows:
“Each Ministry has that responsibility. So, they have to ensure that
they are able to utilise the funds and utilise them properly. What
happens is that the first instalment is released without UCs. The
second instalment is released only after the utilisation certificate is
given. They have to ensure that the money has been utilised.”

10.3 On the proactive policy measures taken by the Department to
ensure  that there is proper utilisation of funds, the Secretary informed as follows:
³That is why, supposing in a certain scheme there is not enough
spending and they want to divert it to another scheme, we are
allowing reappropriations even till the last minute to see that the
money is spent. As you very rightly said, Agriculture is very crucial.
But, this year for instance, they have been able to do much better in
terms of releasing money in time to the State Governments. I think,
when the financial accounts for 2009-10 are laid, it will be seen that
they have actually done better than in the previous years.”

B. Decline in Capital Expenditure of the Central Government
 11.0 The capital expenditure of the Central Government, both in
absolute numbers and as percentage of total expenditure during the last five
years is as given below:
Trend of Capital Expenditure of the Central Government
  (Figures shown are net of Receipts and Recoveries)
Year Absolute
amount
%of total
expenditure
2004-05 113,331 23%
2005-06 66,362 13%
2006-07 68,778 12%
2007-08 118,238 17%
2008-09
(provisional)
90,158 10%
11.1 Asked to furnish the reasons for massive decline in capital
expenditure of the Government, the Secretary, Department of Expenditure,
stated as below during the evidence:
“a lot of capital expenditure is being done through State
Governments. So, it is going under Revenue expenditure. for
example, the Accelerated Irrigation Programme, AIBP, it is going as
a transfer to the States, it is shown in revenue expenditure. But it is
going for capital. Similar is the case with NREGA…”
 11.2 On this issue, the Controller General of Accounts also informed the
Committee as under:
“Sir, the question which has been raised is with regard to the capital
expenditure allocation. I would like to submit that in the
Government of India Budget what is given as a grant either to the
State Government or to a DRDA or to any other society or even to
an autonomous institution – we show it only as a revenue
expenditure. But it is the perception that in many of these schemes
in the economy, there is creation of assets where it goes directly
into the State Government. For example, if the State Government,
again in turn, releases money to a panchayat or to a municipality, it
will again give it only as a grant. The asset will get created in the
accounts of the municipality or the panchayat.
This problem will remain and this is a problem which is there in the
budget of most Governments across the world. They all try to get
some figure of asset creation outside the Budget, separately and
then they try to work out. One of the ways in which it could be done
is to distinguish between grants given for creation of assets and

grants given for meeting regular revenue expenditure. For example,
salaries and things like that.”
 11.4 In a post evidence reply, the Ministry further explained the issue as
below:
“The total revenue expenditure of the Central Government has
grown in the last two years on account of implementation of 6 th
Central Pay Commission recommendations. Among other factors,
this is one of the reasons why the total capital expenditure as a
percentage of total expenditure has been impacted. Barring a few
exceptions, the capital expenditure has increased in RE 2009-10
and BE 2010-11 as indicated in table below:-
        (Rs. In crore)
Year Total
Expenditure
Revenue
Expenditure
Capital
Expenditure
Capital
Expendit
ure as
% of
total
exp.
2004-05 441428 384329 57099* 12.94
2005-06 505738 439376 66362 13.12
2006-07 583387 514609 68778 11.79
2007-08 678363 594433 83930@ 12.37
2008-09 883956 793798 90158 10.20
2009-10
(RE)
1021547 906355 115192 11.28
2010-11
(BE)
1108749 958724 150025 13.53
* Excludes Rs. 32, 675 crore towards repayment to National Small
Savings Fund under Debt Swap Scheme and Rs. 24,149 crore (RE 2004-
05) towards Block loans to State Governments (Transactions under Debt
Swap scheme was one-time transaction and Block loans to State
Governments was discontinued pursuant to 12 th Finance Commission
recommendations).
@ Excludes Rs. 34,308 crore on account of transfer of RBI’s stake in SBI.
The main reason for the declining trend of capital expenditure is
due to the implementation of the recommendations of the Twelfth
Finance Commission, by which the loans for State Plan schemes,
which were earlier passed through Union Government budget are
allowed to be raised directly by the States since 2005-06…Apart
from Plan Capital Expenditure, presently Capital expenditure of the

Government is largely accounted for under Defence Capital
Expenditure, Loans to States (pass through of loans for externally
aided projects), investment in financial institutions and Loans to
Public Sector Enterprises.”
11.3 On being asked whether there is any mechanism/system in place to
monitor that the money transferred to States is really resulting in creation of
capital, the Secretary, Expenditure, stated as follows during the course of
evidence:
“Sir, the Outcome Budgets which are prepared by various Ministries
is a mechanism which was sought to be in place for showing how
the money has been utilised and what outcomes have come.
As the CGA mentioned, the new e-governance tracking system,
which the planning Commission is putting and new independent
evaluation office which they are planning to set up, are also two
mechanisms for tracking what has actually happened at the ground
level.”

CHAPTER V
Department of Disinvestment
Utilisation of Disinvestment Proceeds
12.0 The disinvestment policy of the Government, as furnished by the
Department of Disinvestment, in one of their written submission, is stated as
below:
“The disinvestment policy envisages development of ‘People
Ownership’ of CPSEs to share in their wealth and prosperity while
retaining ownership and control with Government. To achieve these
objectives the Government has on 5 th November, 2009 approved
inter-alia, the under mentioned policy framework for disinvesting its
equity in CPSEs that have positive net worth, no accumulated
losses and that have recorded net profits in three preceding
consecutive years:-
(a) Listed CPSEs that do not meet the mandatory
requirement of 10 per cent public shareholding are to
be made compliant; and
(b) Unlisted CPSEs are to list on Indian stock exchanges
through public offerings out of Government’s
shareholding or issue of fresh shares or a
combination of both.
(c) Listed profitable CPSEs if need funds for their capital
expenditure requirements may approach the capital
market and that time Government may consider a part
of its shareholding.”
12.1 Asked to furnish details of the budgeted proceeds, proposed to be
received by way of disinvestments in the year 2010-11, the Department of
Disinvestment, in one of their written replies, stated as under:
“The estimated collection from disinvestments proceeds for 2010-
11 is Rs. 40000 crore and the Department will make all efforts  to
achieve the same.”
12.2 When the Committee raised a query on total mobilisation, made so
far by the Department, the Secretary, Disinvestment, while tendering his
evidence, informed as below:
“the mobilisation is Rs. 23,552 crore in the fiscal year which has just
ended.”

12.3 As per the Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement, presented along
with the Budget 2010-11, the disinvestments proceed has been used for reducing
fiscal deficit, as evident in the following paragraph:
“In spite of no significant increase in tax to GDP ratio and additional
expenditure commitments arising on account of the 13 th Finance
Commission recommendations, the fiscal deficit with the help of
disinvestment proceeds and reforms in expenditure management
including subsidies has been reduced from 7.8 per cent in 2008-09
(including securities issued in lieu of subsidies to oil and fertiliser
companies) to 5.5 per cent in BE 2010-11.”
12.4 However, on this issue, the Department of Disinvestment, in their
written submission stated as under:
“The proceeds from disinvestments will be utilised for funding the
capital expenditure under the social sector schemes identified by
Planning Commission and Deparment of Expenditure.”
12.5 The Corpus, interest income and utilization of proceeds of the
National Investment Fund (NIF) is shown as below:
(Non Plan- Rs. In crore)
Year Corpus of
NIF
Utilisation/Allocation
to Fund Managers
Income Utilisation of
Income
2005-06 - -
2006-07 - -
2007-08 1814.45 1651.00
2008-09 1814.45 1814.45 (163.45
balance allocated)
84.81
2009-10 1814.45 1814.45 209.24 185.90*
* Allocated for Mid-Meal Scheme
12.6 Asked to explain the reasons for a small amount of funds being
utilised, the Secretary, Department of Disinvestment, in his deposition before the
Committee stated as below:

“The old NIF, the corpus is not to be spent. From April, 2009 to 31 st
March, 2012, the Government in view of the economic slow down
has taken a decision that the disinvestment proceeds which come
in during this period will be spent in full through the NIF for capital
expenditure of social sector programmes.  So what has been given
in this chart is the old corpus which remains before April, 2009 and
from that corpus the interest income has been shown in a column.
That interest income is to be spent every year.  Seventy-five per
cent of that interest income is to be spent on social sector
schemes.  It has been spent on mid-day meal scheme and 25 per
cent is spent on reviving PSUs or providing capital expenditure for
Central sector PSUs. That is the scheme.  So, from 2009-10
onwards, this is now being spent and disinvestment proceeds are
going into six social sector schemes which are designated the
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme,
the Indira Awas Yojana, the Rajiv Gandhi Grammen Vidyutikaran
Yojana, the JLNUURM, the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit
Programme and the Accelerated Power Development Programme.”
12.7 In response to a query on IPOs/FPOs of public sector undertakings,
issued recently, the Department of Disinvestment, in a written reply, stated as
below:
“The details of subscription of IPOs and FPOs by this Department
are as under:
NHPC Ltd.  -  23.53 times oversubscribed (IPO)
OIL India  -  30.64 times oversubscribed (IPO)
NTPC Ltd.  -   1.30 times oversubscribed (FPO)
REC Ltd.  -   3.14 times oversubscribed (FPO)
NMDC Ltd.  -   1.25 times oversubscribed (FPO)
Both the IPOs were subscribed more than 20 times and the
response was as expected. All the FPOs were also fully subscribed
taking into account that the share price of these companies was
already discovered by the market and the shares were available in
the market before the FPO.”
12.8 Further asked whether the returns through these offers justified their
potential, the Department, in a post evidence reply stated as under:

“The Issue price of the five Public Offerings during 2009-10 is given
as under:
Company (date
of issue)
Issue Price (Rs.)
QIB and HNI Retail and
Employees
NHPC (August
2009)
36 36
OIL (September
2009)
1050 1050
NTPC (February
2010)
201 191
REC (February
2010)
203 193
NMDC (March
2010)
300 285
All the Public Offerings were fully subscribed at the prices
mentioned in table above and Government realized an amount of
Rs. 23552.97 crore. For fixing the Floor Price/Price Band for the
Public offering the process is; the Advisers make a presentation
before the High Level Pricing Committee comprising senior officials
of various Departments and the CPSE concerned and recommend
a price band based on market feedback, investor feedback, past
and expected future performance of the company, comparison with
peer group companies (such as Price to Book Value Multiples,
Price to Earning Per Share Multiples EV/EBITDA), the listed price,
if the share is already listed on the stock exchanges and the
prevailing market conditions.
After the presentation and recommendations of the Advisers, the
High Level Pricing Committee deliberates independently and
recommends Floor Price/Price Band for the Issue for the
consideration of the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM). The
EGoM ultimately takes a final decision on the issue price.”

Part II
Recommendations/Observations
Utilisation of funds under the National Social Security Fund
1. The Committee find that although the Government has
announced setting up of National Social Security Fund (NSSF) with a
corpus of Rs. 1000 crore, the implementation aspect of the concept has not
been well thought out, giving rise to the inevitability of the fund remaining
unutilised. Having recognized the necessity of setting up a social security
fund long back, absence of any action plan for a proper delivery
mechanism gives rise to an apprehension that the purpose for which the
fund has been established might not materialize  well in time to benefit the
unorganized labour.  In the Committee’s view, even if the fund is meant to
be kept in public account, the Government should have taken a
coordinated approach with all the concerned Ministries to devise the
schemes/programmes under the fund. The Ministry of Finance thus seems
to have adopted a casual approach while launching this scheme without
making any assessment as to actual requirements. The corpus of the fund
seems to have been arbitrarily decided without reference to ground
realities. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should
persuade other related Ministries/Departments to formulate the
programmes/schemes in a time bound manner for proper utilization of the
fund.  Further, a coordination committee may be set up for this purpose in
the Ministry of Finance to oversee the implementation of the scheme as
early as possible. The Committee would like to know the progress made in
this regard within three months.

Underutilisation of budgetary provisions for supporting infrastructure
projects
2. The Committee find that budgetary provisions for supporting
infrastructure projects through viability gap funding has always been on
the higher side, despite little actual utilization. The primary reasons for
shortfall in actual utilization is stated to be less demands by Sponsoring
authorities and larger number of ‘in- principal’ approvals granted by the
Department of Economic Affairs etc. The Committee are however surprised
to note that these shortcomings are going unnoticed despite review of PPP
projects by the Empowered Committee. Further, the receipt of negative
grants in many projects shows the inadequacies in actual
commercial/market evaluation, resulting in false assessment of the viability
of the projects.  Therefore, the Committee are of the view that the
Empowered Committee needs to function more efficiently and adopt a
more realistic approach, while assessing the viability of a project, so as to
arrive at correct projections and more realistic budgetary estimates under
this head to ensure greater efficiency in allocation of the resources.
Debt burden of the Government
3. It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee that the
combined debt burden of the Centre and State Governments has now
reached 80 per cent of GDP. They find that over the years, the debt burden
of the Central Government manifests a high level of 56.7 per cent as
budgeted for the year 2009-10, of which internal debt along with other

internal liabilities account for 54.4 per cent. This combined with States debt
liabilities has reached a level of 80 per cent, exceeding the outer limit of 75
per cent, prescribed by the Twelfth Finance Commission. Thus, whatever
achievement on the level of fiscal deficit that has been made so far by
the Centre and States has been altogether negated by fiscal profligacy
under-pinned by high debt, which undoubtedly would be unsustainable in
the future.  More alarming is the fact that around 36 per cent of the revenue
of the Central Government is being spent on servicing of debt. This, in the
view of the Committee, clearly indicates the inexorable path of debt trap
towards which the country may be heading for, nearly mortgaging the
future generations to present-day compulsions. Although, based on the
projections of the Thirteenth Finance Commission, it may be possible to
reverse this trend, however, the Committee apprehend that this might not
be achievable, in view of the large proportion of revenue being expended
for interest payment.  The admission by the Finance Secretary during his
deposition before the Committee about the difficulty to achieve the deficit
targets as envisaged by the Finance Commission is also not a very
encouraging sign. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government
should apprise them of the specific measures being taken in pursuance of
the recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance Commission to contain the
deficit while reducing the debt burden of the Government, both for the
Centre and States.
Regulation of Unit Linked Insurance Products (ULIPs)
4. The Committee note that Unit Linked Insurance Products
(ULIPs) which are in the nature of insurance cum investment scheme, were

introduced in 2001 and have since become a popular avenue for
investment, with total value of sum assured under the scheme being Rs.
8.5 lakh crore as on 31 st March, 2009.  However, the Committee are
surprised that despite ULIPs being an old product, the regulatory
jurisdiction over these products is still hazy and not clearly defined, with
both SEBI and IRDA claiming to be mandated to regulate the marketing and
sale of these products.  It is also apparent that while mutual funds, which
are akin to ULIPs are well regulated in terms of entry loads, disclosure
norms etc., this does not appear to be the case with ULIPs. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Finance should take steps to ensure
safeguarding the interest of investors by resolving the jurisdictional
dispute and putting in place comprehensive regulations for ULIPs,
incorporating the concerns of both SEBI and IRDA.
5. In this context, the Committee also note that key financial
regulators appointed by Government being at loggerheads on an issue
concerning large number of investors/subscribers is very unusual and
extremely disquieting.   The Committee note with concern that a ban has
been imposed by SEBI on the ULIPs issued by 14 life insurance companies,
which has been contradicted by IRDA by asking all these companies to
continue with their business as usual, notwithstanding the order of SEBI.
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Finance cannot remain a
mute spectator to such posturings of one upmanship by its regulatory
bodies.  The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Finance must not only intervene immediately to resolve the deadlock in
this matter, but also as a general policy, spell out in clear terms their

supervisory role vis-à-vis regulatory bodies under their jurisdiction.  The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in the matter within
one month.  In this context, the Committee also desire that the proposed
Financial Stability and Development Council should be constituted early to
address interalia such inter-regulatory issues.
Under-utilisation of the corpus of Financial Inclusion Fund and Financial
Inclusion Technology Fund
6. The Committee note that though Financial Inclusion Fund (FIF)
and Financial Inclusion Technology Fund (FITF) have been set up with the
objective of promoting financial inclusion, their utilization towards
achieving the same has been erratic.  As on 31 January, 2010, while under
FIF, out of Rs. 34.09 crore available, funds to the extent of Rs. 14.31 crore
remained unutilized, the utilization under FITF has exceeded its corpus,
since committed funds under this have exceeded the available funds.  The
reasons cited for meagre release out of the FIF include interalia, time lag
between sanctions and release, project funding through the mechanism of
viability gap funding, inability of RRBs/Cooperative banks to sink the
projects due to lack of perspective and technically qualified staff,
appointment of individuals as Banking Correspondents (BCs), RBI’s
requirement of banks to bring FIF/FITF proposals, role of cooperatives
remaining unidentified etc.  Further, inadequacy of corpus is also stated to
be a big factor in limiting commitments.  The Committee feel that for better
utilization of these funds as well as speedier achievement of the goal of
financial inclusion, it is imperative that projects are identified/tailor made
before-hand.  Off the shelf projects could be prepared by Lead Banks,

which would be readily available for implementation by the banks.  Further,
the role of Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural Banks have to be clearly
established and their staff need to be trained and motivated to ensure
effective implementation of schemes/projects.  The Committee desire that
Government should apprise them of the measures taken to resolve the
problems as highlighted above.  They also recommend the Government to
correctly assess the requirement of funds for implementation of financial
inclusion so as to make budget provisions in consonance with actual
requirements.
Financial Inclusion
7. Financial Inclusion has received major policy focus in recent
years.  The Government has taken various measures like relaxation in
branch authorization policy of RBI, increased use of banking
correspondents/facilitators (BCs/BFs), mobile banking, greater role of lead
banks in promoting financial inclusion, use of appropriate technology etc.
However, these steps notwithstanding, 375 districs and 99 blocks in the
country continue to be either under-banked or unbanked.  While the Union
Budget has announced the issuing of additional licences for private banks
for extending geographic coverage of banking services, it is not clear as to
how the potential of private players will be tapped to provide banking
services in unbanked/under-banked areas, particularly keeping in view
their poor track-record in this regard.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend that RBI should keep this aspect in mind and give topmost
priority to the issue of greater financial inclusion and social banking while

granting licenses to private players who should be mandated to render the
specified extent of banking services in rural and semi-urban areas.
8. Considering the unavoidable link between the opening of
Branches by Commercial Banks in remote/un-banked areas and viability
thereof, the proposal of banking correspondents (BCs)/banking facilitators
(BFs) model with a view to bringing basic banking services, particularly
collection of deposits, delivery of remittances etc. to the doorsteps of a
large population residing in un-banked areas assumes significance.  But
entrusting implementation of the BC/BF model through totally untested
medium like individual grocery (kirana)/medical/fair price shop owners,
PCO operators, Petrol Pump owners, Retired Teachers etc. seems to be
fraught with uncertainties.  On the other hand, Banks, both in the public
sector and in the private sector, have evolved over decades a unique model
of Pigmy/Tiny Deposit Collectors who are well versed with the exact
banking need of un-banked  people vis-à-vis the Banks, but their prospect
of contributing to the cause of “Financial Inclusion” is being neglected by
Government.  Keeping in view the primary need of ensuring evolution of
dependable and trustworthy BCs/BFs model’s network and broadbasing
the concept of financial inclusion, RBI should focus on gainfully utilizing
the Pigmy/Tiny Depositors, especially in view of their vast experience and
proven trust worthiness.  Further, the Committee recommend the
Government to make a study on effectiveness of the BC/BF model in
extending banking services to the unbanked areas and rationale of levying
charges on customers of banking services in these areas and apprise them
of the details thereof.

Bank Lending to Agriculture & Weaker Sections
9. The Committee notice that performance of commercial banks
has remained pathetic with regard to agriculture and weaker sections
lending as required under RBI guidelines, wherein 18 per cent of Adjusted
Net Bank Credit (ANBC) is to be lent to agriculture and 10 per cent of ANBC
is to be extended for weaker sections. In the year 2009, only 14 public
sector and 8 private sector banks have been able to meet the agricultural
lending target. This shows that banks are getting away with lower
disbursement to agriculture  with impunity. While the performance of
public sector banks in case of weaker sections has been relatively better,
private sector banks have shown very poor record. As per the information
supplied by the Ministry, only 16 public sector banks and 4 private sector
banks could achieve the desired percentage of lending last year.
10. The present mechanism of deterrence through Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) does not seem to have the desired
effect in persuading banks to achieve targeted level of lending. Therefore,
the effectiveness of four similar funds (Short Term Cooperative Rural
Credit Fund, MSME Refinance Fund, MSME Risk Capital Fund and Rural
Housing Fund), is also doubtful. Further, through this system, direct credit
to farmers is being replaced by indirect credit, which is also not
forthcoming due to less demands from States for implementation of
projects. Therefore, the Committee feel that an alternate
system/mechanism/process needs to be formulated to enable the farmers
to get the benefit of direct institutional credit. The Committee are of the
opinion that instead of a penal system, the Government/RBI could examine

the system of incentives for banks who have achieved the targeted
disbursements to agriculture and weaker sections.
11. The Committee were informed that Lead Banks have been
assigned the task of ensuring financial inclusion for villages having
population of over 2000 by March, 2011, as recommended by the High
Level Committee to review the Lead Bank Scheme. The Committee are of
the view that in addition to financial inclusion, the Lead banks may also be
given additional responsibility to chalk out the action plan for overall
development of villages.
Non Performing Assets in Banks
12. The Committee note with concern the increase in Net NPAs of
banks over the last three years.  It is seen that public sector banks as a
whole have reported an increase in NPAs of around Rs. 10,000 crore during
the period March 2007 to December 2009, while in the corresponding
period , net NPAs of private sector banks has shown an increase of around
Rs. 3000 crore, with the actual position showing a trend of decline in
March, 2009 vis-à-vis December, 2009.  It seems that while public sector
banks have fallen short of  lowering their NPAs, their private sector
counterparts have fared better in this regard.  Among public sector banks,
13 banks have shown rising NPAs since March 2008, while as many as 6
banks have shown consistent rise in net NPAs since March 2007.  In
contrast, new private banks have reported higher NPAs as against their old
counterparts.  Also, 4 new private banks have shown steady rise in NPAs
since March, 2007.  In view of the above, the Committee do not find merit in
the contention that NPAs have risen only recently owing to extraordinary

economic circumstances.  The Committee, therefore, would like to be
apprised about the effectiveness of measures taken by
Government/Reserve Bank of India in arresting the growth of NPAs.  They
would also like  to be apprised on the role of DRTs  in effecting settlement
of debt.
Surrender of Unutilised Funds by the Ministries/Departments
13. The Committee find that huge amount of funds have been
surrendered by various Ministries/Departments year after year. For
instance, as per the figures furnished by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure), in the year 2008-09, a significant proportion of
allotted funds have been surrendered by Ministries/Departments like
Planning (84.37%), Land Resources (25.43%), Shipping (24.74%), New and
Renewable Energy (27.82%), Earth Sciences (26.41%), Housing and Poverty
Alleviation (21.31%), Atomic Energy (17.81%), Space (18.63%) and School
Education and Literacy (11.41%).  Such large percentage of surrender of
funds from the budgetary allocations can only point to the fact that the
concerned Ministries/Departments do not have adequate capacity to utilize
the allotted funds, thereby leaving the programmes and schemes under
their purview incomplete and unattended.  The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Government should focus on capacity-building of
Ministries/Departments    mandated to incur large expenditure on
development.  There should also be a deterrent mechanism to ensure that
such large amount of funds are not routinely surrendered every year.
14.  Further, the Committee also find that the total amount
surrendered in the years 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 were Rs. 33111

crore, Rs. 31892 crore and Rs. 77271 crore respectively, which further
shows that even if the funds remain unutilised, the allocation of funds are
not reduced in the subsequent year.  The Committee would, therefore,
recommend that while making fresh allocations, the past amount of
surrendered funds should be kept in consideration and subsequent
allocations should be made only after assessing the progress made in the
schemes/programmes.  Further, from the information made available to the
Committee, it is also not clear as to what extent these surrenders are due
to economy measures or due to non implementation of the
schemes/programmes. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised
about the percentage of surrenders on account of savings/implementation
of economy measures and the percentage of surrenders due to non
utilisation of funds.
Decline in Capital expenditure of the Central Government
15. The Committee take serious note of the fact that capital
expenditure of the Central Government has declined over the last five
years, with only 10 percent of the total expenditure going towards creation
of assets in the year 2008-09.  The reason for this declining trend in capital
formation is stated to be the change in classification of revenue and capital
expenditure, under which transfers to States for implementation of various
schemes through which assets are created, are shown as revenue
expenditure in accounts of the Central Government.  However, in the
absence of any concrete mechanism to monitor as to the extent of these
transfers actually materialising in asset creation in States, the Committee
are not ready to accept the Ministry’s contention with regard to fall in

capital expenditure of Central Government.  Regardless of the technical
classification of expenditure, the Committee would, therefore, expect the
Government to ensure that the extent of capital expenditure made, actually
results in corresponding asset creation.  For this purpose, the Ministry of
Finance must put in place an effective on-line monitoring system to gauge
the creation of assets, particularly in rural development schemes.
Utilisation of Disinvestment Proceeds
16. The disinvestment of Central Public Sector Enterprises has
been revived in the current year.  In the year 2009-10, Initial Public Offers
(IPOs)/Follow on Public Offers (FPOs) have been made in case of five
public sector undertakings, thereby realizing Rs. 23552.97 crore.  However,
the policy of the Government regarding utilisation of disinvestment
proceeds is not very transparent.  On the one hand, the Government has
stated in the Medium Term Fiscal Policy Statement that these proceeds
have helped in cutting down fiscal deficit, while on the other hand, the
Committee were informed that these proceeds will be utilised for capital
expenditure under the specified social sector schemes.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should clearly spell out the
policy stance with regard to utilisation of disinvestment proceeds.  They
also desire that they be apprised of the details of the utilization of the
amount of disinvestment proceeds realized so far including the extent of
expenditure incurred on reviving sick PSUs.
Disinvestment Policy
17. Though the disinvestments of PSU shareholdings through
IPOs/FPOs, have been stated to be oversubscribed, details of the

companies participating in these offers have not been divulged.  The
Committee apprehend the disinvestment programme, if carried out in the
present manner, might have to be bailed out by Government owned
companies.
18. The Committee are of the view that the disinvestment
programme should not become dependent on public financial institutions.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should review
their disinvestment policy and make proper assessment of market
conditions before deciding to offload the shares so as to realise the true
value of undertakings in the larger interest of the nation.
New Delhi;                 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi,
15  April, 2010                                                   Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance.

Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29th March, 2010 from 1100 hrs. to  1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.     Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4.     Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5.     Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7.     Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
8.     Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9.     Shri Manicka Tagore
RAJYA SABHA
10.   Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
12.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
13.   Shri S. Anbalagan
14.   Shri Mahendra Prasad
15. Shri Y. P. Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. B. Visala   - Deputy Secretary
Part –I
(1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs.)
WITNESSES
        Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs and Expenditure)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla, Finance Secretary
2. Smt. Sushma Nath, Secretary, Expenditure
3. Dr. Kaushik Basu, Chief Economic Adviser
4. Shri C.R. Sundramurthy, Controller General of Accounts
5. Shri H.A.C. Prasad, Sr. Economic Adviser
6. Smt. Vilasini Ramachandran, Additional Secretary, Expenditure

7. Smt. L.M. Vas, Additional Secretary, Economic Affairs
8. Shri Shakti Kant Das, Joint Secretary, Budget
9. Dr. K. P. Krishnan, Joint Secretary, Capital Market
10. Shri Govind Mohan, Joint Secretary, Infrastructure & Investment
11. Dr. Anup K. Pujari, Joint Secretary
12. Shri Alok Sheel, Joint Secretary
13. Shri H. Pradeep Rao, Joint Secretary
14. Smt. Dakshita Das, Controller of Aids Accounts & Audit
15. Smt. Madhulika P. Sukul, Joint Secretary
16. Smt. Anjuli Chib Duggal, Joint Secretary
17. Smt. Meena Agarwal, Joint Secretary
2. The Committee heard the view of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs and Expenditure) in connection with
the examination of the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of these departments.  The
major issues discussed related to National Social Security Fund (NSSF),
underutilization of funds allocated for infrastructure financing through viability gap
funding, Debt burden of the Government, reasons for huge surrender of funds by
different Ministries/Departments, decline in capital expenditure of the Central
Government, monitoring of asset creation by State Government etc.  The
Chairman directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the queries
raised by Members at an early date.
   The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
Part-II
(1315 hrs. to 1425 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Secretary
2. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Addl. Secretary
3. Shri K.V. Eapen, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Ravneet Kaur, Joint Secretary
6. Shri Tarun Bajaj, Joint Secretary
LIC
Shri T. S. Vijayan, Chairman

     IRDA
Shri A. Girdhar, Executive Director
RBI
Shri B. P. Vijayendra, Chief General Manager
NABARD
Dr. Prakash Bakshi, Executive Director
Ministry of Finance (Department of Disinvestment)
1. Shri Sumit Bose, Secretary
2. Shri Siddharth Pradhan, Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Minakshi Ghose, Joint Secretary
4. Shri H. P. Rao, Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
5. Smt. Kalpana Mittal Baruah, Joint Secretary
3. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Financial Services and Disinvestment) in connection with the
examination of the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of these departments. Major
issues which came up for discussion included additional banking license
proposed to be given to private players to enable expansion of banking,
performance of foreign banks in priority sector lending, performance of business
correspondents/facilitators model in extending credit facility in unbanked areas,
shortfall in agriculture lending by public and private sector banks, effectiveness of
Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) in increasing Bank lending to
agriculture, Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in banks, appropriateness of pricing
and timing of Initial Public Offers (IPOs)/ Follow on Public Offers (FPOs) of some
of the central pubic sector undertakings recently offered for disinvestment,
utilization of proceeds of National Investment Fund (NIF) etc.   The Chairman
directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the points raised by
Members at an early date.

    The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
Part –III
(1530 hrs. to 1700 hrs.)
4. X X X X X X X X X X
Part –IV
(1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs.)
5.    X X X X X X X X X X
              The Committee adjourned at 1800 hours.