FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2011
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 22.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)


COF No. 47
Price : Rs. 35.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 8
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 24
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 25
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ............................................................................ 26
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
19 December, 2011 .................................................................... 27
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation ................................................... 29 (i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi Chanabasappa
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda

(iv)
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Forty-seventh Report
on action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
the Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation.
2. The Thirty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 August, 2011. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 28 September, 2011.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 19 December, 2011.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation, which was presented to Lok Sabha on
2 August, 2011 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same
day.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 16 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analysed and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1 to 8 and 10 to 15
(Total: 14)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Nil
(Total: Nil)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation No. 9
(Total: 1)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 16
(Total: 1)
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter I and final replies in respect of
recommendation contained in Chapter V may be furnished to them
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
5. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee are constrained to note the persistent
underutilization of allocated funds in the Plan Expenditure of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation during the
last five years. The unspent balance in the Plan Expenditure as
compared to the Budget Estimates has been to the tune of
Rs. 27.76 crore (33%) in 2006-07, Rs. 26.00 crore (28%) in 2007-08,
Rs. 66.15 crore (51%) in 2008-09, Rs. 143.60 crore (63%) in 2009-10
and Rs. 145 crore (54%) in 2010-11. This persistent and rising trend
of underutilization of funds in the Plan Expenditure shows the
inability of Ministry to absorb the allocated funds and depicts
poor management of budget planning on the part of the Ministry.”
6. The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply stated as
follows:
“I. The shortfall in the plan expenditure during the last three
years is mainly on account of implementation of India
Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) and Economic Census.
The main reasons for the shortfall in the expenditure are as
under:
II. Processes involved in approvals of competent authorities
for ISSP took a considerable amount of time to get
completed due to the following reasons:
(a) Such a complex and large project for strengthening of
the National Statistical System primarily through the
strengthening of the State Statistical Systems in all their
dimensions has been taken up for the first time ever
in India.
(b) Significant difficulties faced in assigning monetary
values to expected project costs and the envisaged
project benefits, since most the targeted benefits, such

3
as improvement in data quality, reduction in time lags
in the compilation and dissemination of various types
of socio-economic statistics, etc., by their very nature,
are not easy to quantify.
(c) The CCEA approved the project on 19th March, 2010.
(d) The process of approval by the World Bank for the
Project and the accrual of funds (as a loan from the
World Bank) for the Project got completed in July, 2010.
(e) Seed Money, for preparation of the required detailed
State Strategic Statistical Plans (SSSPs) could be
commenced only during Second Quarter of 2010-11.
(f) States/UTs, were eventually found to consume much
more time (than had been earlier anticipated by MOSPI)
to complete their SSPs and the required approvals at
the State Levels despite several earlier held regional
workshops on SSSP .
(g) A fairly long list of prescribed procedural requirements,
at the State/UT level before the requisite approvals
can be accorded at the State/UT level.
(h) Since such a project, under an instrument of a detailed
MoU, has been taken up for the first time ever in
India, the process of securing required approvals at
the ends of both the concerned State Governments and
Government of India has also added to the time
required for completion of the required formalities
which are to precede implementation.
III. In case of Economic Census (EC), Government decided to
conduct Caste and BPL Censuses during June-September,
2011, the period earlier planned for Economic Census.
Further dovetailing of EC with Population Census was not
found feasible. In order to reduce pressure on State resources
and ensure availability of manpower, it was decided in
consultation with Ministry of Rural Development and
Registrar General of India (RGI) to conduct EC after the
conduct of both the Censuses preferably during January-
June, 2012. Hence no money, involving printing of schedules,
instruction manuals and training programmed, could be
spent.
IV . To ensure proper utilization of fund in respect of various
schemes of the Ministry, stringent monitoring mechanism
has been put in place. Towards this end, it has been decided

4
to adopt a two-pronged approach to monitor the expenditure
in the Ministry. At the initial level, the expenditure would
be reviewed by Director Generals of CSO and NSSO/
Additional Secretary, as the case may be, on monthly basis;
and corrective measures taken so as to ensure pro-rata
expenditure vis-a-vis the budget allocations. Thereafter, on
quarterly basis, the expenditure would be reviewed at the
level of Secretary (S&PI) alongwith the physical monitoring
of activities proposed, as part of the Annual Action Plan of
the Ministry.”
7. The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the
underutilization of allocated funds in the plan expenditure during
the last three years is mainly on account of processes involved in
approvals of competent authorities took considerable time, thereby
delaying implementation of Indian Statistical Strengthening Project
(ISSP) and Economic Census. The Committee are further given to
understand that a stringent monitoring mechanism has been put in
place in order to ensure proper utilisation of funds in respect of
various schemes of the Ministry. The Committee, however, observe
that had this monitoring mechanism been put in place earlier, this
situation of underutilization of funds year after year would not have
occurred. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
effectiveness of the measures taken in this regard.
B. National Statistical Commission (NSC)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
8. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee note that with regard to conferring statutory status
to the National Statistical Commission, the Commission appointed
a Committee on 8th November, 2010 under the Chairmanship of
Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon to look into legislative measures on
statistical matters, including a Bill to provide statutory status to
the Commission. However, no timeframe has been fixed for
introducing the Bill in Parliament. The Committee reiterates that
conferring statutory status would enable the National Statistical
Commission to function in an independent manner for
strengthening the statistical system in the country. The Committee
hope that the Committee, under the Chairmanship of Prof. N.R.
Madhava Menon would submit their report on conferring statutory
status to the NSC within the period of six months and the related
Bill, which would enable the National Statistical Commission to
function independently is brought before Parliament accordingly.”

5
9. The Government, in their action taken reply stated as follows:
“The recommendation is noted. Steps are being taken to expedite
the process.”
10. The Committee are constrained to observe with dissatisfaction
the evasive and short reply of the Ministry regarding the issue of
conferring statutory status to the National Statistical Commission.
Moreover, the Ministry has also not apprised the Committee about
the status of Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon Committee’s Report on the
National Statistical Commission. The Committee would like to
reiterate that the report of Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon Committee
be expedited and urge upon the Government to bring the related
Bill, which would enable the National Statistical Commission to
function independently before, Parliament at the earliest.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
11. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee note that with regard to the process of identifying
core statistics, a statement indicating the views of different Central
Ministries/Departments and a suggestive list of core statistics were
placed before the National Statistics Commission in its 39th meeting
held in December, 2010. The Commission desired that the list is to
be recast in a sequential way and a concept paper may be prepared,
keeping in view inter-alia the core statistics in the form of indicators,
economic parameters, etc., and the statistical processes through
which and the periodicity by which the core statistics are presently
produced and the agencies that are presently involved in the
production. The Committee further note that after notification of
core statistics by the Government, the Commission would lay down
standards in respect of methodology. The Committee desire that
Government should expedite the preparation of the concept paper
and list of core statistics as per the suggestions of the Commission
so that the list of core statistics is notified and the Commission
could formulate the standards in respect of methodology for
collection of such statistics without any further delay.”
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Planning have
stated as under:
“The draft concept paper and draft list of core statistics have been
received in the Commission Secretariat. They will be placed before
the Commission in its next meeting to be held in August, 2011 for
its view in the matter.”

6
13. The Committee note that concept paper and draft list of core
statistics have been received in the Commission Secretariat and hope
they might have been approved by the Commission. The Committee
desire the Government to notify the list of core statistics and
formulate the standards in respect of methodology for collection of
core statistics expeditiously.
C. Infrastructure and Project Monitoring
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15)
14. The Committee recommended as under:
“The Committee are dismayed to note that 563 projects costing
Rs. 150 crore and more which are on the monitor of the Ministry
have experienced cost overrun of 20.3% and time overrun of 51%.
83 ongoing projects have both time and cost overrun, 54 projects
have only cost overrun and 193 projects have only time overrun.
The reasons attributed by the Ministry for time and cost overruns
include, land acquisition and rehabilitation and resettlement, forest/
environment/wildlife clearances, delay in shifting utilities, removal
of encroachments, law and order problems, lack of proper
co-ordination at State level, lack of resources/fund constraints,
change in scope, technology selection, geological surprises, etc. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that persistent problems of
time and cost overrun in the infrastructure projects, could be
avoided if pre-project activities including clearance are completed
before sanction of projects or before award of contract. Evidently,
the Ministry has been lagging behind on this issue. The Committee
expect that the recommendations of the in-house Group of the
Ministry constituted at the behest of the Committee, under the
Chairmanship of an Additional Secretary would be implemented
by the Government in a time bound manner so as to resolve the
issues related to time and cost overruns of Central Sector Projects.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome in this regard
on quarterly basis.”
15. In their action taken note the Ministry of Planning have
submitted as below:
“The observations of the Committee have been communicated to
all the concerned Ministries. The concerned infrastructure Ministries
have been requested to take follow-up corrective action and report.
It may be noted that this Ministry has always been emphasizing
on the completion of pre-project activities and clearance while
giving comments for appraisal of the projects for PIB/EFC, etc.

7
It may be added that on the advice of this Ministry, State
Governments are now setting up a ‘Central Sector Projects
Coordination Committee (CSPCC)’ under the Chairmanship of
respective Chief Secretaries which is expected to remove various
impediments like delays in land acquisition, rehabilitation and
resettlement, forest/environment/wildlife clearances, delays in
shifting of utilities, removal of encroachments, law and order
problems, etc. so that time and cost overrun in Central Projects is
minimized. This is expected to speed up execution of Central
Projects within the approved cost.”
16. The Committee appreciate the fact that on the advice of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, State
Governments are now setting up a ‘Central Sector Project
Coordination Committee (CSPCC)’ under the Chairmanship of
respective Chief Secretaries to remove various impediments so that
time and cost overrun in Central Projects is minimized. The
Committee hope that CSPCC would also lay emphasis on the
completion of pre-project activities in order to speed-up execution
of Central Projects within the approved cost and timeframe.

8
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee are constrained to note the persistent
underutilization of allocated funds in the Plan Expenditure of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation during the last
five years. The unspent balance in the Plan Expenditure as compared
to the Budget Estimates has been to the tune of Rs. 27.76 crore
(33%) in 2006-07, Rs. 26.00 crore (28%) in 2007-08, Rs. 66.15 crore
(51 %) in 2008-09, Rs. 143.60 crore (63%) in 2009-10 and Rs. 145 crore
(54%) in 2010-11. This persistent and rising trend of underutilization
of funds in the Plan Expenditure shows the inability of Ministry to
absorb the allocated funds and depicts poor management of budget
planning on the part of the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
I. The shortfall in the plan expenditure during the last three years
is mainly on account of implementation of India Statistical
Strengthening Project (ISSP) and Economic Census. The main
reasons for the shortfall in the expenditure are as under.
II. Processes involved in approvals of competent authorities for
ISSP took a considerable amount of time to get completed due
to the following reasons:
(a) Such a complex and large project for strengthening of the
National Statistical System primarily through the
strengthening of the State Statistical Systems in all their
dimensions has been taken up for the first time ever in
India.
(b) Significant difficulties faced in assigning monetary values
to expected project costs and the envisaged project benefits,
since most the targeted benefits, such as improvement in
data quality , reduction in time lags in the compilation
and dissemination of various types of socio-economic
statistics etc., by their very nature, are not easy to quantify.

9
(c) The CCEA approved the project on 19th March, 2010.
(d) The process of approval by the World Bank for the Project
and the accrual of funds (as a loan from the World Bank)
for the Project got completed in July, 2010.
(e) Seed Money, for preparation of the required detailed State
Strategic Statistical Plans (SSSPs) could be commenced only
during Second Quarter of 2010-11.
(f) States/UTs, were eventually found to consume much more
time (than had been earlier anticipated by MOSPI) to
complete their SSPs and the required approvals at the
State Levels despite several earlier held regional workshops
on SSSP .
(g) A fairly long list of prescribed procedural requirements,
at the State/UT level before the requisite approvals can
be accorded at the State/UT level.
(h) Since such a project, under an instrument of a detailed
MoU, has been taken up for the first time ever in India,
the process of securing required approvals at the ends of
both the concerned State Governments and Government
of India has also added to the time required for
completion of the required formalities which are to precede
implementation.
III. In case of Economic Census (EC), Government decided to
conduct Caste and BPL Censuses during June-September, 2011,
the period earlier planned for Economic Census. Further
dovetailing of EC with Population Census was not found
feasible. In order to reduce pressure on State resources and
ensure availability of manpower, it was decided in consultation
with Ministry of Rural Development and Registrar General of
India (RGI) to conduct EC after the conduct of both the
Censuses preferably during Jananuary-June, 2012. Hence no
money, involving printing of schedules, instruction manuals
and training programmed, could be spent.
IV.T o ensure proper utilization of fund in respect of various
schemes of the Ministry, stringent monitoring mechanism has
been put in place. Towards this end, it has been decided to
adopt a two-pronged approach to monitor the expenditure in
the Ministry. At the initial level, the expenditure would be
reviewed by Director Generals of CSO and NSSO/Additional
Secretary, as the case may be, on monthly basis; and corrective
measures taken so as to ensure pro-rata expenditure vis-a-vis

10
the budget allocations. Thereafter, on quarterly basis, the
expenditure would be reviewed at the level of Secretary (S&PI)
along with the physical monitoring of activities proposed, as
part of the Annual Action Plan of the Ministry.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 7 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee feel that keeping in view the fact that during
the last three years, the Ministry were able to expend less than 50%
of allocated budget on Plan Schemes, the demand of Rs. 600 crore
for the year 2011-12 is unwarranted.
Reply of the Government
1. The consolidated Annual Plan 2011-12 proposals of the Ministry
were prepared after the detailed discussion with the senior officers of
the Ministry before they were sent to the Planning Commission so as
to project realistic assessment of financial resources. Planning
Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 600 crore (excluding
MPLADS) for the Annual Plan (2011-12) of the Ministry after the
proposals were examined by Planning Commission in a Plan Meeting.
The rise in Plan allocations of the Ministry for the year 2011-12 is
mainly on account of allocation of Rs. 200 crores for the scheme “India
Statistical Strengthening Project (lSSP)”, which is basically meant to
improve the capacity of States Statistical System, and; allocation of
Rs. 220 crores for the scheme “Economic Census”, to be launched
during the year, which has the main objective of preparing a frame of
enterprises in India, and to generate basic entrepreneurial data.
2. In case of ISSP , plans for 2011-12 are as follows:—
(i) In case of three States viz. Karnataka, Rajasthan and Gujarat,
wherein MoUs have been already signed with GOI, all
possible efforts are being made to ensure proper timely and
effective implementation and release of funds.
(ii) In at least 10 States/UTs, it is proposed to commence the
implementation of the project based on State Specific MoUs
and release first installment of funds. Thus it would be
possible to fully utilize the Plan budget for the year.
3. As regards Economic Census, it is proposed to take up the
finalization work regarding conduct of census like finalization of census
schedules, finalization of manual of instructions, finalization of

11
tabulation plan, conduct of All-India conference of State Planning
Secretaries and All-India training of trainers and state level training
during July-Feb. 2011-12, and start the field work in 6-7 States from
March, 2012. EFC under the chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure)
has approved the proposal in its meeting held on 21.6.2011. The
proposal is under submission for consideration of CCEA. Efforts are
being made to obtain financial approval of scheme by Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) and thereafter by Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA). It is expected that full allocation of funds
would be utilized during the year.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee had in their earlier reports on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
emphasized the need for undertaking an effective exercise for
identifying the shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning
and ensuring proper utilization of funds. The Committee are
dismayed to note that this advice has fallen on deaf ears and no
concrete efforts have been made by the Ministry in this regard. The
Committee, time and again, recommended that the Government
should devise an effective mechanism for identifying and overcoming
the deficiencies in the existing system of budgetary planning for
assessment of funds required and in ensuring proper utilization of
allocated funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
concrete steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
1. To ensure proper utilization of fund in respect of various schemes
of the Ministry, stringent monitoring mechanism has been put in place.
Towards this end, it has been decided to adopt a two-pronged approach
to monitor the expenditure in the Ministry. At the initial level, the
expenditure would be reviewed by Director Generals of CSO and
NSSO/Additional Secretary , as the case may be, on monthly basis;
and corrective measures taken so as to ensure pro-rata expenditure
vis-a-vis the budget allocations. Thereafter, on quarterly basis, the
expenditure would be reviewed at the level of Secretary (S&PI) along
with the physical monitoring of activities proposed, as part of the
Annual Action Plan of the Ministry .
2. In respect of schemes which are operated by more than one
Divisions of the Ministry, during 2011-12, Division-wise allocations have
been made by DG, CSO/DG, NSSO before the beginning of the year.

12
Each Division has been instructed to maintain an expenditure register,
activity-wise and Head-wise, which should be put up to DGs on regular
basis for perusal and for suggesting remedial measures. It is hoped
that these measures would yield results.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Economic Census
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that some preliminary work concerning the
Sixth Economic Census has been taken up during the Annual Plans
2009-10 and 2010-11. The main work for conducting the census would
start in January-June 2012 at a total cost of Rs. 750 crores. The
Planning Commission has tentatively allocated Rs. 220 crore for the
year 2011-12. Since the results of the Economic Census generate huge
amount of information, which has immense value for the purpose
of planning, development and research especially for the unorganized
sector of the economy, the Committee desire that without any further
delay the work concerning the Sixth Economic Census should be
expedited and completed during the 11th Five Year Plan itself.
Reply of the Government
During 2010-11 it was decided to conduct Sixth Economic Census
in the Second Quarter of 2011-12 namely June-September, 2011 so that
the Field Work is completed during 11th Five Year Plan period.
Therefore all preparations like printing of schedules, instruction manual,
procurement of kits and training in few states were proposed.
Meanwhile, Government decided to conduct Caste Census as well as
BPL Census during May-Sept. 2011. Since involvement of same states
and district administration for the conduct of three censuses during
the same period would put pressure on them, it was decided in
consultation with the Ministry of Rural Development and Registrar
General of India on 27.01.2011 to defer the field work of Sixth Economic
Census to avoid overlap. In the meanwhile the Govt. decided to
dovetail the two Censuses and renamed it as Socio Economic & Caste
Census (SECC), and to undertake the field work during June-December
2011. Keeping this in view and also recommendation of the EFC for
Sixth Economic Census, the Sixth Economic Census would now be
conducted between January to June 2012, after completion of the SECC
only.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]

13
India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that India Statistical Strengthening Project
(ISSP) is aimed to build up sound capacities at the State/UT level to
collect, compile and disseminate relevant and reliable official statistics
for planning and policy making at the State and Sub-State level.
The Committee also note that the ISSP could not gain momentum
as desired for being a project of complex and large nature, delay in
the approval by the World Bank, (since the project is 80% funded
by the World Bank), delay in the release of seed money for
preparation of the required detailed State Strategic Statistical Plans
(SSSPs).
Reply of the Government
1. The Committees notings, observations and concerns expressed
in this para have been taken note of for the purpose of taking necessary
follow-up actions and remedial measures in this regard.
2. It is to be informed in this connection that, in the meantime,
various initiatives and follow-up actions/measures have been taken in
this regard by the Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation
(MOSPI) such as, for example, the following:
(a) Intensive initiatives taken by MOSPI to impress upon the
States/UTs concerned about the enormous potential which
the project viz. the ISSP holds for delivering a variety of
benefits to them with regard to improving the State/UT
level Statistical System in all respects,
(b) Several visits undertaken by concerned senior officials of
the Ministry, including Secretary (Statistics & Programme
Implementation) to different States to expedite progress of
work on the project,
(c) Intensive reviews of the project at the annual meetings of
Conference of Central and State Statistical Organizations
(COCSSO);
(d) Periodic reviews undertaken by the National Statistical
Commission (NSC) with groups of States to discuss about
all aspects of performance/functioning of their respective
State Statistical System and
(e) National and Regional level workshops organized by the
Ministry to provide necessary orientation, sensitization &
hand-holding type of technical assistance to States/UTs.

14
3. By virtue of these measures/initiatives undertaken by MOSPI,
especially for the past about a year or so, it appears that the required
activities to be undertaken in this regard by the participating States
have since started acquiring some momentum. As of now ( viz. as of
16.9.2011), excepting for Chandigarh and Goa, all the other States/UTs
have already agreed to participate in this project and have conveyed
their decision to do so to MOSPI through their Letters of Participation
(LOPs). The required seed money to help the States concerned to
prepare their comprehensive State Strategic Statistical Plans (SSSPs)
have since been released to all the aforesaid 33 States/UTs, excepting
for Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The required individual State/UT specific
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) on the ISSP , based on the duly
approved SSSPs, have since been signed between the Government of
India and the concerned State Governments on a case-specific basis in
regard to five States viz. Karnataka, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Andhra
Pradesh & Bihar. For two more States viz. Kerala and Tamil Nadu, it
is expected that the MoU on ISSP will be getting signed shortly. In
respect of three of these States, viz. Karnataka, Rajasthan and Gujarat,
the Government of India has since also released the entitled (as per
applicable MoU) 1st installment of funds to enable them to commence
effective implementation of the project in accordance with the relevant
MoU. It is expected that shortly, MOSPI would be in a position to
release the corresponding 1st installment of funds (to facilitate
commencement of implementation of the ISSP project) to two more
States viz. Andhra Pradesh and Bihar. This apart, aided, among other
things, by frequent and close work related interactions in the context
of the ISSP project between MOSPI and the other participating
States/UTs, the work on preparation of the respective State/UT specific
SSSPs and the draft MoUs based thereon has since progressed to
significant levels of completion in about nine other States/UTs such
as, for example, Orissa, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, West
Bengal, Punjab, Mizoram, Sikkim and Haryana. In the remaining states
(viz. Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Chattisgarh, Daman & Diu, Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep,
Nagaland, Puducherry, Tripura, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh.) have
initiated work in preparation of respective SSSPs, but are yet to finalise
the same. Karnataka, the first State to sign MoU, is implementing the
project for about 6 months now. Encouraged by the momentum
acquired in the meantime by the project and the levels of success
achieved so far, especially during the last above a year or so, MOSPI
would be taking all the required and possible measures to ensure that
the momentum, which has since been gathered under the project, is
not only sustained but also stepped up further in the months to come.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]

15
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee feel that since the ISSP is the first project ever
of its kind being implemented in India for the primary purpose of
strengthening of the National Statistical System, it requires
strengthening and improvement in all aspects. To expedite the pace
and progress of the project during the 11th Plan period the Project
Steering Committee of the Ministry should monitor the scheme
periodically. Deficiencies noticed in the project should be addressed
so as to build up a sound Statistical System and data support
mechanism in the country. The Committee recommend that ISSP
should be focused on building a strong statistical system with
adequate and trained manpower at the Center, State and Sub-state
level for maintaining and disseminating credible and reliable
statistics. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Steering Committee on the ISSP in the Government of India
under the Chairmanship of Secretary MoSPI has been meeting
periodically to inter-alia monitor the scheme viz. ISSP and issue
necessary directives/directions for expediting the pace and progress of
the project during the 11th plan period. The aforesaid Steering
Committee has so far hold seven meetings during which, among other
things, the MoUs on ISSP for the States of Karnataka, Rajasthan,
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar have been discussed in detail and
approved by the said Steering Committee to facilitate the next step/
stage of signing of the MoUs on ISSP between the Government of
India and the concerned States. At its Meetings, the said Steering
Committee takes due Cognizance of the issues raised and suggestions
given herein such as the deficiencies noticed in the project, the need
to build up a sound Statistical System and data support mechanisms
in the country, especially at the level of the States/UTs , since the
ISSP project is predominantly focused on the strengthening and
improvement of the State Statistical Systems, in all its relevant
dimensions, such as quality of data, timeliness, adequacy,
comprehensiveness, relevance and utility of data produced and
disseminated by the State Statistical Systems.
Apart from this, the MoU instrument on the ISSP has also got
certain built-in provisions to facilitate and support the task of effective
monitoring of the progress of the project from time to time. Capacity
Building of the Statistical personnel, in particular, is one of the core
underlying goals/objectives of the ISSP project and as such, all possible
efforts are made and required assistance rendered by MoSPI to ensure
that the project participating States/UTs take due note of and effectively
address the issue of “Training of Personnel’ in their respective SSSPs.

16
2. The aforesaid Steering Committee has been regularly monitoring
the progress of the scheme periodically and so far, the Steering
Committee on ISSP in the Government of India has met seven times
and provided all the necessary policy directives and prescriptions
related to the implementation of the project, approved schedules and
time frame of the State Strategic Statistical Plans (SSSPs), provided
clarity to the Memoranda of Understanding which were subsequently
signed by the Government of India with the concerned State
Governments for the implementation of the project. As per the
directions and guidance of the said Steering Committee, workshops
are also being organized to monitor the progress of the ISSP . Recently,
viz. during June 16-17, 2011, a Workshop was held inter-alia for
Monitoring the Implementation of the ISSP and reviewing the status
of progress of work on the project in ten States which are either already
implementing the project or else, are at an advanced level of
preparation of their respective State Strategic Statistical Plans (SSSPs).
Also, another workshop, for about fifteen other States/UTs, which have
been somewhat considerably and relatively slow to progress on the
project as of now has been planned to be organized at Gangtok during
the month of August, 2011........
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Considering the importance of statistics in respect of delivery of
justice system, the Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation is in the process of setting
up a Statistical Cell in the Ministry of Justice and the National
Statistics Commission has also set up a Committee to look into
various matters related to the judicial system. The Committee desire
that the Government should expedite the process of establishing the
Statistical Cell in the Ministry of Justice during the 11th Plan period
itself. The Committee expect to be apprised of the Ministry's plan
of action and progress in the direction.
Reply of the Government
The issue of establishing of permanent full-fledged Statistical Cell
in the Ministry of Justice with suitable component of ISS officers like
1 HAG, 2 SAG, 2 JAG, 2 STS and 2 JTS (as in the major ministries)
will be taken up by ISS Division along with the proposed
comprehensive cadre review. However, this Ministry in consultation
with D/o Justice has agreed to create the Statistical Cell immediately

17
by loaning 1 SAG, 1 JAG, 4 SSS officers. The cell will be operational
immediately on availability of office accommodation etc. to the cell by
the D/o Justice.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Basic Statistics for Local Level Development (BSLLD)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee note that Basic Statistics for Local Level
Development (BSLLD) is a centrally sponsored scheme with the
objective to develop the decentralized data bases at village/Block
level for Local Level Planning in all States. The scheme envisages
generating village level statistics at the Gram Panchayat level by
compilation of information through Panchayat Secretary in
coordination with the village level functionaries. The Committee
further note that Panchayati Raj Institutions are fully involved in
implementation of the Scheme. However, at present the PRIs are not
capable of handling data and ensuring reasonable quality. Since the
success of BSLLD would depend upon the extent to which the
Panchayati Raj institutions are able to organize the continuing data
collection, which, they are not capable of handling by ensuring
reasonable quality, the Committee desire that the Government should
ensure availability of qualified and competent manpower at the local
level for the Scheme. Capacity building for the PRI personnel and
other local level institutions for compilation work should be made
a major part of the Scheme. The Committee are not happy with the
existing trend of utilisation of budgetary allocations. Budget estimates
are revised southwards continuously but these are not being spent
fully. The Committee also desire that realistic assessment of
budgetary requirements for the Scheme should be projected so as to
avoid underutilization of funds. The Committee expect to be apprised
of the specific action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
At present, Basic Statistics for Local Level Development (BSLLD)
scheme is being implemented as a large Centrally Sponsored pilot
scheme covering around 500 Panchayats in one or two districts each
of the 32 States/UTs which are implementing the scheme. The
observations made by the Standing Committee revolves around mainly
two issues:
The Panchayat Secretaries, who compile village level statistics with
the help of village level functionaries, are not qualified enough to
compile quality data and therefore capacity building at the level of
PRI is essential.

18
Under-Utilization of the allocated budget is also a concern of the
Committee. As regards the first issue, it is informed that, sufficient
budget provision was kept for training at different level during
implementation of the pilot scheme. At the time of formulation of the
full fledged scheme, sufficient fund provision will be kept for capacity
building at different levels of PRls functionaries on the basis of the
findings of the pilot scheme, the States/UTs are categorized according
to the level of statistical capability for compiling and processing of
data. For the States/UTs which are relatively less capable in collection/
compilation of quality data, special efforts will be made for their
capacity building.
The BSLLD pilot scheme has been implemented in two phases; in
Phase-I, data for 2008-09 has been compiled while in Phase-II, data for
2009-10 will be compiled. So far as, the under utilization of budget
allocation is concerned in last three years, proposals for Phase-II could
not be materialized during 2010-11 due to delayed completion of
Phase-I of the pilot scheme. In fact, many of the States/UTs could
complete Phase-I only towards the last two quarters of 2010-11. As a
result, the States/UTs have started sending proposals for Phase-II only
during 2011-12. While processing data of Phase-I, many States/U'Ts
faced difficulties in solving data collation problems; these States/U'Ts
are continuously assisted in tackling the data processing problems
through engagement of software agency, who developed the application
software. It is expected therefore, that States/UTs will complete
Phase-II of the pilot scheme as scheduled and funds have been released
to the States/UTs for conducting second phase of the pilot with faster
pace and as of now, about Half of the budget allocation for the current
FY 2011-12 has been released in the first quarter itself.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
National Statistical Commission (NSC)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee note that the National Statistical Commission under
the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan has made 623 recommendations
covering 11 sectors of the economy. 261 recommendations have been
implemented and the remaining 362 recommendations are being
processed by the various implementing agencies. The Committee desire
that the remaining 362 recommendations should be implemented by
the concerned implementing agencies in a time bound manner and
the Committee, which has been constituted under the Chairmanship
of Dr. Sudipto Mundle, member, NSC should monitor the progress
of implementation of remaining 362 recommendations on priority
basis for their implementation.

19
Reply of the Government
Efforts are being made to implement the remaining
recommendations of the Dr. C. Rangarajan Commission. All concerned
agencies—Central and State are being pursued to furnish the status of
implementation of specific recommendations. Letters have been sent to
Central Ministries and States/UTs followed by regular reminders.
Member NSC is regularly monitoring the progress of implementation
of recommendations.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee note that with regard to the process of identifying
core statistics, a statement indicating the views of different Central
Ministries/Departments and a suggestive list of core statistics were
placed before the National Statistics Commission in its 39th meeting
held in December, 2010. The Commission desired that the list is to
be recast in a sequential way and a concept paper may be prepared,
keeping in view inter-alia the core statistics in the form of indicators,
economic parameters etc., and the statistical processes through which
and the periodicity by which the core statistics are presently produced
and the agencies that are presently involved in the production. The
Committee further note that after notification of core statistics by
the Government, the Commission would lay down standards in
respect of methodology. The Committee desire that Government
should expedite the preparation of the concept paper and list of
core statistics as per the suggestions of the Commission so that the
list of core Statistics is notified and the Commission could formulate
the standards in respect of methodology for collection of such
statistics without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
The draft concept paper and draft list of core statistics have been
received in the Commission Secretariat. They will be placed before the
Commission in its next meeting to be held in August 2011 for its view
in the matter.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 13 of the Chapter I)

20
Shortage of Manpower
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee notes that there are about 117 vacancies in Indian
Statistical Service (ISS) and 1138 vacancies in the Subordinate
Statistical Service (SSS). Shortage of manpower has been affecting
the quality of data collected by National Sample Survey Organisation
(NSSO) and National Academy of Statistical Administration (NASA)
besides adversely affecting the functioning of prestigious schemes
of the Ministry. The Committee are given to understand that the
vacancies in Indian Statistical Service (ISS) are mainly dependent
on promotion which is within the purview of the Ministry. The
Committee note that Ministry has drawn a programme to fill the
vacancies. Hence, the Committee expect that suitable action will be
taken expeditiously for filling up the vacant promotional posts so as
to address the problem of shortage of manpower. As regards
manpower shortage in Subordinate Statistical Services (SSS), Staff
Selection Commission has initiated steps for recruitment of
Investigator Grade-II. Recruitment Rules have been sent to
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) for their approval.
The Committee expect the Ministry to pursue the matter with DoPT
for early approval of the revised Recruitment Rules.
Reply of the Government
Out of the 117 vacancies reported earlier, majority of them are at
the JTS and STS level. The proposal to fill all the vacant post of STS
in connection with relaxation in qualifying service was sent to DoPT
and DoPT has agreed to fill 65 posts of STS on promotion. In addition
to the above, 44 vacancies at the level of JTS were reported to the
UPSC for the ISS Examination, 2010 and UPSC completed the process
of selection. On promotion of 65 JTS officers to STS, the resultant
vacancies will also be filled from the feeder grade officers immediately
on ad-hoc basis. Therefore, the problem of large vacancies will be solved
and this issue may be closed.
As regards shortage of Manpower, in Subordinate Statistical Service
is concerned, it is stated that all the vacant posts in Statistical
Investigator Gr.-I as on 31.3.2011 have been filled-up by making
Ad-hoc promotions from Statistical Investigator Gr.-II. However, this
has caused further vacancies in S.I Gr.-II. As on 1.7.2011 about 1215
posts in S.I Gr.-II are lying vacant. SSS division is taking all possible
measures to fill up existing vacancies by recruiting statistical
investigators Gr.-II through SSC. Out of 250 dossiers received from
Staff Selection Commission against 2010 examination, 248 offers of

21
appointments are expected to be issued shortly on completion of
pre-appointment formalities. There is a shortfall of 175 candidates
recommended by Staff Selection Commission against 423 vacancies
confirmed by this Ministry against 2010 Examination. 525 more
vacancies have been communicated to SSC for 2011 Examination and
the shortfall of 175 vacancies will be added at the time of confirming
the number of vacancies to SSC. It is proposed to recruit about 500
candidates per year as per the Strategic Action Plan till all the vacancies
are filled up.
It is mentioned that, in the absence of Recruitment Rules,
SSS cadre is unable to consider promotions in S.I Grade I on regular
basis and as such, all the vacancies are not reported to SSC. The Draft
RRs have been got approved from DoP&T and the same are under
finalization by UPSC. Pending the finalization of RRs, on the advice
of DoP&T, UPSC has been requested to consider one time exemption
for allowing Subordinate Statistical Service to make promotion on
regular basis as per existing/old RRs.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee have noted that large attrition rate due to lack
of promotional avenues and lower grade are major reasons for
shortage of manpower. The Committee want that the matter relating
to the revision of grade pay for certain posts should be pursued
with the Ministry of Finance for an early decision so as to check the
attrition rate thereby overcoming the shortage of manpower.
Reply of the Government
As noted by the Committee the rate of high attrition in Subordinate
Statistical Service, is mainly due to lower grade pay in comparison to
other Group B Central Services. The issue was taken up with Ministry
of Finance at ministerial level but unfortunately the proposal of this
Ministry for enhancement of Grade pay has been turned down by the
Finance Ministry. However, Finance Ministry will be once again
approached for revising the Grade Pay through Cadre Review of SSS
which is already under process.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]

22
Infrastructure and Project Monitoring
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee note that the overall infrastructure sectors
performance during 2010-11 (April-November) has shown moderate
growth. However, as compared to the targets set for this period,
except refinery production and highway up-gradation, most of the
sectors have lagged behind their targets. The Committee in their
14th Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation inter-alia recommended
that the reasons for inability to achieve the set targets should be
properly examined and analyzed to impress upon the concerned
Ministries/Departments/PSUs for taking appropriate remedial
measures for meeting the targets and improving the growth rate.
The Committee expects the Ministry to pursue the matter with the
concerned Ministries/Departments/PSUs in the right earnest.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation apart
from time and cost overruns also monitors the performance of the key
infrastructure sectors. This monitoring of the performance of the
infrastructure sector is against the set targets. The Ministry brings out
every month a Review and Capsule Report on the performance of the
infrastructure sector and share this with all concerned including the
line Ministries. The shortfalls in the achievements of performance
whenever observed are also brought to the notice of the concerned
Ministries through D.O. letters for corrective action and also discussed
during MoU meetings, QPR meetings etc.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee are dismayed to note that 563 projects costing
Rs. 150 crore and more which are on the monitor of the Ministry
have experienced cost overrun of 20.3% and time overrun of 51%.
83 ongoing projects have both time and cost overrun, 54 projects
have only cost overrun and 193 projects have only time overrun.
The reasons attributed by the Ministry for time and cost overruns
include, land acquisition and rehabilitation and resettlement, forest/
environment/wildlife clearances, delay in shifting utilities, removal
of encroachments, law and order problems, lack of proper
co-ordination at State level, lack of resources/fund constraints, change
in scope, technology selection, geological surprises etc. The

23
Committee are of the firm opinion that persistent problems of time
and cost overrun in the infrastructure projects, could be avoided if
pre-project activities including clearance are completed before
sanction of projects or before award of contract. Evidently, the
Ministry has been lagging behind on this issue. The Committee
expect that the recommendations of the in-house Group of the
Ministry constituted at the behest of the Committee, under the
Chairmanship of an Additional Secretary would be implemented by
the Government in a time bound manner so as to resolve the issues
related to time and cost overruns of Central Sector Projects. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome in this regard on
quarterly basis.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been communicated to
all the concerned Ministries. The concerned infrastructure Ministries
have been requested to take follow up corrective action and report. It
may be noted that this Ministry has always been emphasizing on the
completion of pre-project activities and clearance while giving comments
for appraisal of the projects for PIB/EFC etc.
It may be added that on the advice of this Ministry, State
Governments are now setting up a “Central Sector Projects Coordination
Committee (CSPCC)” under the Chairmanship of respective Chief
Secretaries which is expected to remove various impediments like
delays in land acquisition, rehabilitation & re-settlement, forest/
environment/wildlife clearances, delays in shifting of utilities, removal
of encroachments, law and order problems etc. so that time and cost
overrun in Central Projects is minimized. This is expected to speed up
execution of Central Projects within the approved cost.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 16 of the Chapter I)

24
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
—NIL—

25
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
National Statistical Commission (NSC)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that with regard to conferring statutory status
to the National Statistical Commission, the Commission appointed a
Committee on 8th November, 2010 under the Chairmanship of
Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon to look into legislative measures on
statistical matters, including a Bill to provide statutory status to the
Commission. However, no timeframe has been fixed for introducing
the Bill in Parliament. The Committee reiterates that conferring statutory
status would enable the National Statistical Commission to function in
an independent manner for strengthening the statistical system in the
country. The Committee hope that the Committee, under the
Chairmanship of Prof. N.R. Madhava Menon would submit their report
on conferring statutory status to the NSC within the period of six
months and the related Bill, which would enable the National Statistical
Commission to function independently is brought before Parliament
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted. Steps are being taken to expedite
the process.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 10 of the Chapter I)

26
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Infrastructure and Project Monitoring
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
The Committee are constrained to note that a large number of
projects have been initiated by Railways without adequate funds and
without definite date of completion. The projects of Railways have
time overruns ranging from 3 to 225 months with substantial cost
overruns. The Committee feel that this is a very pathetic situation and
needs to be addressed quickly with regard to conceptualizing the
projects especially. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation convey the Committee’s displeasure
in this regard to the Ministry of Railways and take corrective measures
for addressing issues which contribute to delays and cost escalation.
The Committee wants the dates should be fixed without further delay
for commissioning the projects of Railways and ensure that the projects
take off within time. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
outcome in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Railways has been conveyed the observations of
the Committee. The reply from Ministry of Railways is awaited.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
O.M. No. G-20017/3/2011-B&F/dated 28.9.2011]
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
19 December, 2011 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

27
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th December, 2011 from
1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Prem Das Rai
6. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai
9. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Piyush Goyal
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Financial Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment);

28
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Planning;
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-seventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at Sl. Nos. (ii) and
(iv) without any modification and those at Sl. Nos. (i), (iii) and (v)
with minor modifications. The Committee authorised the Chairman to
finalise the Reports in the light of the modifications suggested and
present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

29
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2011-2012) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations 16
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 14 87.50
have been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15)
(iii) Recommendation/Observation which Nil 0.00
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the Government’s replies
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 01 6.25
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 9)
(v) Recommendation/Observations in respect 01 6.25
of which final reply of the Government
is still awaited
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 16)