SIXTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
Fifty Third Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Ministry of Planning]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6.12.2012
Laid in  Rajya  Sabha  on 6.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 ( Saka)


COF No. 62
Price : Rs. 50.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................... 12
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ........................................... 36
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ....................................... 37
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ............................................................................ 40
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on
29 November, 2012 ................................................................... 41
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-third Report
of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Planning ................... 43
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2012-2013)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suvendu Adhikari
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi
8. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
9. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11.D r. Chinta Mohan
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Prem Das Rai
14. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
15. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
16. Shri Adv. A. Sampath
17. Vacant*
18. Shri Thakur Anurag Singh
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Naresh Agrawal
23. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
24. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
* Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f
28.10.2012 consequent upon his induction to the Union Council of Ministers.

(iv)
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
27. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
28. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
29. Shri P . Rajeeve
30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
31. Dr. Yogendra P . Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Additional Director
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Sixty Second Report
on action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
the Fifty Third Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Planning.
2. The Fifty Third Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2012. Replies indicating
action taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were
furnished by the Government on 27 September, 2012.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 29 November, 2012.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty Third Report of the Committee
is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
04 December, 2012 Chairman,
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fifty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Planning, which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 24 April, 2012 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha
on the same day.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 12 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analysed and categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12
(Total : 11)
(Chapter II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Nil
(Total : Nil)
(Chapter III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation No. 9
(Total : 1)
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
(Total : Nil)
(Chapter V)

2
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter I may be furnished to them
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS)
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
5. The Committee recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that since its inception MGNREGS has been
infested with numerous infirmities. During the last 5 years of
implementation of MGNREGS, the expenditure have been reported
to the tune of Rs. 8823.35 crores in 2006-07, Rs. 15856.89 crore in
2007-08, Rs. 27250.10 crore in 2008-09, Rs. 37905 in 2009-10 and
Rs. 39377.26 crore in 2010-11 respectively on the scheme. However,
the Committee are concerned that the aim of the scheme which
was to enhance the livelihood security of the people in rural areas
and to create durable assets is far from being fulfilled, inspite of
substantial expenditure incurred so far. It is a matter of dismay
that the Scheme could not make much impact on the rural economy
due to reasons such as lack of awareness amongst rural people,
delay in wage payments, poor coverage of Banks and Post Offices,
non maintenance of records like job cards, dated receipts, muster
rolls, slow grievance redressal, low creation of durable assets, poor
conduct and quality of social audits etc. Since the 12th Plan Period
has already been launched with the Budget Proposal of 2012-13,
the Committee desire that the Government should make sincere
efforts to strengthen the synergy between MGNREGS and
agriculture and allied sectors to boost the rural economy. The
Committee further desire that the infirmities noticed in the
implementation of the Scheme since its inception should be
addressed comprehensively and the evaluation study to be
conducted by different research institutes in pursuance of the
Committee’s recommendation should be completed in a time bound
manner.”
6. The Government, in their action taken reply stated as follows:—
“The observations are noted. The measures taken to improve
implementation of MGNREGS and address infirmities include the
following:—
(i) In consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor General of
India, MGNREGS Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 have been
notified. All States have been asked to put in place a robust
Social Audit Mechanism as outlined in these Rules.

3
(ii) W ith a view to ensuring timely payment, infusing
transparency and enhancing the integrity of wage payment,
Schedule II of MGNREG Act has been amended to make
wage disbursement to MGNREGS workers through
institutional accounts in Banks or Post Offices a statutory
requirement unless specifically exempted.
(iii) To str engthen the institutional outreach for wage
disbursement, it has been decided that the State
Governments should roll out the Business Correspondent
Model to make wage payment through Banks with Bio-
metric authentication at village level.
(iv) Permissible administrative expenditure limit was enhanced
from 4% to 6% for deployment of dedicated staff for
MGNREGS, strengthening management and administrative
support structures for social audit, grievance redressal and
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
infrastructure.
(v) ICT based MIS has been made operational to make data
available to public scrutiny including job cards, muster rolls,
employment demanded and number of days worked, shelf
of works, funds available/spent, social audit findings,
registering grievances etc.
(vi) Instructions have been issued directing all States to appoint
Ombudsman at district level for grievance redressal.
(vii) The mechanism of State and district level Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees is available for monitoring of the
scheme.
(viii) States have been instructed to establish and operationalise,
State Employment Guarantee Funds for greater flexibility in
management of funds for MGNREGS.
The evaluation of MGNREGS will be completed in a time bound
manner, as suggested.”
7. The Committee note that the Government has taken a number
of measures to improve the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and to
address infirmities which includes Social Audit Mechanism, wage
disbursement through institutional accounts in Banks or post-offices
with Bio-metric authentication at village level, appointment of
ombudsman for grievance redressal, etc. The Committee desire that

4
while evaluating MGNREGS, the Government should assess the
impact of the scheme on agricultural activities, number of assets
created, quality of assets and how these assets are benefiting the
villages. The Committee further desire that use of machines for
manual labour particularly for earth digging purposes during harsh
summer months and in cold hilly areas should also be considered
while reviewing the scheme during the 12th Plan Period. The
Committee thus recommend that the Government should enhance
the efficiency, scale and scope of the MGNREGS during the Plan
period and also explore the feasibility of including urban areas in
the ambit of the scheme. They also suggest that the Government
should ensure timely payment of wages. The Committee hope the
evaluation report on the scheme will be completed soon and the
Committee apprised about the same.
Restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Schemes
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
8. The Committee recommended as under:—
“The Committee in their earlier reports had recommended that the
plethora of schemes and programmes operating now should be
streamlined and rationalized to manageable proportions. The
Committee note that this has been accepted by the Government in
principle as mentioned by the Finance Minister in his Budget
Speech 2012-13 to streamline and reduce the number of Centrally
Sponsored Schemes. The Committee are of the view that the current
year, being the first year of the 12th Plan, it is the ripe time to
restructure and rationalize the number of Centrally Sponsored
Schemes to enhance their efficiency and scale.”
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Planning, have stated
as under:—
“Planning Commission had set up a sub-committee to look into
the issue of restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) to
enhance their flexibility, scale and efficiency under the
Chairmanship of Shri. B.K. Chaturvedi, Member, Planning
Commission. The recommendations of the sub-committee are being
processed for due approvals and will be taken forward in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan.”
10. The Committee note that Planning Commission had set up a
Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri B.K. Chaturvedi,
Member, Planning Commission to look into the issue of restructuring

5
of Centrally Sponsored Schemes and the recommendations of the
Sub-Committee are being processed for approvals and would be
taken forward in the 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee would
thus expect the Government to restructure these schemes accordingly.
Estimation of Poverty
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
11. The Committee recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Planning Commission is the nodal
agency for estimating the number and proportion of people living
below the poverty line at National and States level, separately for
rural and urban areas. The methodology for estimation of poverty
has been reviewed from time to time. The Committee noted that
the Planning Commission has declared the year 2020 or latest by
end of 13th Five Year Plan (2021-22) as the target year for
elimination of poverty based on the methodology/estimates of
Lakdawala Committee. The Committee are surprised that even
though the Planning Commission has accepted the recomputed
poverty estimates for the year 1993-94 and 2004-05 as recommended
by the Tendulkar Committee, which has given a higher estimate
of poverty, they have fixed the target based on Lakdawala
Committee’s report. The Committee had in their earlier reports,
inter-alia emphasized on the need for overcoming the shortcomings
in the estimation of BPL population and more particularly the
divergence in the estimates of BPL population/poverty levels
brought out by the Planning Commission. The Committee are at
a loss to understand as to how the target for elimination of poverty
will be achieved on the recomputed higher estimates. The
Committee desire that more rigorous efforts should be made so
that the target can be achieved by 2020.”
12. In their action taken note the Ministry of Planning have
submitted as below:—
“A note on ‘Advance Planning for subsequent Five Year Plans’
was submitted to the Hon’ble Committee where a write up was
given under the sub-head ‘Elimination of poverty by 2020 or latest
by the end of 13th Five Year Plan 2021-22’. It is submitted that
various poverty amelioration measures being undertaken were
outlined in the said note. This caption of the one of the sections
of the Note was genesis in the Report of the Committee on India
Vision-2020 prepared under the Chairmanship of Dr. S.P . Gupta in

6
December, 2002 which stated that ‘the compound effect of achieving
the targeted annual GDP growth rate of 8.5 to 9 per cent over the
next 20 years would result in quadrupling of the real per capita
income and almost eliminating the percentage of Indians living
below the poverty line.’ This was a projection based on available
information in 2002 and predicted on several conditions indicating
a growth rate of 8.5 to 9 per cent between 2002-2020. The Report
was an internal document and was a background for further
discussions on poverty estimates in the 10th and 11th Five Year
Plan. It is clarified that the caption is not further amplified in the
succeeding paragraph of the write up and, was inadvertently
included. This is regretted.
It is clarified that the poverty figures based on Lakdawala
Committee methodology mentioned in the said Note was in the
context of 11th Five Year Plan wherein it was aimed at reducing
the poverty ratio by 10 percentage points by the end of the
11th Five Year Plan. The Note also brings out the various initiatives
taken by the Government as a part of development strategy to
achieve a significant rate of reduction in the poverty.
The Tendulkar Committee submitted its Report in December, 2009
and re-worked the poverty estimates for 1993-94 and 2004-05. The
Tendulkar Committee estimated that the head count poverty ratio
which was 45.3% in 1993-94 had come down to 37.2% in 2004-05
as against the Lakdawala Committee poverty estimates of 36%
and 27.5% respectively. The Tendulkar Committee concluded that
both the sets of poverty estimates are not comparable because of
different methodologies used. The revised poverty estimates by
the Tendulkar Committee were in fact a new goalpost. The Mid-
Term Appraisal of the 11th Five Year Plan also mentions this fact.
While reporting both the poverty estimates it was brought out in
the Mid-Term Appraisal that irrespective of whether we use the
‘old’ method or the new method, the percentage of population
below the poverty line has declined by about the same magnitude.
Therefore, it is submitted that the reference of Vision-2020 only
reiterates the Government’s commitment to the reduction of poverty.
The 11th Five Year Plan was based on the strategy of inclusive
growth with the ambitious target of reducing the head count ratio
of consumption poverty by 10 percentage points during the Plan
period 2007-12. As a result of the concerted efforts, the rate of
reduction of poverty has also increased, as is evident from the
latest poverty estimates based on the methodology of Tendulkar
Committee i.e. the poverty has come down from 45.3% in 1993-94

7
to 37.2% in 2004-05 and further to 29.8% in 2009-10. The Approach
Paper to the 12th Five Year Plan focusses on the strategy by faster,
sustainable and more inclusive growth which reflects that the
planning process continues to accelerate the rate of poverty
reduction, especially among the people who are at the bottom of
the strata.
The methodology for estimation of poverty followed by the
Planning Commission has been based on the recommendations
made by the experts in the field from time to time. Planning
Commission, in June 2012, has constituted an Expert Group under
the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan to “Review the Methodology
for Measurement of Poverty”. The composition of the Expert Group
and its Terms of Reference are as under:
Composition
1. Dr. C. Rangarajan, Chairman Prime Minister’s Chairman
Economy Advisory Council
2. Dr. Mahendra Dev., Director, Indira Gandhi Member
Institute of Development Research
3. Dr. K. Sundaram, Former Professor, Delhi Member
School of Economics
4. Dr. Mahesh Vyas, MD & CEO Centre for Member
Monitoring Indian Economy
5. Shri K.L. Datta, Former Adviser (Perspective Member
Planning), Planning Commission Convener
Terms of Reference
(i) To comprehensively review the existing methodology of
estimation of poverty and examine whether the poverty line
should be fixed solely in terms of a consumption basket or
whether other criteria are also relevant, and if so, whether
the two can be effectively combined to evolve a basis for
estimation of poverty in rural and urban areas.
(ii) To examine the issue of divergence between consumption
estimates based on the NSSO methodology and those
emerging from the National Accounts aggregates; and to
suggest a methodology for updating consumption poverty
lines using the new consumer price indices launched by
the CSO for rural and urban areas State-wise.

8
(iii) To review alternative methods of estimation of poverty,
which may be in use in other countries, including their
procedural aspects; and indicate whether on this basis, a
particular method can be evolved for empirical estimation
of poverty in India, including procedures for updating it
over time and across States.
(iv) To recommend how the estimates of poverty , as evolved
above, should be linked to eligibility and entitlements for
schemes and programmes under the Government of India.”
13. The Committee are constrained to note that the Planning
Commission, which is the nodal agency for estimating the number
and population of people below the poverty line at national and
States level, has faulted in providing credible information to the
Committee on a fair estimation of levels of poverty across the
Country and the prospects of achieving the target of elimination of
poverty by 2020. The Committee would like to point out that time
and again they have emphasized on the need for overcoming the
shortcomings in the methodology of estimation of BPL population
and ironing out the discrepancies and divergence in the various
estimates of BPL population/poverty levels.
14. In this context, the Committee note that an expert Committee
under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan has been constituted
to review the methodology for the measurement of poverty. The
Committee may be apprised about the progress made in this regard.
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
15. The Committee recommended as under:—
“The Committee are unable to understand as to how the
Government is still continuing with the implementation of Aadhar
without the legislative approval and have allocated Rs. 1758 crore
for the Scheme for the year 2012-13. The Committee in their
42nd Report on the ‘National Identification Authority of India Bill
2010’ has inter-alia given their observations on number of issues
and has conveyed their unacceptability of the National Identification
Authority of India Bill, 2012 in its present form and urged the
Government to reconsider and review the UID Scheme and also
the proposals contained in the Bill with all its ramifications and
bring forth a fresh legislation before Parliament. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Government to urgently address the issue
identified/pointed out by the Committee in their report.”

9
16. The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply stated as
follows:—
“1. The UID project has been envisioned to provide a unique
identity to every resident in India which will be the
foundation for better delivery of public services and targeted
subsidies. The project has a bias towards the developmental
agenda for promoting more inclusive growth. The purpose
of the UID project is to promote inclusion and benefit
marginalized sections of society who have no formal proof
of identity vis-à-vis the State and hence experience difficulties
in accessing various welfare schemes that are implemented
by the Government of India and State Governments. The
key role of the UID number is that of an enabler—a number
that helps governments design better welfare programs,
enables residents to access resources and services more easily
wherever they live, and allows agencies and programs—
such as the NREGA, PDS, SSA—to deliver benefits and
services effectively and transparently . The number will, thus,
be an identity infrastructure and the foundation over which
multiple services and applications can be built for the
resident. The consent of the individual is obtained before
enrolment into the UID system.
2. UIDAI has set up a security framework and implemented
security policies and procedures in line with the Government
policies and circulars. The strategic control of the data lies
with the UIDAI and the Data Centre operations are headed
by officers of the rank of Joint Secretary and Director. The
process followed by the UIDAI for enrolments is clearly
defined. Verification of data is done through three modes—
document based verification, through introducers and
through the NPR process of public scrutiny. The processes
at the time of enrolment include capturing the operator
biometrics (which is verified at backend at the time of
processing data for generation of aadhaar). In case of
enrolments through the introducer based system (which is
followed in case of persons with no documents), the
‘introducers’ are authorized by the registrars and may
include local Government officials and elected
representatives. These enrolments through introducers, while
enabling enrolments for those who do not have any
documents, do not compromise the robustness of the process.
The process of introduction has been designed to be

10
technologically non-repudiable, as the introducer has to have
his/her own Aadhaar number and he/she puts up his/her
electronic thumb impression on the enrolment record of the
person being introduced.
3. The enrolment is being done under the control and
supervision of Registrars, including Registrar General of
India, who is one of the Registrars of the UIDAI, by hiring
enrolment agencies (who are private agencies). Data
digitization and biometric enrolment for RGI are also being
carried out by private agencies.
4. The Authority has also addressed concerns on misuse of
Aadhaar information for possible profiling and tracking of
individuals. Profiling of individuals is not possible in the
UIDAI system, as in the definition of demographic
information in the Bill, it has been clearly stated that the
information to be collected will not include any profiling
information, such as on race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity,
language, income or health. Tracking and surveillance is
also not supported in the UID system.
5. UIDAI accepts documents for those who have some kind
of documents which can work as proof of identity and proof
of address. For those who have no documents (there are a
large number of persons in India who fall in this category)
the concept of ‘introducers’ has been introduced. These
‘introducers’ are authorized by the registrars and may
include local Government officials and elected
representatives. Enrolments through introducers, while
enabling enrolments for those who do not have any
documents, do not compromise the robustness of the process.
The process of introduction has been designed to be
technologically non-repudiable as the introducer has to have
his/her own Aadhaar number and he/she also has to put
his/her electronic thumb impression on the enrolment record
of the person being introduced. The third method is the
NPR process. There will be only one ID number for one
person in the Aadhaar system. Hence, there is an incentive
for a resident to give correct information at the enrolment
stage itself.
6. As per the Government’s latest decision, UIDAI would,
through its multiple Registrars, enroll 60 crore people in
States/UTs where UIDAI has already commenced work. In
the remaining States, NPR will collect the biometric data.

11
In the event of any discrepancy between the NPR and
UIDAI database, NPR data will prevail. Once the UIDAI
programme is fully rolled out and Aadhaar numbers are
issued to all residents, it would only be made a necessary
condition for availing public benefits and services. The
purpose of Aadhaar is not to identify beneficiaries under
different programmes. This would continue to be the
responsibility of States/Line Ministries of the Government.
Aadhaar would eliminate the possibility of a person getting
double benefits under the same programme or getting
benefit even if he is not entitled. This in itself is likely to
save substantial public resources.
7. In respect of Finance Minister’s Budget announcement
regarding roll out of Aadhaar enabled payments in at least
50 selected districts within six months, UIDAI is pursuing
the matter with a clear plan of action. Department of
Financial Services will draw up a roadmap for convergence
of their financial inclusion initiative with Aadhaar so as to
ensure its utility to the Aadhaar enabled payment system
for disbursement of social security benefits. They will also
examine ways to facilitate opening of bank accounts for all
individual Aadhaar holders.
Legal Issues:  M/o Law and Justice as well as the Attorney General
of India have opined that action to enroll residents by UIDAI in
terms of the executive notification issued on 28.1.2009 is valid.
However, the Government is pursuing the proposal for enacting
legislation as it is felt that a regulatory structure supported by a
legal framework would assist in more effective functioning of the
UID Authority. Particularly, any violations of security and privacy
of UID data on the part of any of the stakeholders that may arise
in the future, could be dealt with in a more rigorous and firm
manner under a defined legal mechanism which would be possible
by enacting the proposed NIDAI Bill.”
17. The Committee are surprised at the Planning Commission's
silence on their recommendation to address the key issues identified/
pointed out by the Committee in their Report on the ‘National
Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010’. The Committee would
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Government should
urgently address the various shortcomings/issues pointed out by the
Committee in their earlier report and bring forth a fresh legislation
before Parliament.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2012-13)
The Committee note that in the plan provision of the Ministry of
Planning for the year 2010-11, the actual expenditure was Rs. 310.88 crore
as against the BE of Rs. 2000 crore which was later reduced to
Rs. 1045 crore at RE stage. In the year 2011-12 also the actual
expenditure was Rs. 829.57 crore as against the BE of Rs. 1600 crore
which was reduced to Rs. 1330 crore at RE stage. In their earlier
report the Committee had expressed their displeasure on substantial
and persistent underutilization of allocated funds. The Committee had
pointed out the Ministry’s failure in regard to appropriate projection
of fund requirements in formulating budget estimates for programmes
and schemes. The Committee are unhappy to note that the formulation
of Budget for plan programmes/schemes of the Ministry of Planning
has been reduced to an exercise of unrealistic estimates projection,
underutilization of funds and failure of plan programmes/schemes to
absorb the allocated funds. The recurrent and substantial
underutilization of allocated funds shows the efforts that have been
made by the Ministry of Planning in this regard have been found to
be effective. The Committee are surprised to note that only one meeting
was held on 23.8.2011 to review the trend of expenditure during the
first quarter of the year 2011-12 which reflect casual approach of the
Ministry and desire that periodic/quarterly meetings should be held
to review and constantly monitor the trend and progress of expenditure.
The Committee reiterate that the Ministry of Planning should endeavour
to be a role model for other Central Ministries/Departments in
preparation of realistic budget estimates.
Reply of the Government
The expenditure has improved significantly in 2011-12; the actual
expenditure was Rs. 1257.36 crore (Provisional) as against the BE of
Rs. 1600 crore; which was later reduced to Rs. 1330 crore at RE stage.
As recommended by the Standing Committee, for monitoring the
progress of expenditure, utilization of allocated funds will be reviewed

13
quarterly with all the spending authorities and Divisions of Planning
Commission entrusted with the responsibility of executing the Plan
Schemes. This would ensure timely utilization of budgetary allocations.
Reviews will be held by Secretary in August 2012, November 2012
and February 2013.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Achievement of the 11th Five Year Plan
The objective of the 11th Five Year Plan was to achieve faster and
more inclusive growth at a targeted GDP growth rate of 9 percent per
annum. However, the Committee find that except during 2007-08, in
none of the remaining four years the target was achieved. Sector such
as Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, Mining and Quarrying have recorded
dismal growth rates. The reasons attributed for slow growth rate by
the Ministry of Planning were severe global economic crisis, weak
monsoon in 2009 and double-digit inflation, etc. The Committee are of
the opinion that since there was a delay in the Mid-Term Appraisal of
the 11th Plan Period, the Government could not take remedial measures
in time to address the above factors to attain the targeted growth
during the 11th Plan Period. The Committee hope the Government
would be more serious and proactive to achieve the targeted growth
rate during the 12th Plan Period and complete the Mid-Term Appraisal
well in time before the second-half of the Plan period commences, so
that meaningful corrective measures can be taken at the right time.
The Committee, further, desire that a comprehensive assessment of
outcomes of inclusive growth achieved during the 11th Plan Period be
conducted at the earliest. The Committee be apprised of the action
taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) aimed at achieving an
average annual growth rate of 9 per cent. The Plan targeted 4 per cent
in the agricultural sector, 10 to 11 per cent in the industrial sector and
9 to 11 per cent in the services sector. As per the revised estimates of
national income for the year 2011-12 released by Central Statistics Office
(CSO), the average annual growth rate for the Eleventh Plan is
estimated to be around 7.9 per cent. The agriculture sector is estimated
to grow by 3.3 per cent, industrial sector by 5.9 per cent and services
sector by 9.7 per cent. This is remarkable given the fact that the period
coincided with uncertain global economic environment coupled with

14
adverse domestic factors. The shortfall against targets is not new as is
evident from the Table given below:—
Table
Sectoral Growth Rates for 9th to 11th Plan and
Target for XIIth Plan
Sl. Sector IXth Xth XIth XIIth
No. Plan Plan Plan Plan
(Target)
1. Agriculture & Allied Sector 2.5 2.3 3.2 4.0
2. Industry 4.3 9.4 7.4 9.6
3. Services 7.9 9.3 10.0 10.0
Total GDP 5.5 7.8 8.2 9.0
Source: Approach to the 12th Plan Table 2.1 on Sectoral Growth Rates.
The initiatives taken in the Eleventh Plan period for faster and
inclusive growth have resulted in substantial progress towards achieving
this end. The latest poverty estimates based on Tendulkar methodology
reveal that the head count poverty ratio has declined from
37.2 per cent in 2004-05 to 29.8 per cent in 2009-10 registering a fastest
ever decline rate in poverty. It is noted that SC, ST are converging.
The monitorable indicators in the 11th Five Year Plan were
27 National targets and achievements against them have been
encouraging. Further, there has been a significant improvement in
various human development indicators as well. In so far as outcome
of inclusive growth is concerned, the improvements in indicators are
given below:—
• As per the Census 2011 the overall literacy rate in the
country has increased from 64.83 per cent in 2001 to
74.04 per cent in 2011.
• The male-female gap in the literacy rate has gone down to
16.68 in 2011 in comparison to 21.59 in 2001.
• According to Ministry of Human Resource Development,
the drop-out rate at primary level declined to 24.93 per cent
in 2008-09 from 39.03 per cent in 2001.
• The all India Net Enrolment Ratio (NER) for primary level
has increased from 84.5 per cent in 2005-06 to 98.6 per cent

15
in 2008-09. Similarly the all India NER for upper primary
level has increased from 43.1 per cent to 56.2 per cent during
the same period.
• As per Sample Registration System (SRS) Statistical Report
2010, the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) has declined from
3.2 during the period 1998-2000 to 2.6 in 2008-10.
• The Infant Mortality Rate has come down from 57 (SRS
2007) per thousand live births in 2006 to 47 per thousand
in 2010 (SRS 2011).
• The Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) was 254 per lakh live
births in 2004-06 (SRS April, 2009) and has come down to
212 per lakh in 2007-09 (SRS June, 2011).
• The percentage of people using improved source of drinking
water has increased from 88 per cent in 2005-06 to
91.4 per cent in 2008-09.
• The percentage of households without sanitation facilities
has declined from 55.3 per cent in 2005-06 to 49.2 per cent
in 2008-09.
• As per Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI), the
all India tele-density increased from 44.88 per cent (as on
31st December, 2009) to 75.43 per cent in (as on
30th September, 2011).
The allocation for the 11th Five Year Plan was 7.99% of GDP (for
Centre, as per Eleventh Plan document) and 82.15% of Gross Budgetary
Support (of the Centre Allocation). Economic growth is a complex
combination of development schemes and programs and policies that
support it. The achievements against targets have to be viewed in this
holistic perspective.
As regards the Mid-Term Appraisal (MTA) of the Eleventh Plan is
concerned, it may be indicated that the process was initiated in July
2009, just after completion of two years and three months of the Plan.
The MTA for 10th Plan was also completed in June, 2005. The 11th
Plan commenced in time; with the Annual Plan 2007-08 (launched
from 1st April, 2007), as the 1st Year of the Plan.
The MTA is a comprehensive exercise, involving discussions with
Central Ministries, State Governments, Academia, representatives of
NGOs to obtain their perspective on the schemes. After the detailed
process, the MTA for the 11th Plan was prepared and placed before
Full Planning Commission and the Cabinet in their meetings held on
23rd March, 2010 and 10th June, 2010 respectively. The NDC approved

16
the same in July 24, 2010. Thus, all the stakeholders were aware of the
basic direction and suggestions for mid-course correction that were
being proposed by the MTA by the end of the third year/beginning
of the fourth year of the Plan. Finalizing MTA any earlier would be
constrained by the time-lag in availability of data/information as well
as the need for detailed consultations with all stakeholders, would
therefore, not give an accurate position of the progress of the plan at
its mid-point.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
12th Five Year Plan
The Committee note that the 12th Five Year Plan has been launched
with the Budget proposal for 2012-13 to address five critical issues to
put the economy back on a high growth trajectory of 9 per cent.
However, the 12th Five Year Plan is yet to be approved by the National
Development Council (NDC) and the shape of the 12th Plan Period
would be visible by June or July, 2012, as admitted by the Member
Secretary before the Committee. The Committee cannot but deprecate
the lackadaisical manner of functioning of the Planning Commission
in completing the procedural formalities of approval of the 12th Five
Year Plan timely. Since the first financial year of the 12th Five Year
Plan has already started, the Committee desire that the 12th Five Year
Plan is finalized at the earliest so that there could be a synchronization
of Budget proposal for the year 2012-13 with funds allocated for
12th Plan Period for core sectors/areas as identified. The Committee,
further, desire that sectoral constraints noticed in the 11th Plan Period
should be addressed for creating conducive policy environment for
each sector of the economy so as to achieve the targeted growth during
the 12thPlan.
Reply of the Government
As per established practice the approach paper which outlines the
directions of Plan in terms of priorities is approved by the National
Development Council (NDC) in the year before the Plan begins and
the full Plan is approved by the NDC during the course of the first
year. Thus, the Eleventh (2007-12) and Tenth (2002-2007) Plans were
approved by NDC respectively in December, 2007 and December, 2002.
In case of Ninth Plan, it was little later and was approved only in the
February, 1999 (Plan Period—1997-2002).

17
The Approach Paper for the Twelfth Plan has been approved by
the National Development Council (NDC) in October, 2011. The
Approach Paper besides outlining the overall framework and direction
of Twelfth Five Year Plan also lays down the priorities of the Plan.
The detailed Plan has been approved by the Planning Commission in
its meeting held on 15.09.2012 and is expected to be placed before the
NDC by October or November, 2012, i.e. earlier than any other previous
Three Plans.
It is worthwhile to mention that to have the Plan, in the instant
case Twelfth Plan (2012-17) approved before the start of the first year
(i.e. April, 2012), Planning Commission would have needed to interact
with Ministries on the five-years perspective in October and November
of 2011-12 which is precisely the time when Ministries were busy with
discussions with the Finance Ministry on revised estimates for 2011-12
and on non-Plan requirements for the next year. To get them to focus
on the five-year targets this would needed to be done in August and
September, when Planning Commission had no clear picture of the
Plan expenditure outcome for 2011-12, which is the base year of the
Twelfth Plan. Besides, 90 per cent of the expenditure in the first year
is ongoing Eleventh Plan programmes. New Plan programmes, for the
Twelfth Plan, redesigned to reflect lessons learned from the Eleventh
Plan, have to be processed for Government and Cabinet approval and
this usually happens in the course of the first year of the Plan. The
new designs come into effect from the second year of the Plan.
The approach to the Twelfth Plan give special emphasis on
addressing the Sectoral constraints noticed in the Eleventh Plan Period.
The total investment in infrastructure which includes roads, railways,
ports, airports, electricity, telecommunications, oil gas pipelines and
irrigation is estimated to have increased from 5.7 per cent of GDP in
the base year of the Eleventh Plan to around 8.0 per cent in the last
year of the Plan. The pace of investment has been buoyant in some
sectors, notably telecommunications, oil and gas pipelines, while falling
short of targets in electricity, railways, roads and ports. The Approach
to the Twelfth Plan has therefore, emphasised the need for massive
expansion in investment in infrastructure. In particular, it has identified
six sectors that would need greater focus during the Plan. These
include:—
(i) Energy: Securing the Energy Future for India
Faster and more inclusive growth will require a rapid
increase in energy consumption. Since we have limited
domestic resources, alternatives to secure energy future for
India would be explored.

18
(ii) Accelerated Development of Transport Infrastructure
Inadequate transport infrastructure results in lower efficiency
and productivity; higher transaction costs; and, insufficient
access to large national market. An efficient and widespread
multi-modal transport network to facilitate developmental
needs would be targeted.
(iii) Rural Transformation and Sustained Growth of Agriculture
Rural India suffers from poor infrastructure and inadequate
amenities. Low agricultural growth perpetuates food and
nutritional insecurities, which also reduces rural incomes.
Support to the villages need to be extended during the Plan
and the living and livelihood conditions of the villagers
have to be improved in innovative ways.
(iv) Managing Urbanization
Most of our metros and cities are under severe stress with
inadequate social and physical infrastructure coupled with
worsening pollution. Migration pressures are likely to
increase. There is a need to make cities more livable and
ensure that smaller cities and towns are not similarly
overwhelmed tomorrow.
(v) Improved Access to Quality Education
Educational and training facilities have been increasing
rapidly. However, access, affordability, and quality remain
serious concerns. Employability is also an issue. There is a
need to improve the quality and the utility of education,
while ensuring equity and affordability.
(vi) Better Preventive and Curative Health Care
India’s health indicators are not improving as fast as other
socio-economic indicators. Good healthcare is perceived to
be either unavailable or unaffordable. It is essential to
improve healthcare conditions, both curative and preventive,
especially relating to women and children.
The Approach to the Twelfth Plan expressed the necessity of
allocating not only additional resources to health as India's health
outcome indicators continue to be weaker than they should be, at
current level of development but also to overcome the shortage of
health professionals at all levels to achieve an expansion in the public
provision of health services. There has been inadequate attention
towards improving our education and training capacities in this area.

19
There are also problems of accountability of personnel even when
these are recruited. These lacunae will take time to rectify, but the
Twelfth Plan must give a special emphasis to solve this problem.
The Government has taken a number of steps in the area of skill
development. During Eleventh Plan Government initiated a Coordinated
Action on Skill Development which aims at creation of 500 million
skilled man power by 2022. A three tier structure was put in place viz.
Prime Minister’s National Council on Skill Development for policy
direction, National Skill Development Coordination Board for
coordinating efforts of 17 central Ministries and synergy with State
and National Skill Development Corporation for engaging private
efforts in skill development. National Skill development policy prepared
in 2009 lays down strategy to achieve the target of 500 million skilled
man power by 2022. New initiatives in terms of Modular Employable
Skill Programme, Skill Development in Left Wing Affected Districts,
and Revamping of Rationalization of school education have been
initiated. NSDC has been put in place which has equity base of
10 crore and corpus of 1500 crore. It is creating sector skill council for
setting standards for different occupations besides financing training.
However much needs to be done.
The Twelfth Plan has recognized that constraints in skill
development in terms of shortage of seating capacity, trainers, course
curriculum and resources needs to be overcome to harness the
demographic dividend. This would help in adequately complementing
the potential expansion in the level of economic activity. The expansion
under way in educational and training institutions needs to be
accelerated and more attention needs to be paid to the quality and
appropriateness of skills being imparted.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
Agriculture Sector
The Committee note that an important sectoral target of the
11th Plan was to raise the rate of growth in agriculture to 4 per cent
from 2.5 per cent in the 10th Plan. As per advanced estimates, the rate
of growth of GDP in agriculture during the 11th Plan Period is only
3.3 per cent, even though the Government has put in place various
schemes and programmes to boost the agriculture sector. Moreover,
the Gross Capital Formation (GCF) in agriculture and allied Sector in
2009-10 was Rs. 1,33,377 crore, of which the contribution of Public

20
Sector was Rs. 23637 crore and of Private Sector was Rs. 109740 crore.
This clearly shows that funds infusion by the Government in agriculture
and allied sector was rather low. The Committee deplore this tokenism
on the part of the Government, as about half of the rural population
is still dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. The objective of
inclusive growth cannot be realized without revitalizing agriculture
sector and for which adequate investment is required to spur
agriculture growth.
As commented upon by the Committee in their earlier reports, the
Committee expect the Planning Commission to address the issues
affecting agriculture and allied sectors with due seriousness on priority
basis and formulate appropriate sectoral policies for the revival of
agriculture sector.
Reply of the Government
1. In the first Year (2007-08) of the Eleventh Plan, an outlay of
Rs. 8090 crore was provided to Ministry of Agriculture and it has
been increased to Rs. 21572 crore at the terminal Year 2011-12 of Plan.
Thus, the GBS support has been increased up to 2.66 times, collectively
to the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries (DAHD&F) and Department
of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE).
2. During the current financial year (2012-13), GBS of Rs. 25338 crore
has been provided to Ministry of Agriculture ( i.e. DAC: Rs. 20208 crore;
DAHD&F: Rs. 1910 crore and DARE: Rs. 3220 crore). The budgetary
allocation of IWMP Rs. 3050 crore and AIBP to the tune of Rs. 14242 crore
during the current financial year will also supplement growth in the
Agriculture & Allied Sector.
3. Some of the specific steps taken to accelerate growth of
Agriculture Sector include the following:—
(a) Rainfed Agriculture:  To address the rainfed agriculture the
major interventions taken are as follows:
Watershed Management Programmes
Initiatives for rainfed areas were taken up as soil and water
conservation programme. Watershed management has undergone many
policy changes over the years.
Earlier generation of watershed programmes were mostly confined
to biophysical aspects, viz.; contour bunding, check dams, afforestation
etc. but subsequently the social and institutional issues came into
prominence. Of late, the focus is shifting towards livelihood security

21
and income generation through watershed development. Multiple
ministries/departments and agencies have been involved in the growth
and development of watersheds with an array of watershed schemes.
Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) of Ministry of
Rural Development; NWDPRA, River Valley Projects, Catchment Area
Programme in Flood Prone Rivers, Shifting cultivation scheme of
Ministry of Agriculture; Watershed Development Fund administered
by NABARD; Hill Area Development Programme (HADP) and Western
Ghats Development Programme of Planning Commission; various
afforestation programmes and other national and externally aided
projects are amongst the various watershed related schemes.
Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP), is under
implementation since 2011-12 as a sub scheme of RKVY and mainly
focuses on promoting integrated farming system in rainfed areas.
During 2011-12 Rs. 250 crores were allocated to different States under
the RADP . A token provision of Rs. 149 crores has been made for
2012-13 as the programme will finally be addressed through NMSA of
the 12th Five Year Plan.
The flagship programme of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY), National Horticulture Mission (NHM), Artificial Ground
Water Recharge, Artificial Recharge to Ground water through Dug wells,
Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies directly linked to
agriculture, are amongst other schemes for benefit of rainfed areas.
National Rainfed Area Authority
A National Authority for Rainfed Areas was created during 2006
to manage the watershed programmes, to respond innovatively to local
needs with clear accountability for performance.
National Mission on Micro Irrigation is a major initiative to benefit
the rainfed area for promotion of water saving irrigation devices like
drip irrigation system and sprinkler irrigation. Besides, schemes for
Extending Green Revolution to Eastern India (under RKVY), National
Afforestation Programme of MoEF, Reclamation and Development of
Alkali & Acid Soils, Soil Health along with the Oil Seed and Pulses
Promotion Schemes etc. are also under implementation.
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), under the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), a new initiative
during 12th Plan, will address water conservation and enhancing
efficiency and productivity of water besides sustainability of natural

22
resources and rainfed agriculture. The ‘in-principle’ approval for NMSA
has been conveyed. The National Water Mission and National Mission
for a Green India under NAPCC have direct relevance to management
of natural resources and rainfed areas.
(b) Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) has been launched with
an allocation of Rs. 25000 crore over and above the other on-going
programmes; Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana provides Central Assistance
to State Plans with a view to incentivise the States to make higher
investments in Agriculture. Further, RKVY envisages promotion of
district agricultural plans which is the cornerstone of the strategy of
implementation of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) so as to reflect
and address local and regional issues. The States have appreciated the
Scheme due to the flexibility available within the Scheme for them to
tailor it to their specific requirement. During 11th Plan an expenditure
of Rs. 22425 crore is expected.
(c) National Food Security Mission (NFSM) has been launched in
Mission-mode, aimed at increasing foodgrains production by at least
20 million tonnes (8 million tonnes of wheat, 10 million tonnes of rice
and 2 million tonnes of pulses) by the end of the Eleventh Plan. The
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is under implementation in
480 districts in 18 States. The NFSM-Rice is being implemented in 136
districts in 14 States, i.e., Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. The NFSM-Wheat
is being implemented in 141 districts of 9 States of Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal. The NFSM-Pulses is being implemented in
171 identified districts in 14 States namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal.
(d) Agricultural Extension is being strengthened for efficient transfer
of technology through support to States for agricultural reforms and
use of mass media. The extension delivery efforts are strengthened
further through district level Agriculture Technology Management
Agencies (ATMAs in 604 districts) and 630 Krishi Vigyan Kendras in
rural districts.
(e) Initiatives have been taken to enhance farmers’ income through
diversification into high value crops as well as non-crop sources such
as livestock and fisheries etc. Initiatives have been taken to enhance
farmers’ income through diversification into high value crops as well

23
as non-crop sources such as livestock and fisheries etc. Besides the on-
going Horticulture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries development
programmes, a National Dairy Plan (NDP) has been launched. This is
a strategic plan with an outlay of Rs. 17,371 crore to achieve a target
of 180 million tonnes of milk production annually by 2021-22. Milk
production is expected to grow at 4% with an annual incremental
output of 5 million tonnes in the next 15 years. Districts will be
categorised into 324 high potential districts for intensive development
and remaining 282 low potential districts for further expansion of the
sector.
(f) Steps have been taken to ensure greater flow of institutional
credit to the agriculture sector as a result of which the flow of
institutional (Co-operative Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Commercial
Banks) credit to agriculture has gone up from Rs. 2,29,400 crore in
2006-07 to Rs. 446779 crore in 2010-11.
Estimated Production in 2011-12
As per 3rd Advance Estimates of production of foodgrain, oilseeds
and other commercial crops for 2011-12, released by Directorate of
Economics and Statistics, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
foodgrain production reached a peak production level of 252.56 million
tonne in 2011-12 (with record wheat and rice production) recovering
from a low production level of 174.77 million tonne in 2002-03. Among
coarse cereals, especially Maize in case of Rabi Maize, has performed
well over the decade. Maize production has increased to 21.33 million
tonne in 2011-12. In the case of commercial crops, Oilseeds production
has increased from 20.6 million tonne in 2000-01 to 32.47 million tonne
in 2010-11, especially due to better performance of soyabean, Groundnut
and castor seed but slightly declined to 30.0 million tonne in 2011-12.
Cotton is another crop which has performed well with the result that
production has more than tripled from less than 10 million bales in
2001-02 to 35.2 million bales in 2011-12.
Growth Rate for Agriculture Sector
The Growth target rate of Agriculture and Allied Sectors for the
Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans was 4% per annum. The
mid-term appraisal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan had expected growth
of agriculture during Eleventh Plan to range between 3 and 3.5 percent.
Based on revised advance estimates for 2011-12, the average of annual
growth rates of GDP in agriculture and allied sectors during Eleventh
Five Year Plan is placed at 3.2 percent. The Twelfth Plan growth target
for agriculture has been proposed at 4 per cent.

24
Table: Average Annual Growth rate of Agriculture and Allied
Sectors during Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plan
(All Figures based on 2004-05 prices)
Plan Growth rate of Agriculture
and Allied Sectors
Ninth Five Year Plan 2.5
Tenth Five Year Plan 2.3
Eleventh Five Year Plan 3.2
Source: Approach Paper to the 12th Plan, Table 2.1
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF)
The Committee note that BRGF seeks to bring about focused
development of identified backward districts by implementing
programmes, selected through people's participation. It aims to help
convergence and add value to other programmes such as
Bharat Nirman and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Programme etc., which are explicitly designed to meet rural
infrastructure needs. The Committee feel that these programmes could
not address the causes of backwardness in backward regions as
intended. There is still wide variation in the economic performance
across the States. The main reason for variation in the growth rate are
unequal availability of basic infrastructure. The Committee, in
agreement with the suggestion of the Steering Committee for Rural
Livelihoods and Rural Governance, desire that the Government should
be sensitive to needs and aspirations of regions that feel a genuine
grievance about being left out of the national mainstream and
development process. The Committee further desire that there is a
need for targeted intervention whereby backward regions are provided
with more funds as well as technical support for meeting development
expenditure viz. investment in rural infrastructure, primary education
and health.
Reply of the Government
The main programme for filling the critical gaps in development
is the Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF). Under BRGF, funds are

25
also provided for enhancing the capability of Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) for implementing and monitoring the flagship programmes
The BRGF (State Plan Component) comprises the special Plan for
Bihar, the special Plan for West Bengal, the special Plan for Odisha—
KBK districts and the Integrated Action Plan for selected Tribal and
Backward districts. Based on the experience gained in the
Eleventh Plan, it is expected that BRGF (District Component) and BRGF
(State Component) will be restructured in the 12th Five Year Plan to
sharpen the focus on targeted interventions in backward regions.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF)
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that
expenditure data on rural infrastructure should be maintained and
monitored in centralized manner to enable analysis of the progress
made in this regard and desire convergence of BRGF, MGNREGA and
Bharat Nirman followed by a well defined holistic district Plan for
development of backward region including the specific programme for
areas affected by naxalite extremism.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted. During the discussions in the
Planning Commission for finalizing the States' Annual Plans every
year, the State Governments are persuaded to ensure that State Plans
are based on District Plans consolidated by District Planning
Committees, as advised by the Planning Commission through its
circular dated 25th August, 2006.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS)
The Committee note that since its inception MGNREGS has been
infested with numerous infirmities. During the last 5 years of
implementation of MGNREGS, the expenditure have been reported to
the tune of Rs. 8823.35 crores in 2006-07, Rs. 15856.89 crore in

26
2007-08, Rs. 27250.10 crore in 2008-09, Rs. 37905 in 2009-10 and
Rs. 39377.26 crore in 2010-11 respectively on the scheme. However, the
Committee are concerned that the aim of the scheme which was to
enhance the livelihood security of the people in rural areas and to
create durable assets is far from being fulfilled, inspite of substantial
expenditure incurred so far. It is a matter of dismay that the Scheme
could not make much impact on the rural economy due to reasons
such as lack of awareness amongst rural people, delay in wage
payments, poor coverage of Banks and Post Offices, non maintenance
of records like job cards, dated receipts, muster rolls, slow grievance
redressal, low creation of durable assets, poor conduct and quality of
social audits etc. Since the 12th Plan Period has already been launched
with the Budget Proposal of 2012-13, the Committee desire that the
Government should make sincere efforts to strengthen the synergy
between MGNREGS and agriculture and allied sectors to boost the
rural economy . The Committee further desire that the infirmities noticed
in the implementation of the Scheme since its inception should be
addressed comprehensively and the evaluation study to be conducted
by different research institutes in pursuance of the Committee’s
recommendation should be completed in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
The observations are noted. The measures taken to improve
implementation of MGNREGS and address infirmities include the
following:—
(i) In consultation with the Comptroller & Auditor General of
India, MGNREGS Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 have been
notified. All States have been asked to put in place a robust
Social Audit Mechanism as out lined in these Rules.
(ii) W ith a view to ensuring timely payment, infusing
transparency and enhancing the integrity of wage payment,
Schedule II of MGNREG Act has been amended to make
wage disbursement to MGNREGS workers through
institutional accounts in Banks or Post Offices a statutory
requirement unless specifically exempted.
(iii) To str engthen the institutional outreach for wage
disbursement, it has been decided that the
State Governments should roll out the Business
Correspondent Model to make wage payment through Banks
with Bio-metric authentication at village level.

27
(iv) Permissible administrative expenditure limit was enhanced
from 4% to 6% for deployment of dedicated staff for
MGNREGS, strengthening management and administrative
support structures for social audit, grievance redressal and
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
infrastructure.
(v) ICT based MIS has been made operational to make data
available to public scrutiny including job cards, muster rolls,
employment demanded and number of days worked, shelf
of works, funds available/spent, social audit findings,
registering grievances etc.
(vi) Instructions have been issued directing all States to appoint
Ombudsman at district level for grievance redressal.
(vii) The mechanism of State and district level Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees is available for monitoring of the
scheme.
(viii) States have been instructed to establish and operationalise,
State Employment Guarantee Funds for greater flexibility in
management of funds for MGNREGS.
The evaluation of MGNREGS will be completed in a time bound
manner, as suggested.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Scheme
The Committee in their earlier reports had recommended that the
plethora of schemes and programmes operating now should be
streamlined and rationalized to manageable proportions. The Committee
note that this has been accepted by the Government in principle as
mentioned by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2012-13 to
streamline and reduce the number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
The Committee are of the view that the current year, being the first
year of the 12th Plan, it is the ripe time to restructure and rationalize
the number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes to enhance their efficiency
and scale.

28
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission had set up a sub-committee to look into the
issue of restructuring of Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) to enhance
their flexibility, scale and efficiency under the chairmanship of
Shri. B.K. Chaturvedi, Member, Planning Commission. The
recommendations of the sub-committee are being processed for due
approvals and will be taken forward in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
 [Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
Estimation of poverty
The Committee note that the Planning Commission is the nodal
agency for estimating the number and proportion of people living
below the poverty line at National and States level, separately for
rural and urban areas. The methodology for estimation of poverty has
been reviewed from time to time. The Committee noted that the
Planning Commission has declared the year 2020 or latest by end of
13th Five Year Plan (2021-22) as the target year for elimination of
poverty based on the methodology/estimates of Lakdawala Committee.
The Committee are surprised that even though the Planning
Commission has accepted the recomputed poverty estimates for the
year 1993-94 and 2004-05 as recommended by the Tendulkar Committee,
which has given a higher estimate of poverty, they have fixed the
target based on Lakdawala Committee’s report. The Committee had in
their earlier reports, inter-alia emphasized on the need for overcoming
the shortcomings in the estimation of BPL population and more
particularly the divergence in the estimates of BPL population/poverty
levels brought out by the Planning Commission. The Committee are at
a loss to understand as to how the target for elimination of poverty
will be achieved on the recomputed higher estimates. The Committee
desire that more rigorous efforts should be made so that the target
can be achieved by 2020.
Reply of the Government
A note on ‘Advance Planning for subsequent Five Year Plans’ was
submitted to the Hon’ble Committee where a write up was given
under the sub-head ‘Elimination of poverty by 2020 or latest by the

29
end of 13th Five year Plan 2021-22’. It is submitted that various poverty
amelioration measures being undertaken were outlined in the said note.
This caption of the one of the sections of the Note was genesis in the
Report of the Committee on India Vision-2020 prepared under the
chairmanship of Dr. S.P . Gupta in December, 2002 which stated that
“the compound effect of achieving the targeted annual GDP growth
rate of 8.5 to 9 per cent over the next 20 years would result in
quadrupling of the real per capita income and almost eliminating the
percentage of Indians living below the poverty line.” This was a
projection based on available information in 2002 and predicted on
several conditions indicating a growth rate of 8.5 to 9 percent between
2002-2020. The Report was an internal document and was a background
for further discussions on poverty estimates in the 10th and 11th Five
Year Plan. It is clarified that the caption is not further amplified in the
succeeding paragraph of the write up and, was inadvertently included.
This is regretted.
It is clarified that the poverty figures based on Lakdawala
Committee methodology mentioned in the said Note was in the context
of 11th Five Year Plan wherein it was aimed at reducing the poverty
ratio by 10 percentage points by the end of the 11th Five Year Plan.
The Note also brings out the various initiatives taken by the
Government as a part of development strategy to achieve a significant
rate of reduction in the poverty.
The Tendulkar Committee submitted its Report in December, 2009
and re-worked the poverty estimates for 1993-94 and 2004-05. The
Tendulkar Committee estimated that the head count poverty ratio which
was 45.3% in 1993-94 had come down to 37.2% in 2004-05 as against
the Lakdawala Committee poverty estimates of 36% and 27.5%
respectively. The Tendulkar Committee concluded that both the sets of
poverty estimates are not comparable because of different
methodologies used. The revised poverty estimates by the Tendulkar
Committee were in fact a new goalpost. The Mid-Term Appraisal of
the 11th Five Year Plan also mentions this fact. While reporting both
the poverty estimates it was brought out in the Mid-Term Appraisal
that irrespective of whether we use the “old” method or the new
method, the percentage of population below the poverty line has
declined by about the same magnitude. Therefore, it is submitted that
the reference of Vision-2020 only reiterates the Government's
commitment to the reduction of poverty. The 11th Five Year Plan was
based on the strategy of inclusive growth with the ambitious target of
reducing the head count ratio of consumption poverty by 10 percentage
points during the Plan period 2007-12. As a result of the concerted

30
efforts, the rate of reduction of poverty has also increased, as is evident
from the latest poverty estimates based on the methodology of
Tendulkar Committee i.e. the poverty has come down from 45.3% in
1993-94 to 37.2% in 2004-05 and further to 29.8% in 2009-10. The
Approach Paper to the 12th Five Year Plan focusses on the strategy by
faster, sustainable and more inclusive growth which reflects that the
planning process continues to accelerate the rate of poverty reduction,
especially among the people who are at the bottom of the strata.
The methodology for estimation of poverty followed by the
Planning Commission has been based on the recommendations made
by the experts in the field from time to time. Planning Commission,
in June 2012, has constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship
of Dr. C. Rangarajan to “Review the Methodology for Measurement of
Poverty”. The composition of the Expert Group and its Terms of
Reference are as under:—
Composition
1. Dr. C. Rangarajan, Chairman, Prime Minister’s Chairman
Economy Advisory Council
2. Dr. Mahendra Dev, Director, Indira Gandhi Member
Institute of Development Research
3. Dr. K. Sundaram, Former Professor, Member
Delhi School of Economics
4. Dr. Mahesh Vyas, MD & CEO, Centre for Member
Monitoring Indian Economy
5. Shri K.L. Datta, Former Adviser (Perspective Member
Planning), Planning Commission Convener
Terms of Reference
(i) To comprehensively review the existing methodology of
estimation of poverty and examine whether the poverty line
should be fixed solely in terms of a consumption basket or
whether other criteria are also relevant, and if so, whether
the two can be effectively combined to evolve a basis for
estimation of poverty in rural and urban areas.
(ii) To examine the issue of divergence between consumption
estimates based on the NSSO methodology and those
emerging from the National Accounts aggregates; and to
suggest a methodology for updating consumption poverty
lines using the new consumer price indices launched by
the CSO for rural and urban areas, State-wise.

31
(iii) To r eview alternative methods of estimation of poverty
which may be in use in other countries, including their
procedural aspects; and indicate whether on this basis, a
particular method can be evolved for empirical estimation
of poverty in India, including procedures for updating it
over time and across States.
(iv) To recommend how the estimates of poverty , as evolved
above, should be linked to eligibility and entitlements for
schemes and programmes under the Government of India.
 [Ministry of Planning, O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
Role of Planning Commission
The Committee observe with dissatisfaction the evasive reply of
the Ministry regarding evaluation of performance of the Planning
Commission by an Expert Group. The Committee can only observe
that the Ministry of Planning/Planning Commission do not seem to
be serious in its approach to evaluate the performance of Planning
Commission and redefine its role and objective so as to make itself
more relevant and effective for aligning the planning process with
economic reforms and its impact, particularly for the poor. The
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Government
should constitute an Expert-Group for evaluating the performance of
the Planning Commission and redefining its role and objectives at the
earliest and action taken in this direction be apprised to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted. The Committee is
respectfully informed that there was no intention to be evasive. It is,
respectfully submitted that Planning Commission is fully seized of the
importance of evaluating its own performance and is taking the issue
with the utmost seriousness. Currently Planning Commission is
performing the following major tasks:—
(1) Preparation of five year plans as also indicative plans which
explore the feasibility of and implications of alternative
scenarios of faster growth over a longer term horizon.

32
(2) Allocating plan resources which involves negotiation with
the Ministries on perceived needs and with the Finance
Ministry on available resources.
(3) The Planning Commission also interacts with State
Governments to persuade them of the need for undertaking
sufficient levels of expenditure in critical areas such as
agriculture, health, education and infrastructure.
(4) The Commission also performs the task of providing a
critical evaluation of policies on individual sectors and/or
their effectiveness in terms of the impact on the sector and
the economy. This includes pricing policies and investment
control policies.
(5) Finally, the Commission evaluates different programmes
implemented by various Ministries through its own
continuing review and also by the Programme Evaluation
Organization and supporting studies under Socio Economic
Research scheme.
In addition, in accordance with the Allocation of Business Rules
1961, the Ministry of Planning is entrusted with the following items:
(a) Assessment of the material, capital and human resources of
the country, including technical personnel, and formulation
of proposals for augmenting such of these resources as are
found to be deficient.
(b) Formulation of Plan for the most effective and balanced
utilization of the country’s resources.
(c) Definition of stages in which the Plan should be carried
out on a determination of priorities and allocation of
resources for completion of each stage.
(d) Determination of the nature of machinery necessary for the
implementation of the Plan in all its aspects.
(e) Identifying the factors which, are tending to retard economic
development and determine the conditions which in view
of current social and political situation, should be established
for the successful execution of the Plan.
(f) Appraise from time to time the progress achieved in the
execution of each stage of the Plan and recommend
adjustment of policies and measures that such appraisal may
show to be necessary.

33
(g) Public Co-operation in National Development.
(h) Specific programmes for area development notified from
time to time.
(i) Perspective Planning.
(j) Institute of Applied Manpower Research.
(k) Unique Identification Authority of India.
(l) Policy, planning and implementation of Unique Identification
No. (UID) for residents in India and all selected matters.
 (m) All matters relating to National Rainfed Area Authority
(NRAA).
 (n) Skill Development.
In order to assess its relevance and redefining its role, as a first
step extensive discussions have been held with a wide range of
stakeholders, both internally and externally, and it has been recognized
that Planning Commission must align itself with current and future
requirements for wider engagements to remain relevant to the
development agenda of the nation.
In 2009, a Committee was set up, under Dr. Rangarajan to look
into the efficient management of public expenditure (High Level
Expert Committee on Efficient Management of Public Expenditure). In
its Report the Committee recommended, amongst other things, that
Planning Commission must not restrict itself to the allocation and
management of Plan funds alone. It must play a much broader role in
guiding the use of overall resources of the economy, without distinction
between Plan and Non-Plan and that the budget management should
be done by the Finance Ministry. The major recommendations of the
Dr. Rangarajan Committee with respect to the ’Role of Planning
Commission’ are as follows :—
(1) Estimating the overall resources for the Five year Plan:
(a) Prepare projections of budgetary resources of Centre and
States based on the projections of tax, non-tax and other
receipts within an acceptable fiscal deficit target in
consultation with Ministry of Finance, Central Ministries and
States. This primarily helps prepare projected total budgetary
resources for five years of the plan.
(b) Prepare projections of IEBRs of PSEs, and local bodies, in
consultation with Ministry of Finance, Central Ministries and
States.

34
(2) Projecting allocation of resources across different Sectors/Services
during the Five Year Plan:
(a) Set up assumptions/rules in consultation with MoF for
Central Ministries to enable them to project total resources
required for different Sectors/Services/Ministries on
expenditure of committed and non-committed nature at
different service levels over the period of the FYP .
(b) Define rules/guidelines for transfer of resources to States.
(c) Prepare projections of resources to be allocated to different
Sectors/Services/Ministries and to States over the FYP
period consistent with approved priorities of the FYP .
(d) Prepare projections of budgetary expenditure component of
the plan for the programmes in Sectors/Ministries covered
under the present functional categories of (Social Services
and Economic Services). The grants to be provided to the
State or other sub-national Governments under these
functional heads should also be included in these projections.
(e) On approval of the size and inter-sectoral allocation of
resources for the FYP , assist MoF in preparing needful
mapping documents for budgetary and other components
function-wise, programme-wise and Ministry-wise.
(3) Implementation of the Plan:
(a) Planning Commission may scrutinize the budget allocations
proposed by the MoF during the annual budgeting exercise.
Within the resources allocated to each Ministry/Department,
there may be annual and rolling estimates of the resources
committed on the ongoing services, schemes and
programmes and the likely resources for taking up new
programmes. Planning Commission should also undertake
outcome/output linked review of programmes of the
Ministries/Departments.
(b) The inter-sectoral allocations of resources for functions/
programmes/Ministries as approved in the overall plan
framework may need to be broadly adhered to while
working out budget ceilings for different Sectors/Ministries.
(c) As regards State Plans, Planning Commission, in consultation
with Central Ministries, needs to indicate to States well in
advance the likely resources to be made available to States
for different programmes to enable States to prepare their

35
respective budgets. With the removal of Plan and Non-Plan
distinction, there may not be any need for approval of State
Plans as per the current practice. States may provide
information about the budget/plan function-wise to Planning
Commission/MoF to enable consolidated information to be
prepared and available in public domain. Planning
Commission may hold strategy/review meetings with States
in an appropriate format.
(d) Planning Commission may conduct evaluation of
programmes either itself or through other institutions/
mechanisms.
The recommendations of the Committee’s Report (received in 2011)
are being processed for further approvals.
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO)
Yet another initiative is the creation of an Independent Evaluation
Office (IEO). This has been approved by the Cabinet. The IEO is an
adjunct to the Planning Commission and can supplement the Planning
Commission. It will independently and ex-post, evaluate the
performance of programmes including those devised by the Planning
Commission. It cannot be a substitute for the reform of the Planning
Commission. The following steps were taken for establishment of
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) as given below:
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) is being set up and consequent
to the approval accorded by the Union Cabinet, following steps have
been taken for establishment of Independent Evaluation Office (IEO):
The appointment to the post of Director General, IEO has been
finalized.
The agenda for change in Planning Commission’s role and
organization is pro-actively being pursued and is effectively being led
by fresh initiatives in bringing about changes in the process of planning,
communicating with external stakeholders through an active
engagement and implementing the agenda spelt out in the 12th Five
Year Plan. It is felt that there is not only an awareness for the need
for change in the role of Planning Commission, but also an effective
ownership of the agenda for change by the Commission and its
Members. It is expected that the 12th Five Year Plan will reflect in
adequate measure these changes. In view of this, it is felt that setting
up another Expert group may not be required at this stage.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]

36
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
–NIL–

37
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)
The committee are unable to understand as to how the Government
is still continuing with the implementation of Aadhaar without the
legislative approval and have allocated Rs. 1758 crore for the Scheme
for the year 2012-13. The Committee in their 42nd Report on the
‘National Identification Authority of India Bill 2010’ has inter-alia given
their observations on number of issues and has conveyed their
unacceptability of the National Identification Authority of India Bill,
2012 in its present form and urged the Government to reconsider and
review the UID Scheme and also the proposals contained in the Bill
with all its ramifications and bring forth a fresh legislation before
Parliament. The committee, therefore, urge the Government to urgently
address the issue identified/pointed out by the Committee in their
report.
Reply of the Government
1. The UID project has been envisioned to provide a unique
identity to every resident in India which will be the foundation for
better delivery of public services and targeted subsidies. The project
has a bias towards the developmental agenda for promoting more
inclusive growth. The purpose of the UID project is to promote
inclusion and benefit marginalized sections of society who have no
formal proof of identity vis-à-vis the State and hence experience
difficulties in accessing various welfare schemes that are implemented
by the Government of India and State Governments. The key role of
the UID number is that of an enabler—a number that helps
governments design better welfare programs, enables residents to access
resources and services more easily wherever they live, and allows
agencies and programs—such as the NREGA, PDS, SSA—to deliver
benefits and services effectively and transparently. The number will,
thus, be an identity infrastructure and the foundation over which
multiple services and applications can be built for the resident. The
consent of the individual is obtained before enrolment into the UID
system.

38
2. UIDAI has set up a security framework and implemented
security policies and procedures in line with the Government policies
and circulars. The strategic control of the data lies with the UIDAI
and the Data Centre operations are headed by officers of the rank of
Joint Secretary and Director. The process followed by the UIDAI for
enrolments is clearly defined. Verification of data is done through three
modes- document based verification, through introducers and through
the NPR process of public scrutiny. The processes at the time of
enrolment include capturing the operator biometrics (which is verified
at backend at the time of processing data for generation of aadhaar).
In case of enrolments through the introducer based system (which is
followed in case of persons with no documents), the ‘introducers’ are
authorized by the registrars and may include local Government officials
and elected representatives. These enrolments through introducers,
while enabling enrolments for those who do not have any documents,
do not compromise the robustness of the process. The process of
introduction has been designed to be technologically non-repudiable,
as the introducer has to have his/her own Aadhaar number and he/
she puts up his/her electronic thumb impression on the enrolment
record of the person being introduced.
3. The enrolment is being done under the control and supervision
of Registrars,  including Registrar General of India, who is one of the
Registrars of the UIDAI, by hiring enrolment agencies (who are private
agencies). Data digitization and biometric enrolment for RGI are also
being carried out by private agencies.
4. The Authority has also addressed concerns on misuse of
Aadhaar information for possible profiling and tracking of
individuals. Profiling of individuals is not possible in the UIDAI
system, as in the definition of demographic information in the Bill, it
has been clearly stated that the information to be collected will not
include any profiling information, such as on race, religion, caste, tribe,
ethnicity, language, income or health. Tracking and surveillance is also
not supported in the UID system.
5. UIDAI accepts documents for those who have some kind of
documents which can work as proof of identity and proof of address.
For those who have no documents (there are a large number of persons
in India who fall in this category) the concept of ‘introducers’ has
been introduced. These ‘introducers’ are authorized by the registrars
and may include local Government officials and elected representatives.
Enrolments through introducers, while enabling enrolments for those
who do not have any documents, do not compromise the robustness
of the process. The process of introduction has been designed to be
technologically non-repudiable as the introducer has to have his/her
own Aadhaar number and he/she also has to put his/her electronic

39
thumb impression on the enrolment record of the person being
introduced. The third method is the NPR process. There will be only
one ID number for one person in the Aadhaar system. Hence, there is
an incentive for a resident to give correct information at the enrolment
stage itself.
6. As per the Government’s latest decision, UIDAI would, through
its multiple Registrars, enroll 60 crore people in States/UTs where
UIDAI has already commenced work.  In the remaining States, NPR
will collect the biometric data. In the event of any discrepancy between
the NPR and UIDAI database, NPR data will prevail. Once the UIDAI
programme is fully rolled out and Aadhaar numbers are issued to all
residents, it would only be made a necessary condition for availing
public benefits and services. The purpose of Aadhaar is not to identify
beneficiaries under different programmes. This would continue to be
the responsibility of States/Line Ministries of the Government. Aadhaar
would eliminate the possibility of a person getting double benefits
under the same programme or getting benefit even if he is not entitled.
This in itself is likely to save substantial public resources.
7. In respect of Finance Minister’s Budget announcement
regarding roll out of Aadhaar enabled payments in at least 50 selected
districts within six months, UIDAI is pursuing the matter with a clear
plan of action. Department of Financial Services will draw up a
roadmap for convergence of their financial inclusion initiative with
Aadhaar so as to ensure its utility to the Aadhaar enabled payment
system for disbursement of social security benefits. They will also
examine ways to facilitate opening of bank accounts for all individual
Aadhaar holders.
Legal Issues: M/o Law and Justice as well as the Attorney General
of India have opined that action to enroll residents by UIDAI in terms
of the executive notification issued on 28.1.2009 is valid. However, the
Government is pursuing the proposal for enacting legislation as it is
felt that a regulatory structure supported by a legal framework would
assist in more effective functioning of the UID Authority . Particularly,
any violations of security and privacy of UID data on the part of any
of the stakeholders that may arise in the future, could be dealt with
in a more rigorous and firm manner under a defined legal mechanism
which would be possible by enacting the proposed NIDAI Bill.
 [Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/8/2012-Parl., dated 27.9.2012]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 17 of the Chapter-I)

40
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–NIL–
   N EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
04 December, 2012 Chairman,
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

41
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th November, 2012 from
1530 hrs. to 1730 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri Rahul Gandhi
4. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
7. Shri Prem Das Rai
8. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
9. Shri Thakur Anurag Singh
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
11. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Piyush Goyal
13. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
14. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi — Under Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty First Report

42
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment);
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty Second Report (15th
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty Third Report (15th
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Planning;
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty Fourth Report (15th
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty Fifth Report (15th
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at Sl. No. (iv) without
any modification and those at Sl. Nos. (i), (ii), (iii) and (v) with
modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present
all the Reports to Parliament in the current session.
The Committee adjourned at 1730 hours.

43
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY  THIRD
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) OF THE
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 12
(ii) Recommendations/observations which 11 91.66
have been accepted by the Government:
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the Nil 0.00
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 1 8.34
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 9)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect Nil 0.00
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited: