1
17
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-10)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 (Department of Revenue)
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)]
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/ Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
 (Department of Revenue)
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Second Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  19  April, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/ Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................……….…………(iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................……………………...... (v)
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................………….....
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................………………..
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies .........................................………….
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ................................…………......
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ........................................................................……….
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
15  April, 2010 ......................................................…………….......
APPENDIX
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the
Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the Ministry of  Finance (Department of Revenue)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman
MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav
21.   Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara*
RAJYA SABHA
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh    -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar   -  Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan -  Deputy Secretary
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5
INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorised by the Committee, present this Seventeenth Report on action taken
by Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report of the
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
 2. The Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 December, 2009.  Replies indicating action
taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the
Government on 31 December , 2009.
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 15 April, 2010.
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee is
given in the Appendix.
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
New Delhi;                  DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15 April, 2010                                         Chairman,
 25 Chaitra 1932 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6
CHAPTER – I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Second
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the Ministry
of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) which was presented to Lok Sabha / Laid in
Rajya Sabha on 2nd December, 2009.
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 21 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have
been analyzed and categorized as follows:
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,7,8,10,11,13,14,16,18,19,20 and
21
(Chapter II)        (Total 16)
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. 9&12
(Chapter III)        (Total 2)
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 15&17
(Chapter IV)        (Total 2)
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by
the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 6
(Chapter V)       (Total 1)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations
contained in Chapter I and Chapter V may be furnished to them expeditiously.
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
From the scrutiny of Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of
Finance (Deptt. of Revenue), the Committee find that in response to a
number of recommendations, the Ministry have stated that they have noted
the Committee’s recommendations for compliance.  The Committee
however believe that the actual implementation of these recommendations,
would depend on the follow-up action to be initiated by the Ministry and
their field formations and its effective monitoring.  The Committee would
therefore expect that the requisite follow-up action in respect of all these
recommendations be completed in a time-bound manner.  The Committee
would like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard within a period
of one month.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8
Implementation of VAT Scheme
(Recommendation Para No. 2)
While noticing the trend of substantial under-utilisation of funds allocated
under the Head ‘Implementation of VAT Scheme- Other Charges’, the Committee
had recommended that the Ministry should undertake a comprehensive analysis
of the trend of expenditure incurred under this Head during the past three years
with a view to rectifying and improving upon the existing system of assessing
requirement of funds and its correlation with its deployment and utilization.
  The Govt. in their action taken reply have stated as follows :
“A system for closer monitoring of project activities has recently been put
up in place.  The first review under the new monitoring system of the
project was made in Guwahati in November, 2009.  The second and much
more detailed review off the project activities under the new monitoring
system is planned in January, 2010.
The Committee note that in pursuance of the Committee’s
recommendation, the Ministry has put in place a system for closer
monitoring of project activities.  The first review in this regard has been
made by the Ministry in November, 2009 and second was planned in
January,2010.  The reply is however, silent about the outcome of such
reviews.  Since under-utilisation of budgeted funds is a recurrent feature
under this head, the Committee, expect the Ministry to furnish outcome of
both the reviews undertaken in November 2009 and January 2010 and the
steps taken thereon by the Ministry so as to avoid under-utilisation of
budgeted amount under this head in future.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9
     Tax Arrears and recovery
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
While noticing that no case-wise data on the tax arrears and recovery
thereof has been centrally maintained by the Deptt., the Committee had
recommended that in keeping with principles of ‘good governance’ information
should be available easily almost on ‘Push of a button.’  The Committee had also
emphasized that the Deptt. of revenue and Central Board of  Direct Taxes should
take immediate steps to put in place a Management Information System (MIS)
within three months for collecting and retrieving data concerning appeals,
pendency, disposal, recovery etc.  They should also analyse and segregate this
into different categories, depending on the issue / problem involved so that
respective cases can be pursued and followed up for early results.
 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows :
“The appellate procedure is a dynamic and ever changing field with new
issues being thrown up almost on a daily basis. A new mechanism of
Dispute Resolution Panel has been inserted by Finance (No.2) Act 2009
w.r.e.f.1-4.09. In an ideal situation if all the data by all the officers are
entered then information on all the cases will be available on the touch of
a button but as has been mentioned earlier due to acute manpower
shortage especially at the level of Stenographers, and huge workload, all
the data cannot be entered.  With the cadre review which is under
consideration, the situation will improve.
The recommendations of the Committee on taking immediate steps to put
in place a Management Information System (MIS) has been noted and is
under consideration. However it will not be possible within three months
as it is largely dependent on the exercise of cadre review, availability of
more manpower and changes in the software, business processes etc.
Therefore it is requested that time till April 2011 may be given for the
same.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10
 The Ministry have informed that installation of a Management
Information System (MIS), as suggested by the Committee, is currently
under consideration and the same will be operationalised by April, 2011.
The Committee would like to be kept apprised about the progress in the
matter.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

11
Refund cases and interest paid on refunds
(Recommendation Para No. 14)
The Committee upon noticing the delay in income tax refunds had desired
the Income Tax Deptt. to pay special attention to prompt settlement of refund
claims, which has been an area causing needless hardship to common
assesses.
In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows :
“The Department has put in place a scheme referred to as ‘Refund Banker
Scheme’ for bulk handling of refunds by the designated banker SBI.  It
deals with the Refund Banker which picks up the refunds from
Assessment information System (AST) database after the processing of
I.T. return. After the refunds are picked up, these are dispatched through
paper mode in T+3days & through ECS mode in T+1day. Refund Banker
facility  has been extended in phases and is now  available at 15 stations
(Bangalore, Chennai, Patna, Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Allahabad,
Ahmedabad, Bhubneshwar, Kochi, Trivendrum, Pune, Hyderabad,
Chandigarh, Kanpur)  for non-corporate assesses.. The Refund Banker
Scheme though has limited coverage but the scheme has handled close
to 18.6 % of total refunds issued in FY 2008-09.”
 The Committee note that the Government have put in place a
‘‘Refund Banker Scheme’ for bulk handling of refunds which is now
available at 15 stations for non-corporate assesses.  However, as the
coverage of the scheme is stated to be only about 18.6% of total refunds
issued in (2008-09), the Committee would expect the Ministry to extend the
scope of the Scheme to all such stations, where delays beyond four
months in issue of refunds is a regular feature.  The Committee would like
to be apprised of the efficacy of this scheme in ensuring prompt receipt of
refunds.
(Recommendation Para No. 15)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

12
Further, with regard to the revenue loss occurring due to avoidable
payment of interest on refunds, the Committee had recommended that the
culpability of the Income Tax Officials should be fixed unhesistatingly in the
matter.
 In their action taken reply, the Ministry inter-alia submitted as follows :
“Processing of returns and issuance of refund (if due) is a continuous
process in the Income Tax Department.  According to the Income Tax Act
1961, the returns can be processed till one year from the end of the
financial year in which the returns are made.  Therefore, the returns
received during the financial year 2008-09 can be processed upto March
2010.  As per the Income Tax Act, the due date u/s 139(1) for filing of
returns for individuals is 31 st July of the Assessment year & for corporates
and any other person whose accounts are required to be audited is 30 th
September of the Assessment year.
Assessee is entitled to refund from the 1 st day of April of the Assessment
year to the date on which refund is granted.  Whenever the return is filed,
Assessing officer is bound to take some time to process it and for returns
filed during the year interest from 1 st April automatically follows, till the
date of processing.
Hence, payment of interest on refunds is inbuilt in the statutory provision
of the Act and cannot be avoided.  Assessing officer is bound to make
payment of interest on refund as per statutory provisions of the Act.
However, the shortage of manpower has affected the expeditious
processing of returns.”
The Committee regret to point out that the Action Taken reply is
completely silent about the issue of fixing culpability of the Income Tax
Officials for the revenue loss occurring due to avoidable payment of
interest on refunds.  Due to inordinate delays in issuing refunds, the
assessee suffers on two counts, first when there is incorrect assessment
and again when refunds due to him are delayed for no fault of his.  The
culpability of the tax officials as also the misery of the tax payers thus gets
compounded whenever refunds get delayed.  The Ministry’s reply that the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13
payment of interest on refunds is inbuilt in the statutory provision and thus
cannot be avoided is a specious argument, which only seeks to skirt the
crux of the issue raised by the Committee with regard to huge outgo of
interest and revenue loss due to avoidable delays in issuing refunds. The
Committee while deprecating the Ministry on this count, reiterate that
responsibility should be fixed on the negligent officials for their laxity in
issuing refunds causing loss of revenue to government on the one hand
and hardship to tax-payer on the other.  In this context, the Committee
would also like to be apprised about the number of cases of refunds issued
beyond the stipulated period and the quantum of interest involved therein
since January 2010.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

14
Productivity per assessing officer
(Recommendation Para No. 17)
 While observing that disposal of Income Tax Scrutiny assessment cases
was not commensurate with the increasing workload, the Committee had
expected the Income Tax Deptt. to arrest this trend, if necessary, by increasing
the number of Assessing officers, while also simultaneously enhancing the
disposal target for each officer to make them more productive.
 “The Ministry in their Action taken reply have stated that the selection of
cases for scrutiny and the assessment of the scrutiny cases are ongoing
processes. Even as some scrutiny cases are disposed of, others are picked up
as per the guidelines of the Computer Assisted Scrutiny System(CASS) and
manual selection. Therefore, there is always some pendency of scrutiny cases.
In order to tackle the issue of deployment of more manpower, a number of
steps have been taken.
(i) The Cadre review of the Indian Revenue Service has been initiated.”
 They have further informed that for enhancing the Scrutiny disposal, the
infrastructure at the assessing officer / field formation level has been recently
augmented by way of Comprehensive Computerization and networking of the
offices with a Centralised TAXNET Project.
The reply of the Government is silent on Committee’s specific
recommendation on enhancing the disposal target for each officer to make
them more productive.  The Government have, however, not furnished the
targets for disposal of scrutiny cases by each Assessing Officer.  The
Committee believe that productivity per assessing officer can be more
accurately measured only in terms of scrutiny assessments completed by
an assessing officer in a year.  The Committee, therefore, while reiterating
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

15
their earlier recommendation, desire that the Ministry should not hesitate to
set targets for scrutiny assessments, as it will help increase productivity of
the income tax department.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16
CHAPTER – II
Recommendations / Observations that have been accepted by the
Government
Recommendation No. 1
Implementation of VAT Scheme
1. The Committee are constrained to observe that there had always been
substantial under-utilization of funds allocated under the Head ‘Implementation of
VAT Scheme – Other Charges’ meant for state Value Added Tax (VAT) related
support activities undertaken by the Department of Revenue.  The reasons for
less utilization of funds relate mainly to less expenditure on training and
maintenance during 2005-06, partial release of consultancy charges to National
Institute for Smart Government (NISG) and delays in development of inter-
operatability module and in procurement of additional hardware in 2006-07 and
delay in development of additional application software in 2007-08.  The
Committee are at a loss to understand as to why there was delay in development
of inter-operatability module, procurement of additional hardware and in
development of additional application software, when huge allocations were
made at BE stage, which were revised upwards at the RE stage for the past two
years, but were substantially underutilized to the extent of Rs. 1.70 crore in 2007-
08 and Rs. 1.42 crore in 2008-09.   The Ministry’s reply in this regard does not
satisfactorily explain the persistent shortfall in utilization.  The reasons given by
them are not commensurate with the extent of under-utilisation.
Reply of the Government
 The Department would take all steps to ensure that the divisions act in
time to complete all formalities and spend the provisions given to them to avoid
unnecessary savings.
 (OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31 st December, 2009)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

17
Recommendation No. 2
 The Committee are also not inclined to accept the view point of the
Ministry that during 2007-08 and 2008-09, budgetary allocations were revised
upwards to meet the enhanced requirements indicated by the project
implementing agency and participant States towards Annual Maintenance
Charges (AMC), upgradation of application software and cost of new
components under North Eastern Value Added Tax  (NEVAT) computerization
project.  In view of the fact that the amount allocated has persistently remained
underutilized in the past several years, the Committee, while strongly
disapproving the Ministry’s half-hearted approach in implementing the scheme,
recommend that the Ministry should at least now undertake a comprehensive
analysis of the trend of expenditure incurred under this Head during the past
three years with a view to rectifying and improving upon the existing system of
assessing requirement of funds and its correlation with its deployment and
utilization.
Reply of the Government
 The recommendation of the Committee regarding undertaking a
comprehensive analysis of trend of expenditure incurred under this Head during
the past three years, with a view to rectifying and amending the existing system
of assessing requirement of funds has been accepted in letter and spirit by the
Department.  A system for closer monitoring of project activities has recently
been put up in place.  The first review under the new monitoring system of the
project was made in Guwahati in November, 2009.  The second and much more
detailed review of the project activities under the new monitoring system is
planned in January, 2010.  The Department assures the Committee that all
efforts would be made to ensure that correct assessment of the requirement of
funds is made so that there is no under-utilization of the budgeted amount.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

18
Recommendation No. 3 (i)
Other Fiscal Services – Regulation of Foreign Exchange
The Committee’s examination of this Head has revealed that out of the
Revised Estimate of Rs.24.66 crore and 37.74 crore during the years 2007-08
and 2008-09 respectively, the Ministry spent Rs.19.76 crore and Rs.28.46 crore
only, thus leaving unspent provisions during these years.  The reasons for these
unspent provisions are stated to be non-withdrawal of fund in certain sensitive
sectors and non-utilisation of amount under the object Head ‘Information
Technology’, as approvals of the competent authority could not be obtained.
Funds also remained unutilized due to delay in receiving the actual requirement
of funds from the Zonal/Sub Zonal offices.  The representative of the Ministry
admitted during evidence that the reasons of unspent provisions were different
for different zones.  In the opinion of the Committee, the recurrent unspent
provisions under this Head could have been avoided, if the Ministry had
effectively taken up the matter with the heads of the Zonal/Sub-Zonal offices for
timely finalisation of their requirements.  Such a trend seems to clearly suggest
that the headquarter organisation is not monitoring the activities at the field level.
The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to have the entire requirement
of funds realistically assessed after collecting timely all the information of their
demand from the Zonal/Sub-Zonal Offices.
Reply of the Government
 The Committee’s recommendations have been noted for compliance by
the Enforcement Directorate, which will be more cautious and realistic in its
approach to framing budget proposals.  It has been decided to have a time frame
for all Zonal and Sub-Zonal offices of the Directorate to furnish details on the
amount spent during the previous year, projects in hand and projects likely to be
taken up during the next fiscal year.  These details shall be subjected to in-depth
study at the Headquarters for projecting budget linked to expenditure done and
expected to be incurred.  While demanding Budget under any Head, amount
spent during the previous years, projects in hand and projects likely to be taken
up during the next fiscal year will be taken into consideration.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

19
Recommendation No. 3 (ii)
In this context, the Committee believe that non-drawal of funds not only
reflects poorly on the functioning of the Enforcement Directorate under the
Ministry but also eventually impacts on revenue collection due to inefficient
collection of information.  In this connection, the Committee would like to be
apprised about the correlation between revenue generated and the amount spent
on gathering information etc.
Reply of the Government
 It is submitted that the Enforcement Directorate is not a revenue
generating agency.  It is a law enforcement agency.  Hence, no correlation can
be established between revenue generated and the amount spent on generating
the information.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 4
Setting up of Tax Information Exchange System (TINXSYS)
 The examination of this Head has revealed that there was persistent
substantial under-utilisation of sanctioned provisions during the last four years.
The reasons adduced by the Ministry for such large scale unspent provisions are,
non-consideration of proposal for expanding the scope of Tax Information
Exchange System (TINXSYS) through dematerialisation of Central Sales Tax
(CST) forms and additional time taken in getting the project for computerization
of Value Added Tax (VAT) administrations of Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and
Kashmir sanctioned.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that had the Ministry
made coordinated efforts with the State Governments in sanctioning the projects
for computerization of VAT, the position of utilization of funds would have
definitely improved.  What appears all the more surprising is that the Ministry
have been seeking upward budgetary allocations under this Head year after
year, despite these allocations having remained unspent in the preceding years.
The Committee cannot but express their anguish over the lackadaisical approach
of the Ministry as the funds, idly parked year after year, could have been gainfully
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20
utilized for other fund-starved projects.  The Committee would like to be apprised
of the corrective action taken in the matter by the Ministry.  The Committee
further hope that hindrances in computerization/networking will be ironed out
early for smooth transition to the proposed Goods and Services Tax (GST)
regime.
Reply of the Government
 The Project of computerization of VAT Administrations of Himachal
Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir has been sanctioned by the Department in July
2009.  Out of the total Central share of Rs.25.33 crore, an amount of Rs.9.79
crore is proposed to be released during the current financial year.  With the
sanction of this project, it is expected that the funds budgeted under this Head
will be fully utilized as planned.  The Department assures the Committee that
regular review of the project activities would be done to ensure that project
activities are implemented as per the scheduled envisaged.  The Department is
making efforts to iron-out the problems related to computerization of VAT
administrations and networking.  It has now been agreed that the inter-State
supplies in the GST regime will be handled through IGST model, wherein a
centralized agency will act as a clearing house to settle accounts with the States
on a periodic basis.  All inter-State sellers and purchasers under this model,
would be required to file returns electronically.  The possibility of using the
system developed under TINXSYS for meeting the requirement of IT
infrastructure for the purpose is being examined.  A decision in this regard would
be taken by the Department as soon as this feasibility analysis is completed.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

21
Recommendation No. 5
Grants to States for VAT related expenditure
The Committee are perturbed to find that despite the budgetary provisions
of Rs. 145 crore obtained during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09, not a rupee
was spent under this head.  Regardless, there was substantial upward revision of
BE to Rs. 418.50 crore  during the year 2009-10, which was more than eight
times of the previous year’s BE.  The Ministry have not adduced the reasons for
not utilizing the funds allocated under this important scheme for two years
consecutively. It is thus evident that budgetary requirements are being projected
by the Ministry more on the basis of theoretical anticipation rather than on the
trend of expenditure and actual requirement.  The Ministry’s reply indicates that
they are not at all sure about incurring this expenditure even this year.
Considering their unsatisfactory track record, it is quite possible that the Ministry
may not be able to utilize the fund this year as well, the Committee get an
impression that the Ministry is not very serious about the activities to be
undertaken under this Head.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should
regularly monitor the utilisation of this Head at higher levels, particularly so, as it
relates to capacity building of state machinery for an integrated tax regime.
Reply of the Government
 The funds budgeted under this Head are primarily to be used for
computerization of commercial taxes administrations of the State Governments.
The Department is attaching very high priority to the sanction of Mission Mode
Project for Computerization of Commercial Tax Administrations.  The proposal,
having an overall cost of Rs.1133 crore, has been appraised by the Committee on
Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE), headed by the Secretary (Expenditure) in
September 2009.  The CNE, after proper appraisal, has recommended the project
for sanction.  The proposal to obtain the approval of the Cabinet has almost been
finalized and is likely to be placed before the Cabinet for consideration and
approval shortly.  An Empowered Committee headed by Revenue Secretary will be
set up under the project to consider and sanction individual State projects.  The
meetings of the Empowered Committee will be organized as soon as the approval
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

22
of the Cabinet on the project proposal is obtained.  To ensure that the State project
reports are ready in all respect for sanction before the first meeting of this
Empowered Committee is held, it has been decided to organize regional level
workshops in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata.  The Workshops for Northern
States in Delhi and for Eastern and North-Eastern States at Kolkata have already
been organized in December 2009.  The retro-funding of the expenditure incurred
by the States from 1.4.2007 onwards on project activities is being envisaged under
the project.  Since States have already incurred substantial amount of funds from
1.4.2007 on computerization of their commercial taxes administration, they will be
required to be provided financial assistance early.  However, as the proposal is yet
to be approved by the Cabinet, the budget allocation made under this Head has
been reduced from Rs.418.50crore to Rs.149crore at the RE stage 2009-10.
 The approval for upgradation of the Centre for Taxation Studies, Kerala
into Gulati Institute of Finance & Taxation (GIFT) has also been approved.
However, the first instalment of Central share of assistance could not be released
to the Institute as the land required for construction of the new building could not
be taken over due to some legal hurdles.  It has now been confirmed on 10 th
December that the land required for construction of new building has been taken
over by the Institute.  This will enable the start of activities envisaged under this
project.  It is expected that the funds budgeted for the purpose will be fully
utilized.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 7
 It is a matter of anguish for the Committee that substantial variations have
been occurring between the sanctioned provisions and the actual expenditure
incurred by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) under several
heads of the Grants operated by them during the last four years or so.
Obviously, these instances betray absence of a sound budgetary mechanism for
assessing the actual requirements of funds and the casual and routine manner in
which the Budget Estimates are being prepared by the Ministry.  The Secretary,
Department of Revenue candidly stated during evidence that although they are
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

23
trying to improve the systems, there is no possibility of a positive change in the
near future.  The Committee, while accepting that systemic improvements may
take time, urge the Ministry to accord priority to this exercise.  The Committee
believe that  financial indiscipline will not  be shed, unless the Ministry impress
upon their budget controlling authorities to undertake the task of budget
preparation with utmost seriousness, care and prudence, after taking into
consideration factors like past trends of expenditure, status of
formulation/implementation of various schemes/projects for which funds are
sought etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
address this issue seriously and devise a fool proof mechanism to overcome the
deficiencies in their existing system of assessing the requirement of funds.  The
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise steps taken by the Ministry in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
 It is stated that the budget in respect of all the three Grants of Department
of Revenue (Grant No.41 – Department of Revenue, Grant No.42 – Direct Taxes
and Grant No.43 – Indirect Taxes) is prepared at the Headquarters after
collecting and collating information from all the budgetary authorities spread over
the country.  While calling the Budget proposals from the budgetary authorities, it
is stressed upon them that due care should be taken by them to project exact
requirement of funds depending upon the trend of expenditure in the past. These
authorities prepare their estimates for the ensuing year in the month of
September i.e. around seven months in advance of the actual occurrence of
expenditure.  At this stage, actual expenditure of only five months of the current
financial year is available with them.  While due care is taken to assess the
forthcoming liabilities, estimation particularly under Revenue Section is kept on
the lower side with a view to restrict the Government expenditure to the barest
minimum, keeping in view the economy instructions of the Department of
Expenditure.  The Department estimates the expenditure requirement of the next
year’s budget and the current year’s Revised Estimates based on the realistic
trend of expenditure.  However, it depends upon various factors like uncertainty
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

24
of events likely to take place, meeting out the norms and procedural
requirements etc.
  At present, the progress of implementation of various programmes and
expenditure is reviewed every month and submitted to the Revenue Secretary.  A
quarterly Report in this regard is also submitted to the Secretary (Expenditure).
The deficiencies noticed during the review are noted and communicated to the
implementing agencies for taking corrective action.  The actual requirement of
funds under various programmes is also reviewed at the Final Requirement
stage and re-appropriation of funds within the grant, as permissible under the
rules, is made and excess funds surrendered before 31 st March of the financial
year.
 Instructions are also issued to all the budgetary authorities from time to
time relating to the various formalities and instructions to be kept in view while
formulating the budget proposals.  However, as recommended by the
Committee, all the Budgetary Authorities under the three Grants of the
Department are again being instructed that while preparing the budget proposals,
utmost seriousness, care and prudence must be taken and the Budget proposals
should be prepared after taking into consideration factors like past trends of
expenditure, status of formulation/ implementation of various schemes/projects
for which funds are sought etc.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
OTHER ISSUES RELATING TO FUNCTIONING OF DEPARTMENT
Recommendation No. 8
Unaccounted Money
 Parallel economy and generation and sustenance of unaccounted
money/wealth has been a bane afflicting this country for long.  However, what is
most damaging about this phenomenon is its innate relationship with tax evasion
as also lax tax enforcement.   The disquieting fact that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) have no assessment available with them on the extent
of unaccounted income/wealth, can only compound the problem further.  They
have instead tried to turn away from their responsibility by pleading that since
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

25
most of the transactions generating black money are unrecorded, the credibility
of any estimate of black money is doubtful.    When pressed on the issue, they
cited a 1999 study by Shri Arun Kumar, Professor of JNU in his book ‘Black
Economy in India’ wherein the quantum of black money has been estimated as
Rs.4,87,185 crores i.e., 40% of the GDP.  The Department have further
maintained that keeping in view the nature of Indian economy and also the fact
that a large number of transactions are entered in cash, it is not possible to arrive
at the correct assessment of the quantum of unaccounted money in this country.
Neither is there any proposal under consideration of the Ministry for getting any
fresh study conducted on the quantum of unaccounted money in the country.
Such an indifferent response of the Ministry is not acceptable to the Committee.
It has become imperative that the Ministry conducts a thorough
assessment/survey on unaccounted income/wealth, particularly bringing out the
nature of activities engendering money laundering both inside and outside the
country with its ramifications on national security.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
 The recommendations of the Standing Committee is under consideration
of the Department of Revenue.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 10
As regards the quantum of illegal money of Indian citizens outside the
country in secret bank accounts, the Ministry have informed that there is no
credible information regarding the countries/transactions where the illegal money
is kept in bank accounts.  They have sought to assure the Committee that once
new Agreements for Exchange of Information and Assistance in collection of
Taxes are brought into force and the existing tax treaties are renegotiated, it
would be possible to obtain information on overseas bank accounts in specific
cases.  The Committee would expect the Government to remain proactive on this
front and ensure concerted action for detection of undisclosed/unaccounted
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

26
money stashed away in foreign shores.  Apart from vigorous diplomatic pressure,
the Government should finalise agreements for information and cooperation with
the concerned countries at the earliest.  The Committee would like to be kept
apprised of the concrete steps initiated towards this end.
In the context of the top 25 tax defaulters and the action initiated against
them, when the Committee specifically desired to know as to how huge tax dues
were pending against certain assesees who had little assets to pay from,
Revenue Secretary deposed that these transactions actually originated from
outside the country.  The Committee would expect the Department of Revenue to
pursue vigorously such cases involving unaccounted funds laundered abroad
and apprise the Committee of the outcome thereof
 In this connection, the Committee would also like to point out that all the
agencies under the Department of Revenue viz., Income Tax, Central Excise,
Customs, Service Tax as also the State Sales Tax Department should coordinate
with each other and share data/intelligence about suspicious transactions.
Reply of the Government
CBDT & CBEC
The Government is taking all necessary steps for early finalization of agreements
for information and cooperation with the concerned countries. Concrete actions
taken by the Finance Ministry for detection of undisclosed/unaccounted money
stashed away in foreign shores is as given below:-
(1) Amendment to the Income-tax Act, 1961 : Government has substituted
section 90 of the Income-tax Act 1961 through Finance (No.2) Act, 2009
with a new formulation which will enable the Central Government to enter
into tax agreements with non-sovereign jurisdictions. Since many of the
offshore centers (generally perceived as tax havens) are non-sovereign
jurisdictions, this provision will enable Government of India to enter into
Agreement for the Exchange of Information and Assistance in Collection
of Taxes (AEI&ACT) with these jurisdictions.
(2) Steps taken to initiate negotiations for entering into Agreements for the
Exchange of Information and Assistance in Collection of Taxes
(AEI&ACT): Department of Revenue has written to Ministry of External
Affairs (MEA), with respect to 19 prioritized countries/jurisdictions, for
taking up the matter with these countries/jurisdictions for entering into
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

27
AEI&ACT with them. A copy of our draft AEI&ACT has also been
provided. Responses from some of the countries/jurisdictions have been
received and matter is further being pursued for finalization of these
agreements. Once agreements with these countries/jurisdictions are
negotiated and enter into force, India will be able to obtain information,
including bank related information in specific cases from such
countries/jurisdiction.
(3) Renegotiation of Tax Treaty with Switzerland:  Our existing tax treaty with
Switzerland does not provide for exchange of bank related information as
well as information which is required for Indian domestic purpose only.
Switzerland was approached in April, 2009 through MEA for renegotiation
of the Article concerning Exchange of Information in our existing tax treaty
so that we can have access to bank related information. Switzerland had
agreed for renegotiation of this Article as well as other articles of the
existing treaty. The first round of negotiation was held on 10 th Nov to 12 th
Nov, 2009. The matter is further pursued for early finalization of the new
treaty. Once the protocol amending tax treaty with Switzerland is notified,
India will be able to obtain bank related information in specific cases from
Switzerland.
(4) Renegotiation of remaining Tax Treaties:  Some of our other tax treaties in
force also do not specifically provide for exchange of bank related
information as well as information which is required for Indian domestic
purpose only. MEA has already been approached for renegotiation of all
such tax treaties so that we can have access to bank related information
with respect to these countries. Some of the countries have already
responded to our requests and the matter is being actively pursued with
them.
(5) India a part of Global efforts to take action against Non-Cooperative
Jurisdictions: India has been actively taking part in building global
consensus for taking action against those jurisdictions/countries who are
not transparent or co-operative in exchanging information with other
countries. In the latest initiative in this regard, Indian Finance Minister
participated in recent G 20 Finance Ministers meetings at London on 4-5
September 2009 and at St. Andrews on 7 th November, 2009. Similarly our
Prime Minister also participated in The Pittsburg Summit (Sept 24-25,
2009). India played active role in finalizing the Declarations at these
events which included an action of delivering an effective programme of
peer review, capacity building and countermeasures to tackle non-
cooperative jurisdictions that fail to meet regulatory standards, Anti-Money
Laundering/CFT and tax information exchange standards. Commitment
has been given that countries stand ready to use countermeasures
against tax havens from March 2010. India has also been elected, in
September 2009, as Vice-Chair of the Peer Review Group set up by
Global Forum which shall play an important role in reviewing various
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

28
jurisdictions in terms of compliance with international standards on
transparency and exchange of information
 The Investigation Directorates have been directed to keep a close watch
on the High Net worth Individuals (HNIs) and the agents of foreign banks, to
collect further information about their secret bank accounts opened outside the
country. The Investigation Directorates have also been directed that if any secret
foreign bank accounts is found in the course of search and seizure operations, it
should be immediately informed to the Board for further necessary action in case
of such bank accounts. It is further stated that certain information has been
received in CBDT regarding deposits in foreign bank accounts relating to Indian
nationals. Necessary action under the Direct Tax Laws has been initiated to
verify the information and bring to tax the undisclosed income / asset.
 As regards coordination amongst the various investigating agencies of
Department of Revenue, it is stated that regular meetings of nodal officers of
Investigation Directorates, Enforcement Directorate, DRI, Central Excise,
Customs, Income Tax and Sales Tax takes place under the Regional Economic
Intelligence Councils (REICs) where the intelligence and other inputs are shared
among the agencies. The REICs function under the supervision of Central
Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB).
 At the Centre, the Economic Intelligence Council (EIC) headed by the
Union Finance Minister holds regular meetings with the heads of investigating
agencies to monitor inter-alia sharing of information between various
investigating / enforcement agencies.  Working Group on Intelligence Apparatus,
headed by Revenue Secretary sets the agenda for the meeting of the EIC.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 11
Fall in collection of Corporate Tax
In a press report titled “Revenue Secretary hints at plugging tax leakage”
(The Financial Express dated 30 September, 2009), the Revenue Secretary is
reported to have stated that out of 4.50 lakh registered Corporate Bodies, only
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

29
50,000 pay taxes and that loss of revenue from various tax sops given to
Corporates is no mean amount.  Tax incentives are stated to have cost the
exchequer Rs.68,914 crore revenue in 2008-09 alone.  In this connection, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the loss of revenue arising out of (a)
non-payment of tax due to exemptions given and tax avoidance thereof (b) non-
payment of tax due to evasion, so that a clear picture emerges on the extent of
avoidance as well as evasion of tax. The Committee would also like the
Department to evaluate the extent of tax gains registered from different
categories/classes of tax payers and formulate their exemptions policy
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
 The number of companies who did not pay taxes either due to reported
losses or due to deductions available under the Income Tax Act, 1961 in F.Y.
2008-09 was 1,75,761 out of 4,10,451 as per the Revenue foregone Statement
(Table 1 of Annexure-12 to the Receipts Budget, 2009-10)*.  The tax revenue
foregone owing to exemptions and deductions under various provisions of the
Income Tax Act was projected at Rs. 68,914 crore for F.Y. 2008-09 for corporate
( Table 5 of Annexure-12 Revenue Foregone Statement)*.   The Government has
been moving toward pruning tax deductions and exemptions and also capping
them in the case of corporate through the Minimum Alternate Tax on profits of
companies so that they pay a minimum amount of tax based on the book profits
reported to their shareholders.
 As regards estimated revenue loss due to tax evasion it is stated that
detection of tax evasion is a continuous process. The Department takes several
measures for curbing tax evasion which include Search and Seizure action,
Survey action, Scrutiny proceedings, penalty and prosecution. The results of
investigations conducted in a case are utilized in the assessment proceedings to
bring to tax the undisclosed income. The findings of assessment proceedings are
subject to appeal before various Appellate Authorities and Courts. The final
amount of tax evasion in a particular case can only be quantified after conclusion
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

30
of all pending appeals, which may take considerable time. Therefore, estimating
revenue loss on the account of tax evasion in a particular year becomes difficult.
Moreover, the recommendation of the Standing Committee to conduct a thorough
assessment / survey of unaccounted income/ wealth is under consideration of
the Government.
* Part of the Budget Document
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 13
Appeals
While justifying the large number of appeals pending with the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), the Ministry have stated the reasons for
the same being the number of posts of Commissioner (Appeals) having been
reduced from 282 in financial year 2006-07 to 248 in financial year 2008-09.
They have also cited statistics to highlight that though the disposal per
Commissioner of Appeals has shown improvement of over 12.13 per cent, the
actual pendency has increased on account of filing of large number of appeals.
The Committee are particularly concerned about the huge pile-up of cases
pending for adjudication with the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), which
is the first appellate level in the Income Tax Department.  The Committee would
expect the Department to look into this matter and ensure that prompt
administrative measures are initiated to clear the backlog and expedite
adjudication of tax cases.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The Committee has remarked that it would expect the Department to look into
this matter and to ensure that prompt administrative measures are initiated to
clear the backlog.
 In this regard measures have already been taken by the Department to
effect maximum disposal of appeals.  These include -
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

31
i) Issuance of a Central Action Plan at the beginning of the financial year
laying targets for disposal of appeals which is to be duly complied with all
CITs appeal.
ii) Monitoring of pendency and  disposal by administrative CCITs.
iii) Monitoring of pendency and disposal by Zonal Member, CBDT.
iv) Issue of directions by Member, CBDT, CCITs from time to time and
discussions on the pendency and disposal through video conferencing,
regional/local seminars etc.
v) Rationalisation, re-distribution of work load and transfer of appeals.
 Further, the Cadre review of the Indian Revenue Service has been
initiated and the necessity (or otherwise) of an increase in the number of posts of
CIT(Appeals) is also being examined.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 14
Refund cases and interest paid on refunds
As per the extant stipulation, Income Tax refunds are to be issued within 4
months of filing of returns.  When enquired whether this stipulation is being
adhered to, the Ministry conceded that there have been delays beyond four
months in issue of refunds in e-filed returns during the financial year 2008-09.
The Committee are however, given to understand that no database of cases
where Income Tax refunds are delayed was available with the Department, as
the Income Tax offices were not networked and the database were not
consolidated at a single source. The Committee strongly deprecate the
Department for violating the statutory requirement with regard to income tax
refunds.  The Department has been obviously neglecting prompt issue of
refunds, causing avoidable harassment to ordinary tax payers.  Although, the
Ministry have sought to assure the Committee that they will issue all the refunds
within the statutory time limit, with their capacity enhancing by way of the
upcoming Centralised Processing Center (CPC) at Bangalore, the Committee,
nevertheless, would like the Income Tax Department to pay special attention to
prompt settlement of refund claims, which has been an area causing needless
hardship to common assessees.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

32
Reply of the Government
CBDT
Refunds are worked out after an Assessing Officer processes returns of
income.  As per Income Tax Statute, the processing is to be completed within
one year.  Therefore, all returns with refunds are processed within stipulated
time.  The ‘Citizen’s Charter’ has prescribed time frame of nine months for
determination of refunds and 30 days for issue of refunds after the same is
determined.
The Department has put in place a scheme referred to as ‘Refund Banker
Scheme’ for bulk handling of refunds by the designated banker SBI.  It deals with
the Refund Banker which picks up the refunds from Assessment information
System (AST) database after the processing of I.T. return. After the refunds are
picked up, these are dispatched through paper mode in T+3days & through ECS
mode in T+1day. Refund Banker facility  has been extended in phases and is
now  available at 15 stations (Bangalore, Chennai, Patna, Mumbai, Kolkata,
Delhi, Allahabad, Ahmedabad, Bhubneshwar, Kochi, Trivendrum, Pune,
Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Kanpur)  for non-corporate assesses.. The Refund
Banker Scheme though has limited coverage but the scheme has handled close
to 18.6 % of total refunds issued in FY 2008-09.
Dealing with Stop filers
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 16
As regards question of stop filers of returns brought back to Income Tax
net during the last three years and the quantum of additional revenue realized
from them, the Department stated that the requisite data is not maintained by
them, neither do they have any information regarding amount of tax evaded by
the stop filers.   The Department have further pleaded that due to increase in
workload coupled with the shortage of staff and officers which has reached
alarming proportion, they are finding it difficult to focus on the action to be taken
regarding stop filers.  The Committee would like the Department to fill up all their
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

33
posts so that their assessment work does not suffer due to shortage of staff etc.
If required, additional posts may also be created for this purpose.   The
Department should also put in place a centralized database to trace stop filers of
returns and to recover tax payable from them. They should also devise a simple
form and mechanism under which asseesees can intimate to the Department
about the death of a person or closure of an account.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
 The CBDT has submitted an elaborate reply to the committee about the
issue of “stop filers”. It was communicated that in the absence of integrated
database prior to 2008, it is not possible to collect information about stop filers
brought back to tax net during the last three years and additional revenue
realized from them. Moreover, the constraint arising out of shortage of staff and
officers at various levels, which is quiet alarming, has also been brought out. Due
to various other reasons such as discontinuance of business of the taxpayer,
increase in exemption limit, death of a taxpayer etc and that in some cases even
if action is initiated, it is likely that it will not yield any tax revenue, it was
submitted that based on the specific information available with the department in
select cases, action has been taken by the department where it may yield
revenue.
 Though, the situation mentioned above has not undergone a change since
submission of replies to the Committee, however, in the light of the observations
made in para 16, that the department should also put in place a centralized
database to trace stop filers of return and recover tax payable from them, the
matter has been further analyzed. The Centralized processing Application
Database i.e. AST is enabled to capture details of stop filers. This functionality
exists in AST and Assessing officers can  make use of the same to generate
notices to stop filers, if the relevant data about earlier years is in the System.
However, till 2008, the data was not integrated.  The Project for consolidation of
all Regional  databases to one single centralized database was completed on
02.06.2009.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

34
   As, the department could integrate the systems from  2009  therefore, for
the earlier years, tracing of  all the stop-filers is not  practically possible.
However, some headway can be made only where the data is readily available
on the system, more particularly for the e-filed returns and those cases where
data is seamlessly available on the system. To give a fillip to this task, the CCITs
(CCA) have been asked to actively take the aspect of stop filers into
consideration and they have been requested to direct the Assessing Officers to:
i) issue notice u/s 142(1) for Assessment Year 2008-09 to those taxpayers
who had reported taxable income for AY 2007-08, but have not filed their returns
for AY 2008-09.
ii)       Similarly, all corporates, and also non-corporate taxpayers, who are
required to get   their account audited u/s 44AB, should be served with notice u/s
142(1) for AY 2008-09.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 18
New Assessees registered after restructuring
Although the Department of Revenue have been gloating over an
increasing trend of Income Tax collections and tax buoyancy resulting in a higher
tax – GDP ratio over the years, the Committee’s examination reveals a contrary
situation, wherein there was actually a decrease in the number of new assessees
registered during the year 2007-08.  For the subsequent year, that is 2008-09,
the number of new assessees added was lower than 2006-07 and 2005-06.
Predictably, the Department does not consider this as a negative development,
suggesting a regressive and skewed tax regime.  The Committee would,
however, like the Department to make efforts to augment the number of new
assessees, so that the tax base remains wide and dispersed, reflecting truly the
increase in per capita income as also the diversified nature of our economy. The
Department should also maintain data in this regard slab-wise in a centralized
manner, which should provide both horizontal as well as vertical information on
the new assessees brought on board.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

35
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The endeavour of the department has always been to bring more and
more assessees into the tax net. For this purpose, the department has already
taken certain steps such as collection of information about large value
transactions in the form of Annual Information Reports (AIR) from third parties,
collection of information about tax deductees through the TDS returns filed by tax
deductors, mandatory intimation of PAN to the tax deductors failing which the
rate of tax deduction shall be higher than normal etc. Keeping into consideration
the constraints of manpower and of structural nature relating to the lack of
integrated database prior to the year 2008, Income Tax Department intends
bring new taxpayers into the tax net.
 The recommendations of the Standing Committee may require suitable
legislative amendments/changes in IT Rules and software modifications to
capture the relevant data.  These are under consideration.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 19
Tax arrears and recovery (Indirect Tax)
Burgeoning revenue arrears pending for realization in respect of Indirect
Taxes, is another cause of serious concern for the Committee.  The Committee
find to their dismay that a whopping Rs. 34,779.07 crore is pending for realization
as indirect tax arrears.  The Committee have been informed that out of this huge
amount, only a meagre Rs.393.16 crore has been recovered during the year
2009-10 (Upto 31 May, 2009).  Furthermore, the position with regard to
adjudication of cases also appear to be rather grim as 33,887 cases in Central
Excise, Customs and Service Tax are pending for adjudication with departmental
officers for more than one year as on 31 March, 2009, involving a large revenue
amount of Rs.5016.44 crore.  The Committee would expect the Department of
Revenue and the Central Board of Excise and Customs to specially monitor
these pending cases with a view to disposing them in a specified time frame.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

36
The Committee may be apprised about the status of pendency of adjudication
cases within a period of three months.   The Department of Revenue should also
initiate dedicated measures to realize revenue arrears in a time-bound manner
by pursuing cases vigorously with Tribunals/Courts.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
 The position of outstanding tax arrears and the realisation of arrears as on
31.10.2009 is as under:
Outstanding
arrears as on
30.04.09
(Rs. In crore)
Arrears
realized as on
31.05.09
(Rs. in crore)
Outstanding
arrears as on
31.10.09 (Rs. In
crore)
Arrears Realized
April to
October,2009(Rs.
in crore)
Central
Excise
22,990.51 132.12 24789.72 524.72
Customs 7,089.05 76.00 8029.87 454.44
Service
Tax
4,699.51 185.04 6689.48 1022.74
Total 34,779.07 393.16 39689.06 2001.90
The following steps are being  taken to realize the arrears of revenue  :-
(a) Sensitization at the level of Commissioners/Chief Commissioners by
holding meeting at Nodal/Zonal Level.
(b) Filing of applications for vacation of stay / early hearing in Court/
CESTAT:
Arrears amounting to Rs.15896.90 crore as on 31.10.2009 are locked up in
various courts/ CESTAT as stayed arrears. The field formations have been
sensitized to file application for vacation of stay / early hearing in such cases.
(c ) Follow up of cases pending in BIFR/DRT/OL/COD:
Arrears amounting to Rs.13573.31 crore as on 31.10.2009 are locked up in
BIFR/DRT/OL/COD proceedings which is another area of concern. Steps have
been taken for closely monitoring and proper defence of such cases before the
BIFR/DRT/OL/COD authorities.
(d) Quick implementation of favourable orders of CESTAT/ Courts:-
 Close monitoring is done of all the cases of favourable orders from CESTAT,
High Courts, and the Supreme Court. The field formations have been directed to
implement the favourable orders of CESTAT/ various courts quickly and all
possible steps should be taken to realize the arrears of revenue in such cases.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

37
(e)Defaulters on CBEC Website:-  The list of defaulters against whom Section
142 notices have been issued and those which have not been stayed by the
Courts have been displayed on CBEC website. All the Commissioners have been
directed to take necessary action for recovery of arrears from such cases at their
end.
(f) In cases where defaulters are not traceable / factory closed, necessary action
for recovery of arrears from such assessees are being taken by  giving media
exposure/ reward to informers, who provide information about such defaulters.
(g) Write-off of irrecoverable cases of arrears:
As regards irrecoverable arrears which are being carried forward from
year to year without any possibility of  realization of arrears, all the Chief
Commissioners/ Commissioners have been directed to initiate action towards
write-off in those cases where they are of the considered view that the arrears
are not recoverable even after taking all possible steps.
       Taking note of high pendency in adjudication , CBEC has created a
Special Cell in the Directorate General of Inspection (DGI) to monitor high value
cases as well as the cases pending over one year on a regular basis.  Pendency
of adjudication cases pending for over one year is closely monitored by the Chief
Commissioners and the Commissioners. The Special Cell in DGI receives the
zone-wise pendency details on a monthly basis.  The reports are analyzed, and
followed up with the Chief Commissioners of zones showing high pendencies to
undertake special drive to liquidate the pendency.  The DGI also monitors the
progress in the liquidation of pendency.  Inspections of the field formations on
pending adjudication cases are also carried out.  A concerted drive is on in order
to reduce the pendency.  The Board also reviews the pendency regularly.
Instructions have been issued to formulate time bound programme to liquidate
pendency.
Further, while analyzing  adjudication pendency, the zones are identified
having least /  maximum pendencies of over one year old cases. In this regard,
communications have been addressed to the Chief Commissioners having high
pendencies  and  have already been requested for quick disposal of the cases in
a time-bound manner.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

38
As a consequence of regular monitoring, disposals of adjudication cases
pending for more than a year  have increased:
a)  On Central Excise side: - from 871  during April – October 2008-09  to 1085
during April – October 2009-10
b) On Customs side: - from 31 during April – October 2008-09 to 218 during April
– October 2009-10
 It is, however, pointed out while old cases are disposed off, new cases are
constantly added Adjudication proceedings being quasi-judicial in nature, have to
follow the principles of natural justice such as granting opportunity of hearing to
the parties, cross examination of witnesses etc. Pendency position is however
continuously monitored.
   In respect of Service Tax cases as well, the department has directed the
Chief Commissioners where there is large pendency of adjudication to re-allocate
the cases amongst other officers so as to expeditiously clear the pendency. Two
officers of the rank of Commissioner, one each at Mumbai and Delhi have been
posted in June 2009, exclusively for the purpose of adjudication of pending
Service Tax cases.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 20
Appeals (Indirect Taxes)
On the Indirect Taxes front, the Committee are concerned that the
maximum number of appeals are pending with Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal.  The Committee are concerned about such high rate of
pendency in the Tribunal and therefore, would like the Department to take
effective steps to clear pendency of cases and dispose them within a specified
time frame with a view to safeguarding revenue.   In this regard, the Committee
find the reply of the Ministry to be rather routine and casual.  They would thus
expect the Ministry to shed their lethargy and initiate concrete and time bound
measures to get the cases settled by activating their Directorates for this
purpose.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

39
(I) The matter relating to high rate of pendency in the Tribunal was taken up with
Registry of the Tribunal and the Registry has taken up following positive steps for
speedy disposal of cases viz:
(i) subject-wise grouping of all pending appeals and taking up the same
subject     appeals for hearing ;
(ii) hearing of Larger Bench cases on priority as following the issuance of
orders in Larger Bench cases, many appeals are expected to be
disposed of automatically;
(iii) introduction of the procedure of monthly roster as against weekly
roster;
(iv) starting of a new procedure for listing the short matters on Mondays
and Fridays and regular matters on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and
Thursdays,
(v) preparation of the Cause list of final hearing matters subject-wise so
that matters are decided in chronological orders.
(II) On account of non-availability of suitable candidates, lengthy processing of
proposals etc, delay occurs in filling up of vacant posts of Member. It is being
ensured that all efforts are made by the Department to fill up the vacancies of
Members in CESTAT expeditiously.
(III) The office of the Chief Departmental Representative is ensuring that
adequate number of Departmental Representatives are made available for
representing the department on the dates fixed.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 21
Enforcement of Service Tax
The Committee have also been worried over instances of service tax
evasion and related offences.  The Ministry have tried to downplay the issue by
stating rather generally that development of intelligence, receipt of specific
complaints and audit verification are the major sources of detection of evasion
and wherever such instances are noticed, these offences are coupled with the
offences of tax evasion.  When pressed on the issue, the Ministry have revealed
details of investigations undertaken in respect of cases where Service Tax being
collected by service providers were not actually deposited with the exchequer.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

40
The Committee are alarmed to note that the revenue involved in this not-so-
predictable yet serious offence amounts to as much as Rs.48 crore.   The
Committee apprehend that this could be only tip of the ice-berg, and the extent of
non-compliance could be much wider.   The Committee would expect the
Department to initiate penal measures in all these cases and realize forthwith the
dues along with penalty from the delinquent service providers. As Service Tax is
now a well-entrenched levy, the Committee believe that the Department should
not remain in a fostering or promotional mode any longer vis-à-vis collection of
service tax.  Instead, orientation must now shift to anti-evasion and enforcement
aspects, particularly in view of large number of offences reported.  The online
systems should also be geared up to identify such offences and to enable pre-
emptive action.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
Cases where amounts are collected by the service providers as service
tax, but are not paid to the exchequer are viewed seriously.  In such cases
notices are issued for imposition of penalty, in addition to recovery of the amount
so collected.
        The suggestions of the Committee for laying greater emphasis on anti-
evasion and enforcement aspect have been noted for compliance. The
department is already introducing a system where the service tax payment can
be viewed by officers on the computer. This would assist the officer in better
monitoring of the tax payment by an assessee.
      Further, the system of audit would be strengthened by building up a strong
risk assessment system based on information gathered from independent
sources.  Another important project being undertaken is to develop ‘service
profile’ of service providers, where-under the business process followed by
various types of service providers would be documented. This would help in
identifying the vulnerable points in the business process.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

41
CHAPTER-III
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendation No. 9
 The Committee have been informed that the Income Tax Department
takes continuous measures to identify the sectors and areas of generation and
circulation of unaccounted money.  Information regarding suspicious transactions
and large cash transactions, as disseminated by the Financial Intelligence Unit
(FIU-IND), is also investigated by the Income Tax Department.  Information
collected from various sources is also stated to be collated electronically to
create a 360 degree profile of high networth assessees so as to detect
unaccounted income/assets.  The Committee are further given to understand that
the Directors General of Income Tax (Investigation) have been asked to identify
the sectors in which generation of unaccounted money is more rampant.   It is
not clear whether efforts made by Department, thus far, have yielded the desired
results, as there are still distinct well recognized areas of the economy like real
estate transactions, under-invoicing of imports, over-invoicing of exports etc.
which have evaded tax surveillance and enforcement.  The Income Tax
Department, therefore, requires to brace itself for targeted action in evasion-
prone sectors. In this context, the Committee would like to point out that effective
linkage also needs to be established by integrating PAN with large cash
transactions and linking them with the main monitoring system.  This will facilitate
better tracking of large cash transactions.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
 It is submitted that quoting of PAN is mandatory as per Rule 114B of the
Income Tax Rules, while entering into certain specified financial transactions,
above the prescribed monetary limit. The specified transactions include inter alia
certain cash transactions viz:- (i) Cash deposits aggregating Rs.50,000/- or more
with a Bank; and (ii) Cash purchase of bank draft / pay order / bankers cheque
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

42
for amounts aggregating Rs.50,000/- or more during a single day; (iii) Cash
payment in connection with foreign travel exceeding Rs.25,000/-.
The Central Information Branch (CIB) of Income tax Department also
collects information of cash transactions from the following agencies:
I. Banks, including banking company :
In respect of cash purchase of Bank draft of more than Rs 50,000-,
and cash deposit of more than Rs 50,000/-
II. Travel Agents/ Airlines :
In respect of cash expenditure of more than Rs 25,000/- on foreign
travel.
Furthermore, as per Section 285BA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 certain
specified persons / entities are required to furnish details of specified financial
transactions above the prescribed monetary limit, recorded or registered with
them during any particular financial year, with the Income Tax Department by
way of filing Annual Information Returns (AIR). The specified financial
transactions include cash deposits aggregating Rs.10,00,000/- or more in a year
in a Savings Bank account, which is required to be reported by the bank in the
AIR.
 It is further submitted that information about large cash transactions are
also received by CBDT from the Financial Intelligence Unit of India (FIU-IND) as
per the reporting obligations in respect of certain financial intermediaries under
the provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA).
 The information about large cash transactions collected from the various
sources as mentioned above is uploaded into the ITD system in cases where
PAN is available and later utilized for Computer Assisted Scrutiny Scheme
(CASS). The transactions where no PAN is recorded, necessary enquiry with the
reporting agency is conducted by the CIB Wing of Income Tax Department and
after ascertaining PAN, the information is further processed. In appropriate cases
further investigations are also conducted by Investigation Directorates and
results of enquiry are utilized in scrutiny proceedings to bring to tax the
undisclosed income / assets.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

43
 The sector wise trends of tax evasions and modus operandi are also being
monitored by CBDT. The sectoral analysis reports are compiled and circulated to
field formations for their guidance. It is relevant to mention that similar sector
wise and region wise trend analysis is regularly conducted by the Central
Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB) at an all India level.
 In view of the above the machinery to identify evasion prone sectors of
economy and to track the large cash transactions by integrating PAN is already
in place.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 12
Tax arrears and recovery
While informing that the total amount of income tax arrears outstanding
against assessees as on 31 st March, 2009 was Rs. 2,01,276 crore, the
Department have stated that the exact number of such assessees is not centrally
maintained and it will thus, not be viable to collect case-wise information on the
arrears and recovery thereof.  The Department have also informed that out of the
afore-said amount, only an amount of Rs.13,701 crore is free of problem and is
collectable demand.  The balance is difficult to recover due to various reasons.
Further, the demands on Income Tax outstanding for adjudication by the Income
Tax Department before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) is also a
huge Rs.49,388 crore as on 31 st March, 2009.  Even here, the Department have
expressed their inability to give case-wise information, as the number of cases is
not being centrally maintained by them.  The Committee are unable to
comprehend as to how the Department monitors the pendency and disposal of
cases in the absence of centralized data.  The Committee while strongly
deprecating the Income Tax Department for neglecting such a crucial area of
their functioning, recommend that in keeping with principles of ‘good
governance’, information should be available easily for decision making, almost
on ‘push of a button’.  Needless to emphasize that the Department of Revenue
and the Central Board of Direct Taxes should take immediate steps to put in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

44
place a Management Information System (MIS) within three months for collating
and retrieving data concerning appeals, pendency disposal, recovery etc.  They
should also analyse and segregate this into different categories, depending on
the issue/problem involved so that respective cases can be pursued and followed
up for early results.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
The recovery from the tax arrears is being monitored by various
supervisory authorities at different levels on the basis of the quantum of tax
arrears, the details of which are as follows:
Quantum of tax arrear
Lower limit Upper limit
Monitored by
Rs. 10 Lacs Additional/ Joint CIT
Rs. 10 Lacs Rs. 1 Crore Commissioner of Income tax
Rs. 1 Crore Rs. 10 Crores Chief CIT
Rs. 10 Crores Rs. 25 Crores DIT(Recovery)
Rs. 25 Crores Member(Revenue), CBDT
At all these supervisory levels, the details of individual cases, nature of
additions, quantum of demand raised, arrears outstanding in the case along with
the status of appeal are available. The recoveries of tax out of these arrears are
also being monitored. A reporting mechanism is also in place for the purpose of
monitoring as follows:
• Reports on monthly basis are being sent for arrears between Rs 10
Lacs and Rs 1 Crore to the Commissioners for monitoring
• Reports on quarterly basis are being sent for arrears between Rs
1Crore and Rs 10 Crore to the Chief Commissioners for monitoring
• Reports on quarterly basis are being sent for arrears between Rs
10 Crore and Rs. 25 Crores to DIT(Recovery) for monitoring
• Reports on quarterly basis are being sent for arrears above Rs 25
Crore to Member(Revenue), CBDT for monitoring on behalf of
Board
 The appellate procedure is a dynamic and ever changing field with new
issues being thrown up almost on a daily basis. A new mechanism of Dispute
Resolution Panel has been inserted by Finance (No.2) Act 2009 w.r.e.f.1-4.09. In
an ideal situation if all the data  by all the officers are entered then information on
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

45
all the cases will be available on the touch of a button but  as has been
mentioned earlier due to acute manpower shortage especially at the level of
Stenographers, and huge workload , all the data cannot be entered.  With the
cadre review  which is under consideration, the situation will improve.
The committee has raised an issue about how the department monitors
the pendency and disposal of cases for appeals before Commissioners of
Income tax in absence of Centralized data. It is hereby submitted that detailed
monthly reports of CIT (Appeals) are being compiled by statistical wing of DG (L
&R) and circulated to the Board on a monthly basis. This includes the figures of
pendency of appeal with CIT (Appeal), the age wise analysis of pendency, the
quantum of demand locked up in appeal, besides the high demand appeal as
well as non high demand appeal.  Further to monitor the disposal of appeals by
each CIT (Appeal) statistics pertaining to pendency and disposal of cases by CIT
(Appeals) is also maintained by the CSA.  However case wise information
indicating the appellate status of a particular case i.e. upheld, deleted, partly
allowed etc. is not being maintained, being not relevant from the perspective of
CIT (A). In any case, the utility of the current monitoring mechanism is time
tested and Department has recovered sizeable amount from arrear demand.
             The recommendations of the Committee on taking immediate steps to
put in place a Management Information System (MIS) has been noted and is
under consideration. However it will not be possible within three months as it is
largely dependent on the exercise of cadre review, availability of more manpower
and changes in the software, business processes etc. Therefore it is requested
that time till April 2011 may be given for the same.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

46
CHAPTER-IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
Refund cases and interest paid on refunds
Recommendation No. 15
 According to the Ministry, the returns received in financial year 2007-08
have been processed by 31 March, 2009 and thus the earliest case(s) pending
for refund claim processing related to returns received from 1 st April, 2008
onwards.  The Committee observe that the long delay in issuing refunds resulted
in huge outgo of revenue by way of interest paid on refunds, amounting to as
much as Rs. 4410 crore in the year 2007-08, constituting almost 11% of the total
refunds.    The quantum of interest paid on refunds for the year 2008-09 could
not be made available by the Department.  In the opinion of the Committee, the
responsibility for the revenue loss occurring due to avoidable payment of interest
on refunds must rest squarely on the Income Tax Department, particularly, the
officials entrusted with the task of issuing refunds.  The culpability of the Income
Tax officials thus needs to be fixed unhesitatingly in the matter.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
 Processing of returns and issuance of refund (if due) is a continuous
process in the Income Tax Department.  According to the Income Tax Act 1961,
the returns can be processed till one year from the end of the financial year in
which the returns are made.  Therefore, the returns received during the financial
year 2008-09 can be processed upto March 2010.  As per the Income Tax Act,
the due date u/s 139(1) for filing of returns for individuals is 31 st July of the
Assessment year & for corporates and any other person whose accounts are
required to be audited is 30th September of the Assessment year.
 Assessee is entitled to refund from the 1 st day of April of the Assessment
year to the date on which refund is granted.  Whenever the return is filed,
Assessing officer is bound to take some time to process it and for returns filed
during the year interest from 1 st April automatically follows, till the date of
processing.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

47
 Hence, payment of interest on refunds is inbuilt in the statutory provision
of the Act and cannot be avoided.  Assessing officer is bound to make payment
of interest on refund as per statutory provisions of the Act. However, the shortage
of manpower has affected the expeditious processing of returns.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Recommendation No. 17
Productivity per assessing officer
 Another shortcoming the Committee noticed in the functioning of the
Income Tax Department was that the disposal of Income Tax scrutiny
assessment cases was not commensurate with the increasing workload.  It is
seen from the data made available to the Committee that in the year 2008-09,
the disposal of scrutiny assessment cases was 5,53,060 as compared to the
workload of 9,20,028, thereby showing a disposal rate of a mere 60 per cent.
This cannot but be seen as an index of a lower efficiency curve operating in the
Department.   The Committee would expect the Income Tax Department to arrest
this trend, if necessary, by increasing the number of Assessing Officers, while
also simultaneously enhancing the disposal target for each officer to make them
more productive.  The Committee expect the capacity for scrutiny and disposal of
cases to increase, particularly with computerization and modernization being
implemented in the Department.  This would also warrant the Income Tax
Department to complete their long pending computerization and networking
programme at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
CBDT
 The selection of cases for scrutiny and the assessment of the scrutiny
cases are ongoing processes. Even as some scrutiny cases are disposed of,
others are picked up as per the guidelines of the Computer Assisted Scrutiny
System(CASS) and manual selection. Therefore, there is always some pendency
of scrutiny cases.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

48
 In order to tackle the issue of deployment of more manpower, a number of
steps have been taken.
(i) The Cadre review of the Indian Revenue Service has been initiated.
(ii) Optimization of Direct Recruitment:-
 DOPT O.M. No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated 16 th May, 2001 relating to
optimization of direct recruitment to civilian posts prescribed that all requirements
of recruitment will be scrutinized to ensure that fresh recruitment is limited to 1%
of total civilian staff strength.  Accordingly, the Ministry/Departments were to
draw up Annual Direct Recruitment Plans for filling up direct recruitment
vacancies. CBDT had requested for waiver of this requirement but was not
agreed to by the Cabinet.  As a result, CBDT had to abolish 9508 posts during
the period 2001-02 to 2008-09.  This has reduced intake of direct recruits.  With
effect from 2009-10, this system has been discontinued.  CBDT will now be able
to hold recruitment to fill up all vacant posts.  This will bring down the level of
vacancies.
 (iii) Creation of new posts :-
 Considering that the workload  had increased exponentially over the
years, a comprehensive proposal for additional manpower was submitted by
CBDT to the Committee of Secretaries.  The Committee of Secretaries at the
meeting held in September, 2006 permitted creation of 7051 posts.  These posts
have since been filled up.
(iv) Filling up of Direct recruitment posts :-
 Status of Group A posts:-
  JCIT:  The Deputy Commissioners who have become eligible for
promotion as JCIT w.e.f. 01.01.2009 have since been promoted.  The
proposal for holding DPC in respect of officers becoming eligible for
promotion w.e.f. 01.01.2010 has been initiated.
   Considering the large scale vacancies in the grade of JCIT, due to
non-availability of sufficient number of eligible officers in the feeder
category, a proposal was initiated for seeking approval for one time
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

49
relaxation of the eligibility conditions. DoPT has since given their approval
and UPSC is considering the proposal.
 DCIT:  Officers, who were eligible on 01.01.2009, have been promoted.  In
respect of officers who become eligible from 01.01.2010, action has been
initiated
 ACIT:  Orders have been issued promoting ITOs as ACIT for the vacancy
years 2007-08 and 2008-09 on 27.10.2008.  Necessary action, such as
finalization of Seniority List, collection of AC%Rs etc., has been initiated
for holding DPC for the vacancy year 2009-10.
(v) Status of other posts :-
 The details of filling up of posts at the grade of Inspector (ITI), Tax
Assistants(TA) and stenographers (Grade-III) through Staff Selection
Commission  and Surplus Pool of DPT are as given below:-.
Posts filled up in the Grade of ITI, TA and Steno Grade-III in CBDT
Grade 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10*
Income-tax
Inspector
49 815 192
Tax Assistant 3330 228 333
Stenographer
Grade-III
02 0 0
*Note: In addition to the above, allocation from Staff Selection Commission
is expected shortly for Grades as under:-
Income-tax Inspector Graduate Level Exam 2008 116
Tax Assistants Tax Assistants Exam 2008 657
Stenographer Grade-
III
Matric Level Exam, 2008 1728
Reasons for Vacancies of Assessing officers are as under:
(i) Probationers:-
 At any point of time, there are two batches of approximately 300
probationer each undergoing training at NADT, Nagpur.    Even though these are
recruited against vacancies in the sanctioned strength of Assistant
Commissioners,  but as there is no training reserve, these are reflected as
vacancies in the field.
(ii) Deputation/Study Leave:-
 The number of officers who are on deputation at any point of time is
around 200 and also about 30 officers are on Study Leave/Long Leave.  Since
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

50
there is no deputation/leave reserve equal number of posts remains unfilled and
gets reflected as vacancies at field level.
For enhancing the scrutiny disposal, the infrastructure at the assessing
officer/field formation level has been recently augmented by way of
comprehensive computerization and networking of the offices with a centralized
TAXNET project.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

51
CHAPTER-V
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the
Government are still awaited
Recommendation No. 6
Acquisition of Anti-Smuggling equipments
 The Committee’s examination of this Head has revealed that the Ministry
had obtained Rs.26.51 crore as RE and had spent only Rs.0.50 crore, thus
registering unspent provisions of Rs.26.01 crore due to non-acquisition of land
for installation of the scanners, re-tendering of procurement of mobile scanners,
non-approval of site preparation work estimates for mobile scanners etc.  The
Committee are constrained to observe that in spite of the Committee’s earlier
recommendation made in para 13 of the 74 th Report (Action Taken on Demands
for Grants 2008-09 - 14 th Lok Sabha), the anti-smuggling equipments have not
been procured so far.   It is rather astonishing that the Ministry could not finalise
acquisition of the equipments so far, even though the Finance Minister had
approved the same one year back i.e. on 12 November, 2008 and the tender
evaluation committee held its meeting about eight months back on 27 March,
2009.  The reasons given by the Ministry now regarding non-availability of land
etc. seems to be at variance with that furnished to the Committee earlier, which
related to technological problems.  While expressing their serious concern on the
Ministry’s inept handling of this matter, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should take immediate steps to procure and install the requisite anti-smuggling
equipment without any further delay.  Procedural or operational hurdles, if any,
should be resolved expeditiously at the highest level of the Department.
Reply of the Government
CBEC
 For procurement of 3 mobile scanners, re-tendering was approved by
Finance Minister on 12.11.2008 and global tender for the same was issued on
12.01.2009.  The pre-bid meeting was held on 04.02.2009.  The technical bids
were opened on 03.03.2009.  Meeting of the Tender Evaluation Committee
(TEC) was held on 06.03.2009 to consider the technical bids.  As four bidders
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

52
were foreigners, necessary security clearance had been obtained from IB.  On
receipt of the required clearance, meeting of the TEC was held on 30.09.2009 to
consider the technical evaluation of the eligible bidders.  The price bids in respect
of two technically qualified bidders have been opened on 07.12.2009.  Upon
examination of recommendations of the TEC, utmost efforts will be made for
placement of order towards selected bidder within the stipulated time frame.
 For procurement of 4 fixed scanners, global tender was floated on
16.11.2008.  The pre-bid meeting was held on 22.01.2009.  The tender was
opened on 23.03.2009.  Meeting of the Tender Evaluation Committee (TEC) was
held on 27.03.2009 to consider the technical bids.  Security clearance in respect
of five foreign bidders has been obtained from IB.  Some technical clarifications
sought from bidders have been received and are under examination in
consultation with BARC.  Final recommendations of the TEC are expected to be
received shortly.
(OM No.H-11013/24/2009-Parl. dated 31st December, 2009)
New Delhi;      DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15 April, 2010           Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Finance
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

53
Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.   Shri Harischandra Chavan
3.   Shri Khagen Das
4.   Shri Nishikant Dubey
5.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
7.   Dr. M. Thambidurai
RAJYA SABHA
8.    Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
9.    Shri Mahendra Mohan
10.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad
11.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary
 2.   Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar   - Additional Director
 3.   Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary
 4.   Smt. B. Visala    - Deputy Secretary
    2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and
adoption:-
(i) Draft Report on Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill,
2009;
(ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and
Disinvestment);
(iii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue);
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

54
(iv) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning;
(v) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation;
(vi) Draft Reports on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of  Corporate
Affairs;
(vii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial
Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment);
(viii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(ix) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Planning;
(x) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(xi) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3.    The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above with few
modifications/amendments as indicated in Annexures I, II and III.  The Committee
adopted the remaining draft reports without any change.  The Committee authorized
the Chairman to present all the reports to Parliament in the current session.
      The Committee adjourned at 1700 hours.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

55
ANNEXURE
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2009-2010) OF THE MINISTRY OF  FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
REVENUE)
              Total  % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations   21
(ii) Recommendations/observations which
have been accepted by the Government  16     76.19
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,
7,8,10,11,13,14,16,18,19,20 and 21)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   02       9.52
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 9 and 12)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have  02       9.52
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 15 and 17)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect  01     4.77
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 6)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages