STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
FIFTY-SIXTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2012 / Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)
56

FIFTY-SIXTH  REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
Presented to Lok Sabha on 9 May, 2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  9 May, 2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2012 / Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)

COF No. 56
Price : Rs. 129.00
© 2012 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
I. Introduction .............................................................................. 1
II. Salient features of the Bill ....................................................... 2
III. Financial Action Task Force (FATF) ...................................... 7
IV . Mutual Evaluation of India by FATF .................................... 9
V . Role of Financial Intelligence Unit- India (FIU-IND)......... 9
VI. Role of Directorate of Enforcement....................................... 10
VII. Trailing the flow of money : ................................................... 11
(a) Multi-layered transactions and round-tripping ......... 11
(b) Participatory Notes and Stock Markets : Role of SEBI ... 12
VIII. Money-Laundering and Generation of unaccounted money ... 16
IX. Trade-based money laundering ............................................. 18
X. Onus of proof-distinction between bonafide and
malafide transactions .............................................................. 19
XI. Beneficial ownership ............................................................... 20
XII. Persons carrying on designated business or profession .... 21
XIII. Persons engaged in safe-keeping........................................... 22
XIV . Audit .......................................................................................... 22
XV . Imposition of Fine .................................................................... 23
XVI. Maintenance of Records .......................................................... 24
XVII. Electronic verification of identity .......................................... 25
XVIII. Adequacy of manpower and training requirements .......... 25

XIX. Manageability of financial data and capacity of banking
system ........................................................................................ 26
XX. Fast-tracking of cases ............................................................... 27
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
9 April, 2012 and 8 May, 2012 .............................................. 29
II. The Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment)
 Bill, 2011 ................................................................................. 34
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Dr. M. Thambidurai
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
*22. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
*23. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
*26. Shri P . Rajeeve
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*28. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
29. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
30. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
*Nominated to be the Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f. 4th May , 2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fifty-sixth Report on the
Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
2. The Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2011
introduced in Lok Sabha on 27 December, 2011, was referred to the
Committee on 5 January, 2012 for examination and report thereon, by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Indian Banks'
Association (IBA), Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) and Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry (FICCI).
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 9 April, 2012 took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue).
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 08 May, 2012 considered
and adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the
same and present it to the Parliament.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information
which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Indian
Banks' Association (IBA), Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI),
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Federation of Indian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) for placing before them their considered
views on the Bill in the form of memoranda.

9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
8 May, 2012 Chairman,
18 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Introduction
The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) was enacted
in 2003 and brought into force on 1st July 2005 to prevent money
laundering and to provide for attachment, seizure and confiscation of
property obtained or derived, directly or indirectly, from or involved in
money laundering and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto. The PMLA was brought into the statute to implement the
resolution and declaration made under the Political Declaration and Global
Programme of Action against Money Laundering adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations in 1998. The PMLA has been amended
first in 2005 and thereafter in 2009 subsequent to the presentation of
Report by the Standing Committee on Finance on 19 December, 2008 to
overcome some of the difficulties that were being faced in its enforcement
and to increase the coverage of the Act to include payment system
operators, etc.
The problem of money-laundering is no longer restricted to the
geo-political boundaries of any country. It is a global menace that cannot
be contained by any nation alone. In view of this, India has become a
member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and Asia Pacific Group
on money-laundering, which are committed to the effective
implementation and enforcement of internationally accepted standards
against money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
The anti-money laundering legislative framework of the country
has been evaluated by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), an inter-
Governmental body, for development and promotion of policies to combat
money laundering and terrorist financing. A comprehensive evaluation
of the country’s legislative and administrative framework for prevention
of money laundering and countering financing of terror was made by
the FATF in November/December, 2009. The mutual evaluation report
prepared after the comprehensive evaluation identified several
shortcomings in the existing administrative and legislative framework to
handle activities related to prevention of money laundering. An action
plan was prepared by the Government of India, which was submitted
to FATF. This action plan lists various short-term and medium-term
measures which are required to be taken. This action plan also envisages
several amendments in the PMLA so that the legislative and administrative

2
framework of the country to prevent money laundering and countering
financing of terror becomes more effective and capable of handling the
new evolving threats. The amendments proposed are stated to be based
not only on the mutual evaluation report of the FATF but also the
Government’s own experiences in the implementation of the PMLA.
Accordingly, the Prevention of Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill,
2011 was introduced in Parliament and subsequently referred by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Standing Committee on Finance of
Parliament on 5 January, 2012 for examination and Report thereon.
II. Salient features of the Amendment Bill
1. Amendments and insertions in the definition:  Certain new
definitions have been proposed to be incorporated in section 2 of the Act,
provisions relating to which have been made in the Bill. They are namely-
‘beneficial owner’, ‘client, dealer’, ‘precious metal’, ‘precious stone’, ‘real
estate agent’.
2. Changing the definition of offence of money-laundering:
During Mutual Evaluation of India, it was pointed out by FATF that
concealment, possession, acquisition and use of the proceeds of crime are
not criminalized by PMLA. Article 6 of Palermo Convention requires that
such activities should also to be criminalized. Hence Section 3 of PMLA
has been proposed to include these activities under offence of money-
laundering.
3. Punishment for money-laundering:  FATF Recommendation
requires that “legal persons” also (and not just “natural persons”) should
be subject to effective, proportionate and dissuasive criminal, civil or
administrative sanctions for money laundering. In PMLA the punishment
prescribed in section 4 is rigorous imprisonment not less than 3 years
but which may extend to 7 years and also fine which may extend to Rs.
5 lakh. This amount appears disproportionately low, given the gravity
of the offence of money laundering. It has therefore been proposed to
amend Section 4 so as to provide for imposition of fine proportionate
to the gravity of the offence which will be determined by the court. The
limit of Rs. 5 lakh is therefore proposed to be deleted altogether. Further
an explanation has been inserted in Section 70 that the prosecution or
conviction of any legal juridical person shall not be contingent on the
prosecution or conviction of any individual.
4. Amendment in provisions implemented by FIU:
(i) Sec. 12 prescribes obligation of banks, Financial Institutions
and intermediaries for verification of identity of clients,

3
maintenance of records of transactions and identity and
furnishing STRs, CTRs etc to the Financial Intelligence Unit-
India (FIU-IND). The proposed legislation includes the
following new reporting entities: Department of Posts,
Commodity Exchanges and brokers, Stock Exchanges, Entities
registered with PFRDA, entities who can be included when
notified by the Government -Real estate agents, sub-registrars
(registering property), dealers in precious metals/stones, high
value goods and safe deposit keepers.
(ii) Director, FIU-IND is proposed to be empowered by insertion
of a new Section 12A in the PMLA so that he may call for
records of transactions or any additional information that
may be required for the purposes of the PMLA and also the
power to make inquiries for non-compliance of reporting
entities to the obligations cast upon them.
Strengthening of KYC and reporting obligation:
• Know Your Customer (KYC) obligations–In the
proposed legislation the reporting entity has to identify
“beneficial owner” during KYC.
• Reporting obligations— It is proposed in the legislation
that reporting entity has to report even an attempted
transaction.
• Reference to “integrally connected transactions” is
deleted.
The proposed changes will be reflected in the amended
Section 12 (1).
(iii) Record keeping obligation: KYC documents to be maintained
for 10 years after “the business relationship has ended”
[proposed sec. 12(4)] instead of “after cessation of
transactions”, as at present. “Account files and business
correspondence” also needs to be retained for 10 years
[proposed sec. 12(3)], information about “attempted
transactions” reported to FIU also needs to be retained.
(iv) An exemption clause has also been proposed to exempt
any class of reporting entities from any of the obligations
to identify clients, maintain records and send reports to
FIU.

4
(v) Measures for effective compliance:
(a) In the proposed legislation Director, FIU-IND can refer
special audit of a reporting entity with regard to their
obligations [sec 13(1A)]. Expenses of such audit can be
recovered from the reporting entity [sec. 13(1B)].
(b) Graded penalty is proposed for failures. Such as written
warning, directions to comply , directions to send reports
and finally, fine [sec 13(2)].
(c) Penalty can also be imposed on “designated director
on the Board” and “employees” of reporting entities,
in place of only “officers” at present.
5. Amendment in provisions implemented by Enforcement
Directorate:
(i) Attachment of property: The present Act in section 5 stipulates
that the person from whom property is attached must “have
been charged of having committed a scheduled offence”. It
is proposed to be deleted as property may come to rest with
someone, who has nothing to do with the scheduled offence
or even the money-laundering offence. Procedure for
attachment is at present done as provided in the Second
Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1961. Now it is proposed
in section 5(1) that the procedure will be prescribed separately.
Time for Adjudicating Authority to confirm attachment of
property by ED has been proposed to be increased from 150
days to 180 days.
(ii) Freezing of property : At present PMLA provides for
attachment of property after charge sheet u/s 173 CrPC has
been filed in scheduled offence case and seizure of property
after FIR u/s 157 CrPC has been filed in scheduled offence
case. However, in a number of situations it may not be
practicable to seize a record or property. In such cases, there
has to be a provision for freezing such property, so that it
can be seized or attached and confiscated later. The new sub-
section 17(1A) is proposed to be added for this purpose.
Consequential changes are also proposed in a number of
places in the Act, where “seizure” under section 17 or 18 is
referred to.
At present under PMLA search and seizure can be done only
after FIR u/s 157 CrPC has been forwarded to a Magistrate

5
(in scheduled offence cases where FIRs are required).
However, in cases where FIR is not required ( e.g., Forest Act
violation, Copyrights Act violation), search and seizure can
take place only after charge sheet is filed. This may happen
after a prolonged gap and chances of disappearance of
proceeds of crime cannot be ruled out. To obviate this problem
it is now proposed in the proviso to section 17(1) to undertake
search and seizure in such cases (where there is no
requirement to file FIR) after the investigating officer files a
report (similar to FIR) to a superior officer.
(iii) Making confiscation independent of conviction : At present
attachment of property becomes final under section 8(3) “after
the guilt of the person is proved in the trial court and order
of such trial court becomes final”. Problems are faced in such
cases where money-laundering has been done by a person
who has not committed the scheduled offence or where
property has come to rest with someone who has not
committed any offence. Therefore, it is proposed to amend
section 8(5) to provide for attachment and confiscation of the
proceeds of crime, even if there is no conviction, so long as
it is proved that predicate offence and money-laundering
offence have taken place and the property in question ( i.e.,
the proceeds of crime) is involved in money-laundering.
(iv) Amendment relating to the procedure of confiscation : PMLA
provides for confiscation of attached property to be ordered
by Adjudicating Authority , after conviction in the scheduled
offence case. Appeals to such orders lie with Appellate
Authority, then High Court and Supreme Court, which
implies that there can be another set of appeals after
confiscation. To streamline the process power to confiscate
attached property is proposed to be given to the Special Court,
who shall pass the order to confiscating or release the attached
property, along with judgment in the predicate offence/
money-laundering case.
A new sub section 7 is proposed to be inserted in section 8
to address confiscation or release of property by the Special
Court when a trial cannot take place in a case on account
of death or accused being declared proclaimed offender or
for any other reason.
A new sub-section 60(2A) has been added to address the
issue when trial takes place outside India or the case initiated
abroad is closed and the property is to be confiscated.

6
(v) Retention and presumption provisions:  In the existing Act,
section 20 relates to retention of “property” and section 21
to “records”. It is now proposed to combine these 2 sections
to cover retention of both property and records. Further the
time limit for retention is proposed to be increased from 3
months to 6 months, that is, 180 days in line with the extension
of time limit for attachment under section 5.
(vi) Presumption that records or property (sec. 22) found in
possession of person who is searched or surveyed that it
belongs to the person, contents are true, signature is correct,
etc. is proposed to be extended when such record or property
is produced by a person before an investigating officer, or
has been resumed or seized from the custody of a person by
LEA in course of investigation in the predicate offence under
the provisions of any other Act.
6. Burden of Proof: The existing provision in section 24 reads as—
‘When a person is accused of having committed the offence under section
3, the burden of proving that proceeds of crime are untainted property
shall be on the accused.’ There can be situations where the accused may
cleverly pass off the property to someone to avoid confiscation. To take
care of these eventualities section 24 is proposed to be amended as
below:—
Section 24: In any proceedings relating to proceeds of crime under
this Act, unless the contrary is proved, it shall be presumed that
such proceeds of crime is involved in money-laundering.
7. Committing of cases to Special Court: Presently PMLA requires
under sections 43(1) and 44(1) that trial for both the predicate offence
and the money-laundering offence to take place in the Special Court
(Sessions Court). When ED files a charge sheet under money-laundering
case, the court where the scheduled offence trial is taking place has to
commit that case to the Special Court and to obviate any problem it is
specifically mentioned that the Special Court shall, on receipt of such
case proceed to deal with it from the stage at which it is committed.
8. Officers empowered and required to assist:  New officers are
being added to sec. 54, who are “empowered and required to assist
authorities in enforcement of the Act’’.
9. Appeal against the order of Appellate Tribunal to lie in the
Supreme Court:  Under the existing provision in section 42, an appeal
against the order of the Appellate Tribunal lies before High Court within

7
the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party resides or carries on its
business. Since the attached properties may be located in different parts
of the country in a particular case, the appeals can be filed in various
High Courts in the country in the same case. Hence, such provision is
likely to lead a situation where order of Money Laundering Tribunal
might be reversed by one High Court and upheld by another High Court.
In order to obviate this difficulty, it is proposed in section 42 that the
appeal may lie before the Supreme Court. Concurrently it is also proposed
in section 28 to raise the status of the Appellate Tribunal on the lines
of the Appellate Tribunals under the SEBI Act.
10. Removing monetary threshold for investigating the offence
of money laundering: Under the current provisions the offences specified
in Part A of the Schedule do not prescribe any monetary threshold.
However the offences specified in Part B of the Schedule are considered
Offence of Money-laundering only if the total value involved in such
offences is thirty lakhs rupees or more. The FATF standards do not
envisage monetary threshold for investigating the offence of money-
laundering. To conform to the FATF standards it has been proposed to
move the offences listed in Part B of the Schedule to Part A.
III. FINANCIAL ACTION TASK FORCE (FATF)
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an inter-governmental
body that works for the development of standards for combating money-
laundering and terrorist financing. It also ensures adherence to its
standards by making sure that countries across the world bring about
legislative and regulatory reforms in these areas. It further monitors the
progress of the anti-money laundering efforts of its members. Forty plus
nine recommendations of FATF are considered as global standards on
Anti-money laundering and combating of financing of terrorism.
Benefits of implementing the FATF Recommendations:
The benefits of implementing the FATF recommendations have
been stated to be as under:—
1. Securing a more transparent and stable financial system that is
more attractive to foreign investors: Corrupt and opaque financial
systems are inherently unstable. Excessive money laundering
can cause increased volatility of international capital flows
and exchange rates, market disparities, and distortions of
investment and trade flows.
2. Ensure that financial institutions are not vulnerable to infiltration
or abuse by organised crime groups: Financial institutions that

8
are exploited in this manner are exposed
to reputational risk, financial instability , diminished public
confidence, threats to safety and soundness and other
losses.
3. Build the capacity to fight terrorism and trace terrorist money:
Terrorists need money to finance attacks. Tracing this money
is one of the few preventive tools that governments have
against terrorism.
4. Meet binding international obligations, and avoid the risk of
sanctions or other action by the international community:  The
international community—through numerous international
treaties, United Nations Security Council Resolutions and
best practices—has endorsed the FATF Recommendations at
the highest political level.
5. Avoid becoming a haven for criminals: Countries with weak
AML/CFT systems are attractive to criminals because they
provide an environment in which criminals can enjoy the
profits of their crimes and finance their illicit activities with
little fear of facing punishment.
Membership of India: Pursuant to the decision of the Core Group
on Security, India submitted its application for the membership of FATF
in 2003. India was accorded the status of an ‘observer’ by the FATF in
the year 2006. As part of technical procedure to qualify for membership,
India underwent a mutual evaluation process. A FATF Mutual Evaluation
(ME) Team visited India in December 2009 for on-site discussions and
evaluation of Indian legislative, regulatory and institutional framework
for AML/CFT against each of the 40+9 recommendations of FATF. The
Mutual Evaluation Report pointed out the deficiencies in AML/CFT
framework of India. Subsequently, India has suggested an Action Plan
with short, medium and long term objectives to address the specific issues
raised in the Mutual Evaluation Report that includes proposed
amendments in the PMLA. With these amendments, it is believed that
PMLA would largely conform to the global standards and help in
strengthening and coordinating efforts of national and international
intelligence, investigation and enforcement agencies in combating money
laundering and terrorist financing.
After submission of India’s Action Plan with an assurance of Finance
Minister that India will bring about changes in legislations, regulatory
and institutional framework to confirm to FATF standards, membership
was granted to India in June, 2010.

9
IV . MUTUAL EVALUATION OF INDIA BY FATF
The evaluation of the anti-money laundering (AML) and combating
the financing of terrorism (CFT) regime of India in terms of the Forty
Recommendations and the Nine Special Recommendations on Terrorist
Financing of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) was carried out by
FATF during 2009 and 2010. The FATF team of experts reviewed the
institutional framework, the relevant AML/CFT laws, regulations,
guidelines and other requirements, and the regulatory and other systems
in place to deter money laundering and financing of terrorism through
financial institutions and Designated Non-Financial Businesses and
Professions (DNFBP), as well as assessed the capacity, the implementation
and the effectiveness of all these systems. The Mutual Evaluation Report
(MER) of FATF was released in June, 2010, which was discussed and
adopted in the June Plenary of FATF at Paris. India was admitted as a
member of FATF based on the findings of MER.
However, the MER 2010 highlighted certain deficiencies in the AML
legislation which adversely affected the ratings on a few FATF
recommendations. The areas are broadly summarized below:—
(a) Commodities market out of the ambit of PMLA.
(b) DNFBP sector not subjected to PMLA (except Casino).
(c) Effectiveness concerns due to absence of ML conviction.
(d) Identification and verification of beneficial ownership of legal
persons.
(e) Ineffective sanctions regime for non-compliance. India has
suggested an Action Plan with short, medium and long term
objectives to address the specific issues raised in the MER
2010 that includes proposed amendments in the PMLA.
V . ROLE OF FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE UNIT—INDIA (FIU—IND)
Financial Intelligence Units (FIUs) are specialized government
agencies created to act as an interface between financial sector and law
enforcement agencies for collecting, analysing and disseminating
information, particularly about suspicious financial transactions.
Financial Intelligence Unit—India (FIU—IND) was set up by the
Government of India on 18th November, 2004 as an administrative FIU
i.e., a central national agency responsible for receiving, analyzing and
disseminating information related to suspicious financial transactions.

10
It receives prescribed information from various entities in financial sector
under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002 (PMLA) and in
appropriate cases disseminates information to relevant intelligence/law
enforcement agencies which include Central Board of Direct Taxes, Central
Board of Excise and Customs, Enforcement Directorate, Narcotics Control
Bureau, Central Bureau of Investigation, Intelligence agencies and
regulators of financial sector. FIU-IND does not investigate cases. It is
an independent body reporting to the Economic Intelligence Council
headed by the Finance Minister. For administrative purposes, FIU-IND
is under the control of Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance.
FIU-IND is headed by the Director, who is of the rank of Joint Secretary
to the Government of India.
Section 12 of PMLA requires every banking company, financial
institution and intermediary (referred to as reporting entities) to verify
the identity of all its clients in the manner prescribed, maintain records
of transactions and identity of clients and furnish information of prescribed
transactions to the Director, Financial Intelligence Unit-India.
VI. ROLE OF DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
The Directorate of Enforcement is statutorily notified for
investigating the offence of money laundering under PMLA and to take
the consequential actions of attaching the proceeds of crime involved in
money laundering and for prosecuting the persons. The Directorate of
Enforcement has the powers to carry out survey, searches, seizures and
arrest besides attachment and confiscation of proceeds of crime or property
involved in money laundering.
The Directorate is presently headed by the Director, a Special
Secretary level officer who is appointed as per Section 25 of the CVC
Act, 2003. The Legal wing is headed by the Additional Director
(Prosecution) assisted by Deputy Legal Advisor and Assistant Legal
Advisor.
Presently , PMLA has 156 sections covering 28 acts as scheduled
offences.
The following enforcement actions can be taken under PMLA for
preventing money laundering:—
(i) Provisional attachment of property derived or obtained as
result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence.
The same may be confiscated and vested with Central
Government free from all encumbrances once the guilt of the

11
accused person for the scheduled offence is proved in the
Trial Court and the conviction attains finality.
(ii) Persons found guilty of an offence of Money Laundering are
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three years but may extend up to seven
years and shall also liable for fine up to Rs. 5 lakhs. In the
case of scheduled offence under NDPS Act, the punishment
may extend up to ten years.
The scheduled offences are investigated by various Law Enforcement
Agencies such as State Police, NCB, CBI, Customs, SEBI and other Central
and State Agencies. As per scheme of the Act, at present, the confiscation
of property is linked with conviction in trial of scheduled offence. In case
the accused is acquitted and the acquittal attains finality, the attachment
of properties shall cease to have effect.
The provisional attachment of proceeds of crime as well as property
involved in money laundering is made by the authorised officers of the
Directorate as per the provisions contained under Section 5 of PMLA.
ISSUES RELATING TO AMENDMENT BILL
Several pertinent issues relating to the Amendment Bill were raised
by the Committee and discussed with the representatives of Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue). These included suggestions received
from organisations/institutions such as IBA, RBI, SEBI and FICCI. Written
information/replies was also obtained from the Ministry.
VII. TRAILING THE FLOW OF MONEY
(a) Multi-layered transactions and round-tripping
7 (a) During the oral evidence tendered by the representatives of
the Department of Revenue, the Committee desired to know whether
there was a way the layering transactions across several countries be
limited so that it was easier to trail the flow of money and whether the
FATF could be sensitized of the numerous layers through which
transactions were routed so that a standard in this regard could be
formulated by it.
The Ministry have inter-alia submitted in this regard that the FATF
has issued recommendations that takes into account the risk posed by
such multi-jurisdictional entities and have recommended measures to
mitigate the risk in their revised recommendations issued in Feb.2012.

12
The Committee further desired to know about the method to detect
the round tripping of black money from India through the Foreign
Investment and whether the new Amendment would help in that regard.
The Ministry have replied as below:—
“As per the scheme of the PMLA, the Directorate of Enforcement
initiates investigations on registration of FIR for a scheduled offence
by the concerned law enforcement agency. However, evasion of
income tax, which leads to generation of black money, is not a
scheduled offence under PMLA. It may be mentioned that in certain
cases where charge sheets have been filed by CBI concerning
scheduled offences under IPC and Prevention of Corruption Act,
the Directorate of Enforcement is conducting investigations under
PMLA.”
The Committee, while expressing their serious concern over multi-
layering of transactions across countries including the round-tripping
of unaccounted money generated from India, would recommend that
the Government should take concrete steps to mitigate the risks posed
by such multi-jurisdictional entities and their transactions. The
enforcement mechanism requires to be sensitized for this purpose.
In this context, the Committee note that Clause 58 A of the Bill
provides that where on conclusion of trial in a criminal court outside
India under the corresponding law of any other country, such court
finds that the offence of money-laundering has not taken place or the
property in India is not involved in money-laundering, the designated
Special Court shall on an application moved by the concerned official,
order release of such property.
It has been pointed out that the above provision is drafted in
such a manner as to make it mandatory on the part of the Special Court
to release the property, in case the person is acquitted by the
corresponding law of any other country. This amounts to abridgement
of powers of local court. The Committee would recommend that Clause
58A may be suitably re-drafted so as to restore the power of the local
court in India to decide matters on its merits, even when the person
is acquitted by an overseas court.
(b) Participatory Notes and Stock Markets Role of SEBI :
The Committee during the oral evidence also enquired as to what
steps SEBI was taking to stop generation of Black Money through
Participatory Notes.

13
The Ministry in their post-evidence reply have elaborated as
under:—
“With a view to regulate issuance of Participatory Notes (PNs)
with Indian underlying securities, the SEBI (FII) Regulations, 1995
was amended in January , 2004 by inserting Regulation 15A, which
requires that PNs can be issued only to those entities which are
regulated by the relevant regulatory authority in the countries of
their incorporation and are subject to compliance of “Know-Your-
Client” norms. Further, downstream issuance or transfer of the
instruments can be made only to a regulated entity.
The FIIs who issue PNs against underlying Indian securities are
required to report issued and outstanding PNs to SEBI in a
prescribed format. In the year 2003, Regulation 20(A) was inserted
in the SEBI (FII) Regulations which obligates FIIs to fully disclose
information concerning off-shore derivative instruments issued by
them, as and when and in such form as the Board may require.
As per the extant regulatory structure, FIIs, which are registered
with SEBI and are issuing PNs are required to submit to SEBI a
monthly report in a prescribed format. As per the format, FIIs report
the following information:—
• Name and Location of the person to whom the PNs are issued.
• Type of the investor.
• Name and jurisdiction of the Regulator by whom the person
holding the PNs is regulated.
• Nature of Underlying security.
• Quantity and Value of PNs issued/redeemed/outstanding.
Further, FIIs can issue PNs to regulated entities only and are further
required to submit an undertaking which states that they have not
issued PNs to Resident Indians/NRIs.
The PN issuing FIIs are also required to provide the following
undertaking along with the monthly report:
“We undertake that the beneficial owner and the person(s) to whom
the Off-shore Derivative Instrument is issued in compliance with
Regulation 15A of SEBI (FII) Regulations. We also undertake that
the KYC compliance norms have been followed for the beneficial
owner of the Off-shore Derivative Instrument.”

14
As per our records, the FIIs issuing PNs are regularly submitting
the reports with the requisite information and undertakings.”
Further, elaborating on this issue, the Ministry have submitted
that:—
“Based on reports being filed with SEBI, it may be stated that out
of the 1765 FIIs registered with SEBI as of March 2012, 30 FIIs are
issuing PNs. Of these, about 8 FIIs account for the bulk of PNs
being issued. The PN issuing entities are large sized reputed
Financial Institutions with presence in a host of markets globally.
They issue PNs directly or indirectly through global financial centers
such as London, Hong Kong, Singapore etc. which have Anti-Money
Laundering (AML) and Combating Financing of Terrorism (CFT)
regulations in place. Additionally, FII investments into India are
also subject to Indian Anti-Money Laundering laws. As stated above,
SEBI, on its part, has mandated that PNs with Indian underlyings
can only be issued to regulated entities subject to ‘Know-Your-
Client ’ norms.
Investment in the stock market by individual investors as well as
by institutional investors takes place by the use of funds channelised
through bank accounts. Banks maintain details of each account
holder in accordance with the Know-Your-Customer norms which
have been put in place by the banking regulator. The foreign
currency/monetary flows in India’s domestic market is not
monitored by SEBI. It is monitored by Reserve Bank of India.”
The Committee further enquired as to what steps SEBI has taken
to stop infusion of black money in secondary market.
The Ministry have submitted as follows:—
“SEBI has been continuously taking steps to prevent money
laundering. Some of the major initiatives taken by SEBI in this
regard are as follows:—
I. SEBI has issued a master circular on anti-money laundering
in line with the FATF recommendations and PMLA Act, 2002.
In terms of this circular, intermediaries in securities market
are required to frame policies and procedures to effectively
manage the risks based on categorization of clients as low,
medium or high risk. The circular also gives an illustrative
list of clients belonging to high risk category and high risk
geographies. Intermediaries are required to carry out higher
due diligence process in respect of clients of high risk category.

15
Intermediaries are required to report cash transaction reports
and suspicious transaction reports to Financial Intelligence
Unit (FIU).
II. FATF through its public statements inform the specific lists
of geographies and jurisdictions of higher risk. This list of
high risk jurisdictions as received from the Ministry of Finance
is regularly communicated to the intermediaries. The
intermediaries are required to carry out enhanced due
diligence of clients from these high risk jurisdictions.
III. Because of constant monitoring and inspections, as mentioned
above, the compliance level of the intermediaries has
improved considerably. As a result, during inspections no
serious violations are observed. Wherever necessary, monetary
penalties are also imposed.
All transactions in securities market are required to be carried
out through banking channels. Money invested through stock
exchanges is required to come from the client’s own account
only .
The Committee enquired whether the amended PMLA would be
an answer to the rampant money laundering taking place through
the stock market by allowing/facilitating huge overseas funding of
Indian companies, the sources of which are not clear from doubts
and whether this Act was going to only harass small people or can
catch hold of big corporate.
The Ministry have inter-alia submitted as under:—
“The offences under section 12-A read with section 24 (Prohibition
of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading and
substantial acquisition of securities or control) of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 are already covered in the
Schedule of offences under PMLA. Further, section 70 of PMLA
provides for imposition of fine on companies for the offence of
money laundering as well as on every person who, at the time the
contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to the company for the conduct of the business of the company,
if on completion of the trial for prosecution, the guilt of the company
and its officers is established. As per the Amendment Bill,
section 4 of PMLA is being amended to remove the maximum limit
of fine of Rs. 5 lacs and it is being left for the trial Court to adjudge
the quantum of fine having regard to the gravity of the offence of
money laundering committed by the company or any individual”.

16
The Committee have been informed that the Participatory Notes
(PNs) being issued by FIIs are being regulated by SEBI and that the
PNs can be issued to regulated entities only. However, the Committee
are surprised to learn that other investments in the stock market
including foreign currency flows by both individual and institutional
investors are not being monitored by SEBI. The Committee would like
the SEBI to set up a coordination mechanism in this regard with RBI
so that funds flow into the domestic stock/securities markets is properly
monitored.
In the Committee’s view, scrutiny of fund flows into the markets
cannot be left to individual banks, as tainted money flowing into
markets remains a distinct possibility. Suitable amendments may
therefore be made in the Bill to monitor and curb possible money
laundering taking place through stock/securities markets. All the
regulatory and intelligence agencies including the RBI, SEBI, FIU (IND),
the Enforcement Directorate, the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence
and Investigation Wing of Income Tax Department should set up a
monitoring/coordination mechanism for this purpose, while remaining
alert to such financial flows.
VIII. MONEY-LAUNDERING AND GENERATION OF UNACCO-
UNTED MONEY
The Committee specifically sought to know whether PMLA
amendments will address black money generated through the illegitimate
mining and sale of iron ore and other minerals and illegal land acquisition
in the real estate sector and whether the proposed amendment
would provide mechanism to trace the money trail of mining related
transactions.
The Ministry have replied in their post-evidence note that:—
“Cases of illegal mining of iron ore in the States of Karnataka and
Andhra Pradesh, based on the charge sheet filed by CBI for the
scheduled offence, is currently under investigation by the Directorate
of Enforcement under PMLA”.
The Committee further enquired on the issue of sources of money-
laundering and desired to know as to which authority was mandated to
determine whether the correct production level is reported or not.
The Ministry have submitted in their reply that Central Excise now
acts on self assessment and self removal basis. If there is any complaint
with regard to goods being moved without any payment or under
reporting of production, the Excise Department takes care of it.

17
In this connection, the Committee also desired to know the details
of cases detected by the Intelligence wing of the Income Tax Department
and whether there were enough personnel in the Deptt. to handle this.
The Ministry have explained the position as below:—
“The Income Tax department takes action against tax evasion based
on information/complaints, which are processed and verified.
Information technology tools are used appropriately for processing
and verification of such information. During the last three financial
years, unaccounted assets worth Rs. 2,620 crore, including cash
amounting to Rs. 1,235 crore, have been seized and undisclosed
income of Rs. 28,040 crore has been detected by the Investigation
Directorates of the Central Board of Direct Taxes. Besides, during
income tax assessment proceedings also, under-reported or
misreported incomes are detected and brought to tax”.
On the manpower side, they have submitted that:—
“There is acute shortage of both manpower and budgetary
resources in the Income Tax department, particularly in the
Investigation Directorates. Increasing number of taxpayers,
processing of large quantum of data collected, new responsibilities,
and increasing expectations of taxpayers for international quality
services have necessitated increase in manpower resources of the
department. The department has, accordingly, submitted a proposal
for cadre restructuring seeking about 20,000 additional manpower
in different grades. Complementary budgetary resources will be
required to fund the expenditure for hiring, training, equipping
and meeting employment expenses of thus additional manpower.
It is also to be noted that as against the average global cost of
1% – 1.5 %, the cost of collection of the Income Tax department
is less than 0.58 %, indicating shortage of resources.”
The Committee, while further probing the issue of large
unaccounted money leading to money-laundering activities, asked
as to what effective infrastructure has been put in place to de-
accelerate the generation of black money.
The Ministry on this point have explained as under:—
“The Income Tax Department has set up an Integrated Taxpayer
Data Management System (ITDMS) to electronically collate
information collected from various sources, i.e. Tax Returns, TDS
returns, Annual Information Returns, information collected by the
Central Information Branches (CIB), etc. The same is utilized for

18
investigation of tax evasion information/complaints, including for
developing cases for search and seizure action. Information received
from Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-IND) regarding suspicious
transactions from various banks and financial institutions are also
investigated by the Income Tax Department.”
While elaborating on the efforts made by the Department to augment
revenue, the Ministry have submitted that persistent efforts made by
the Income Tax Department and its investigative machinery have resulted
in substantial increase in Direct Tax revenue collections, indicating
increased voluntary compliance and reduction of black money and
tax evasion.
The Department of Revenue have submitted that the Income Tax
Department has set up an Integrated Taxpayer Data Management
System (ITDMS) to electronically collate information collected from
different sources and that “the efforts made by the Department have
resulted in substantial increase in direct tax revenue, indicating
increased voluntary compliance and reduction of black money and tax
evasion”. The Committee, however, do not share the optimism of the
Department on the revenue front, as there is widespread perception
of tax avoidance and evasion leading to large-scale generation of
unaccounted money in the economy. Tax-GDP ratio has also been only
stagnating. Incidence of under-reporting of production levels as also
under-invoicing of exports and over-invoicing of imports are also major
factors behind generation of unaccounted money, which eventually
leads to money-laundering. Thus, the Government, specially
the Department of Revenue, must always remain alive to the
sources engendering unaccounted money in the country, if they have
to counter the menace of money-laundering. Needless to emphasise,
this requires concerted planning and coordinated enforcement action
on the part of all the enforcement agencies functioning under the
Department. The Committee desire a status report on the existing
framework, its efficacy and measures taken by the Department of
Revenue in this regard. The Committee would also expect the
Department to plug loopholes in the existing framework including
related enactments, taking into account all the aspects engendering
generation of unaccounted money.
IX. TRADE-BASED MONEY-LAUNDERING
The Committee sought to know as to how many cases were
registered involving trade-based money-laundering (TBML) and as to
how PMLA would deal with trade-based money-laundering.

19
In their post-evidence submission, the Ministry stated as
below:—
“Trade based money-laundering has not been distinguished from
other forms of money-laundering as a distinct offence. Hence, no
separate data is available showing the number of TBML cases.
Whenever proceeds of crime generated out of offences listed in the
Schedule to PMLA are laundered through trade, the necessary action
of attachment of such proceeds and further legal proceedings under
PMLA are initiated. In addition, offences under section 135 of the
Customs Act, 1962 is also a scheduled offence under PMLA. As
and when the Customs Department launches prosecution in cases
of evasion of customs duties, the Directorate of Enforcement takes
up investigation in such cases under PMLA.”
The Committee would like the Department of Revenue to take
into reckoning and incorporate incidence of trade-based money
laundering, which has not been distinguished so far as a money-
laundering offence. The Department also requires to maintain a
comprehensive data-base in this regard, which will enable them to tap
trade-based offences.
X. ONUS OF PROOF-DISTINCTION BETWEEN BONAFIDE AND
MALAFIDE TRANSACTION
The Committee expressed their concern that the onus of proof that
the property is not proceeds of crime being on the accused was rather
stringent.
The Ministry clarified their position as under:—
“As per existing section 24 of PMLA, already there is a provision
that when a person is accused of having committed the offence of
money-laundering under section 3, the burden of proving that
proceeds of crime are untainted property shall be on the accused.
This section is being amended to provide that in any proceedings
relating to proceeds of crime under PMLA, unless the contrary is
proved, it shall be presumed that such proceeds of crime is involved
in money-laundering. By virtue of this amendment, the burden of
proof would not only be on the accused but on anyone who is in
possession of the proceeds of crime.”
In this context, the Committee desired a specific clarification as to
whether this Act can distinguish between bonafide and malafide transactions
of property so that innocent persons, who end up with any property , are
not penalized.

20
The Ministry have sought to clarify that:—
“Section 8 of PMLA adequately safeguards the interests of persons
who are not found to be involved in the offence of money
laundering.”
The Committee recommend that the prescribed onus of proof
that the property in question is not out of proceeds of money-laundering
crime, being not only on the accused but also on anyone who is in
possession of the proceeds of crime, should be subject to adequate
safeguards to protect the innocent.
XI. BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP
Clause 2 (i)(fa) reads as:—
“beneficial owner” means an individual who ultimately owns or
controls a client of a reporting entity or the person on whose behalf
a transaction is being conducted and includes a person who exercises
ultimate effective control over a juridical person.”
The proposed amendment contemplates that identification of the
beneficial owners is to be done by the reporting entity in respect of such
clients as may be prescribed. The Central Government will specify the
categories of customers in respect of whom banks will be required to
verify the beneficial owner. It has been pointed out that even if such
requirement may be restricted to certain specified clients, ascertaining
beneficial owners will be extremely difficult task for the banks.
On this issue, the Ministry have stated their position as below:—
“PMLA in present form imposes obligation on the reporting entities
and does not impose obligation on clients. This is in conformity
with the FATF standards which do not impose any direct obligation
on clients to declare beneficial ownership while undertaking
transaction with the bank.”
They have further added that:—
“FATF standards also mention that “where the financial institution
is unable to comply with the applicable requirements, it should be
required not to open the account, commence business relations or
perform the transaction; or should be required to terminate the
business relationship; and should consider making a suspicious
transactions report in relation to the customer.” Thus there is distinct
obligation not to open account if the beneficial ownership cannot

21
be ascertained. This aspect, which has been mentioned in
the circulars of the regulators, should address the concern of the
banks.”
The Committee note that the anti money-laundering law in its
present form does not impose any obligation on clients, but it casts
responsibility on the reporting entities only to ascertain ‘beneficial
ownership’. According to the Ministry, FATF standards do not impose
any direct obligation on clients to declare beneficial ownership while
transacting with the bank. The reporting entities are also required to
make a suspicious transactions report in relation to their customer.
Further, there is distinct obligation not to open account, if the beneficial
ownership cannot be ascertained. The Committee are, however, of the
view that clients as well may be required to declare ‘beneficial
ownership’ while undertaking transaction with the bank. Further, the
Committee believe that considering the large volume of transactions,
which banks are required to deal with, it may not be possible for the
banks to ascertain “the beneficial owners” involved in all such
transactions. Therefore, the Committee would recommend appropriate
parameters clearly defining the nature and scope of “suspicious
transactions” and its “beneficial ownership”, enabling their systematic
sifting from general transactions, so that these transactions are reported
by banks only after prima facie examination based on such parameters/
guidelines.
XII. PERSONS CARRYING ON DESIGNATED BUSINESS OR
PROFESSION
Clause 2 (ii)(ha) reads as:—
“client” means a person who is engaged in a financial transaction
or activity with a reporting entity and includes a person on whose
behalf the person who engaged in the transaction or activity, is
acting.
It has been suggested that in the definition of “reporting entities”,
travel agents, vehicle sellers who deal in large value cash transactions,
may also be included.
The Ministry have however submitted that the Government does
not agree with the suggestion.
The Committee would recommend that the definition of ‘reporting
entities’ may be widened so as to include categories such as travel
agents, vehicle sellers/dealers etc., who deal in large value cash
transactions.

22
XIII. PERSONS ENGAGED IN SAFE KEEPING AND
ADMINISTRATION OF CASH AND LIQUID SECURITIES ON
BEHALF OF OTHER PERSONS
Clause 2 (ix)(sa)(v) reads as:—
“person engaged in safekeeping and administration of cash and
liquid securities on behalf of other persons, as may be notified by
the Central Government”.
It has been suggested that necessary changes may be made in the
proposed amendments to exclude any obligation on the part of
banks to verify contents of the safe deposit lockers to satisfy
themselves that they are not proceeds of crime. The Ministry have
again submitted that the Government does not agree with the
suggestion.’’
Banks, as represented by the IBA, have submitted that it will be
very difficult for the banks to examine and verify each transaction
carried out by their clients, especially in the case of safe deposit lockers,
which is a safety facility extended to the general public. The Committee
would recommend that an appropriate declaration from the customer
may be secured in the case of safe deposit lockers maintained by banks,
so that the ordinary bank customer is not inconvenienced.
XIV . AUDIT
Clause 11 (ii) (1A) reads as:—
“(1A) If at any stage of inquiry or any other proceedings before
him, the Director having regard to the nature and complexity of
the case, is of the opinion that it is necessary to do so, he may
direct the concerned reporting entity to get its records, as may be
specified, audited by an accountant from amongst a panel of
accountants, maintained by the Central Government for this
purpose.”
 It is proposed to amend section 13 of the PMLA Act making
provision enabling the Director to cause an inquiry to be made with
regard to the obligations of the reporting entity (Banks and Financial
Institutions) and also cause an audit of the records of the reporting entity
by an accountant from amongst a panel of accountants maintained by
the Central Government for this purpose. As far as the banks are
concerned, they are already subject to audit by the Statutory Auditors
as well as annual inspection by the Reserve Bank of India. In the course
of such audit and inspection the records of the banks are verified to

23
check whether all the requirements under the PMLA Act have been
complied with the banks. The banks as represented by the IBA are,
therefore, of the view that there is no need for one more audit to be
conducted by the auditors appointed by the Central Government. If the
Director is of the view that the records of a particular bank are not being
maintained or there are any other non-compliances, the same can be
reported to the Reserve Bank of India who can do the necessary verification
during the annual inspection or by conducting a special inspection, if
necessary.
The Ministry have however not agreed to this suggestion.
The Committee are of the view that causing an additional audit of
the banks to be conducted under the proposed Bill may only create
duplication and put needless burden on the banks, as they are already
subject to audit by the Statutory Auditors as well as annual inspection
by the RBI. The Committee would, therefore, suggest that in the course
of such audit and inspection, the records of the banks can be mandated
to be verified for their compliances under the anti-money laundering law
as well. Necessary instructions in this regard may be issued separately.
XV . IMPOSITION OF FINE
Clause 4 reads as:—
“In section 4 of the principal Act, the words “which may extend
to five lakh rupees” shall be omitted.”
It has been suggested that there may be an upper limit for the fine.
Moreover, a percentage of the amount of money laundered may be
considered as the fine. It has also been suggested that since the proposed
amendment to impose fine on the entity does not make any distinction
between Directors who are in charge of and responsible to the company
for the conduct of its business and other Directors like Independent
Directors, nominee Directors, etc., it would be desirable to limit the ambit
of the clause only to Directors and employees entrusted with the day-
to-day conduct of business.
The Ministry have submitted their comments as follows:—
“Recommendation 17 of FATF prescribes that countries should
ensure that effective, proportionate and dissuasive sanctions on
natural or legal persons who fail to comply with anti-money
laundering or terrorist financing requirements, is imposed. As per
the existing provisions in section 4, the fine cannot exceed
Rs. 5 lakh. This amount appears disproportionately low, given the

24
gravity of the offence of money laundering and particularly so for
a legal person. It has therefore been proposed to amend section
4 so as to provide for imposition of fine proportionate to the gravity
of the offence which will be determined by the court. It needs to
be left to judgment of the court to decide the quantum of fine”.
The proposed amendments seek to empower the authorities to
give directions/warnings and impose fines on the directors and
employees of the reporting entities. The Committee, however, find that
this does not make any distinction between Directors who are in charge
of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business and
other Directors (Independent Directors, Nominee Directors etc.) It would
therefore be desirable to limit the ambit to Directors and employees
who are responsible and entrusted with the conduct of the day-to-day
business of the reporting entity and who are entrusted with the task
of complying with the provisions of PMLA.
XVI. MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
Clause 9 (sub-clause 3 and 4) reads as:—
“(3) The records referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall
be maintained for a period of ten years from the date of transaction
between a client and the reporting entity .
(4) The records referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) shall be
maintained for a period of ten years after the business relationship
between a client and the reporting entity has ended or the account
has been closed, whichever is later.”
It has been pointed out that from the proposed amendments it
appears that even documents related to transactions would have to be
maintained till ten years from the date of cessation of business relationship
or the closing of the account, whichever is later. This implies that if the
customer in case of banking account does not close his account, such
documents will become permanent documents and have to be maintained
forever.
The Ministry’s submission on this issue is as follows:—
“FATF standards require maintenance of records of transactions for
at least five years. In case of records obtained through CDD
measures etc., they have to be maintained for at least five years
after the business relationship has ended. This period under PMLA
is ten years. The assumption that ‘even documents related to
transactions would have to be maintained till ten years from the

25
date of cessation of business relationship’ is not factually correct
as obligation under PMLA is to maintain record of all transactions
for a period of ten years from the date of transaction.”
The Committee desire that it may not be necessary to maintain
all kinds of records for a period of ten years from the date of transaction
between a client and the reporting entity. If the business relationship
between a client and the reporting entity has ended or the account has
been closed, the period for maintenance of records may be reduced to
five years. Clause 9 may be clarified/modified accordingly.
XVII. ELECTRONIC VERIFICATION OF IDENTITY
It has been suggested that inclusion of Electronic verification of
identity would provide flexibility for the banks and financial institutions
in ensuring KYC compliance, which may otherwise become increasingly
time-consuming.
The Ministry have submitted that:—
“The procedure and manner of verification and list of officially
valid documents is specified in the PML Rules and circulars of the
regulators. This suggestion can be examined and considered while
amending the PML Rules. The Government, therefore, does not
consider that any amendment in PMLA will be required for this
purpose. The proposed section 12(1)(c) already uses words, ‘as’
may be prescribed.’’
The Committee would suggest that provision for electronic
verification of identity may be made in the Rules, as it would help
the banks and financial institutions in ensuring KYC compliance.
XVIII.ADEQUACY OF MANPOWER AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS
The Committee during the oral evidence expressed their concern
as to whether the Law Enforcement Agencies and banks are properly
equipped with manpower and requisite information technology to handle
the additional responsibilities brought about by the amending PMLA.
The Ministry in their post-evidence reply stated as follows:—
“The Directorate of Enforcement has been sanctioned additional
manpower which will be adequate to effectively deal with the cases
of money laundering under PMLA. The process of induction of the
sanctioned additional manpower is already underway by direct

26
recruitment, promotion and deputation. The Directorate of
Enforcement is also enhancing its technological capabilities through
the NIC for greater application of IT in its work processes.
The proposed amendments to Section 12 and 13 of the PML Act
do not place any additional obligations on the banks as compared
to the present requirements. It may be mentioned that after
introduction of Core Banking Solutions (CBS) by banks maintenance
and retrieval of records is no longer manpower intensive”.
On being enquired as to whether there were adequate personnel
in the Enforcement Directorate to effectively implement the PMLA. The
Ministry in a written note have submitted that the sanctioned strength
of the officers and staff at various levels in the Directorate of Enforcement
has been recently increased from 745 to 2064 in order to enhance its
operational effectiveness having regard to the increase in work relating
to PMLA. Recruitment has been undertaken in three phases.
The Committee desired to know the Ministry’s views on the
desirability of large training budget for the organizations for training of
their personnel in overseas crime enforcement agencies.
The Ministry have expressed their views as under:—
“The suggestion of the Committee is well taken. While the officers
at various levels are already being sent on training to other countries
for upgrading of their skills in fiscal crimes, capacity building in
investigating money laundering offences etc., the Dept. will take
further steps to augment training in related areas”.
The Committee find although the sanctioned strength of the nodal
enforcement agency under the PMLA, namely the Enforcement
Directorate has been substantially enhanced, their effective strength
still remains inadequate. The Committee are therefore of the view that
all the agencies entrusted with key responsibilities under PMLA,
especially the FIU-IND and the Enforcement Directorate should be
adequately staffed with requisite skills to meet their operational
requirements. They should also be provided professional training in
line with international standards. The Committee would like to
emphasise that the operational effectiveness of enforcement agencies
should not suffer for want of staff and training.
XIX. MANAGEABILITY OF FINANCIAL DATA
On the issue of manageability, the Committee specifically
enquired about reduction in the volume of financial data received

27
under the PMLA reporting framework so that attention is focused on
larger cases.
The Ministry’s reply in this regard is re-produced as under:—
“Under the FATF standards, two kinds of reports are required to
be filed with FIU- (1) STRs, which are irrespective of any monetary
value, and (2) threshold based report e.g. Cash Transaction Reports
(CTRs). In terms of numbers, CTRs constitute the bulk of financial
information received in FIU. In some major countries(*) the reporting
threshold for CTR is at the level of $ 10,000. In India, this threshold
is Rs.10 lakh, which is substantially higher than $ 10,000 and
therefore raising it further only to reduce the volume of financial
data may not be desirable.
FIU-IND is in advanced stage of rolling out Project FINnet which
has been designed with the objective to adopt industry best practice
and appropriate technology to collect, analyse and disseminate
financial information. Project FINnet would harness data mining
and business intelligence tools for identifying actionable cases from
the financial data received from the reporting entities”.
The Committee believe that the volume of financial data required
under PMLA may become very unwieldy and hence unmanageable.
It would also require large number of staff which Government may
not be able to provide. The Committee would, therefore, suggest that
certain parameters/thresholds may be stipulated so that all kinds of
data are not processed. The proposed framework should thus focus on
larger cases and laundering-prone categories/sectors. In this context,
the Committee would suggest that a comprehensive data-base would
be useful for analyzing the complex inter-relationship among the
transactions and entities and their trend and pattern over time.
XX. FAST-TRACKING OF CASES
On the question of expediting the cases, the Committee desired to
know whether this law bring about fast-tracking of cases and speed in
investigation.
The Ministry have explained that:—
“With the sanction of additional manpower to the Directorate of
Enforcement, the investigations under PMLA are expected to be
conducted expeditiously. Secrecy in concerned matters is being
maintained. Further, section 43 of PMLA provides for designating

28
Courts of Session as Special Courts for trial of the offence of money
laundering punishable under section 4 ibid.”
The Committee would not like the enquiries under PMLA to
become open-ended without any concrete outcomes. It is, therefore,
necessary that time-lines are prescribed for completing the investigative
process. If fruitful action has to be taken against money-laundering,
it is important that cases are fast-tracked, the culprits punished and
the proceeds confiscated without any delay. Special courts, being set
up to decide cases of money-laundering should be geared up to help
achieve this objective without any hitch.
With the modifications and amendments suggested by the
Committee, it is expected that the PMLA would substantially conform
to the global standards and help in strengthening and coordinating
efforts of both national and international intelligence, investigation
and enforcement agencies in combating money laundering and
terror-financing. In this context, the Committee would like to once
again emphasise that the anti-money laundering law should seek to
tighten any laxity in the existing enforcement mechanism and secure
speedier convictions in a stipulated time-frame.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
8 May, 2012 Chairman,
18 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

29
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9th April, 2012 from 1430 hrs.
to 1645 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Prem Das Rai
7. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
8. Shri Yashvir Singh
9. Shri Manica Tagore
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Piyush Goyal
12. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
13. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

30
Part I
(1430 hrs. to 1515 hrs.)
WITNESSES
2. *** *** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
Part II
(1515 hrs. to 1645 hrs.)
WITNESSES
1. Shri R.S. Gujral, Finance Secretary and Secretary (Revenue)
2. Shri V .K. Garg, Joint Secretary (TRU-II), Department of
Revenue
3. Shri Bimal Julka, Additional Secretary and DG (DOC),
Department of Economic Affairs
4. Shri Umesh Kumar, Joint Secretary, Department of Financial
Services
5. Shri Rajan S. Katoch, Director (Enforcement)
6. Shri S.K. Sawhney, Special Director of Enforcement
7. Shri Balesh Kumar, Special Director of Enforcement
8. Shri Praveen Kumar Tiwari, Director (FIU-IND)
9. Shri B. Mahapatra, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India
(RBI)
10. Shri G.S. Hegde, Principal Legal Advisor, RBI
11. Shri S.K. Jha, DGM, RBI
12. Shri P .K. Nagpal, Executive Director, SEBI
13. Shri Kuneel Prem, CSO(L), IRDA
3. The Committee, thereafter took oral evidence of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) on ‘the prevention of Money Laundering
(Amendment) Bill, 2011’. The major issues discussed included mutual
evaluation report of Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on prevention
of money laundering, amendments proposed in the Bill as per
recommendations of FATF, generation of black money through
Participatory Notes, round-tripping of black money, generation of black
money through the illegitimate sale of iron ore and other minerals, illegal

31
land acquisition in the real estate sector and mechanism existing to
deaccelerate the generation of black money etc. The Chairman directed
the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the
discussion within a week’s time.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned at 1645 hours.

32
MINUTES OF THE NINTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08th May , 2012 from 1000 hrs.
to 1145 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Prem Das Rai
7. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
12. Shri Piyush Goyal
13. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
14. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

33
2. The Committee took up the draft Report on the ‘Prevention of
Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2011 for consideration and
adoption.
3. The Committee adopted the above draft report with some minor
modifications as suggested by Members. The Committee authorised the
Chairman to finalise the Report in the light of the modifications suggested
and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

34
APPENDIX II
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 133 of 2011
THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-
second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention
of Money-laundering (Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in sub-section (1),—
(i) after clause (f), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(fa) “beneficial owner” means an
individual who ultimately owns or
controls a client of a reporting entity or
the person on whose behalf a transaction
is being conducted and includes a person
who exercises ultimate effective control
over a juridical person;’;
(ii) after clause (h), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section
2.
15 of 2003.

35
‘(ha) “client” means a person who is
engaged in a financial transaction or
activity with a reporting entity and
includes a person on whose behalf the
person who engaged in the transaction
or activity, is acting;’;
(iii) after clause (i), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ia) “corresponding law” means any
law of any foreign country corresponding
to any of the provisions of this Act or
dealing with offences in that country
corresponding to any of the scheduled
offences;
(ib) “dealer” has the same meaning
as assigned to it in clause (b) of section
2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956;’;
(iv) clause (ja) shall be omitted;
(v) for clause (l), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(l) “financial institution” means a
financial institution as defined in
clause (c) of section 45-I of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934 and includes a
chit fund company, a housing finance
institution, an authorised person, a
payment system operator, a non-banking
financial company and the Department
of Posts in the Government of India;’;
(vi) for clause (n), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(n) “intermediary” means,—
(i) a stock-broker, sub-broker, share
transfer agent, banker to an issue, trustee to
a trust deed, registrar to an issue, merchant
banker, underwriter, portfolio manager,
investment adviser or any other intermediary
associated with securities market and
74 of 1956.
2 of 1934.

36
registered under section 12 of the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; or
(ii)  an association recognised or
registered under the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952 or any member of such
association; or
(iii)  intermediary registered by the
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority; or
(iv) a recognised stock exchange referred
to in clause (f) of section 2 of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;’;
(vii) in clause (q), the words “and includes
a person carrying on designated business or
profession” shall be omitted;
(viii) in clause (ra), in sub-clause (i), for
the word “remits”, the words “transfers in
any manner” shall be substituted;
(ix) after clause (s), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(sa) “person carrying on designated
business or profession” means,—
(i) a person carrying on activities
for playing games of chance for cash
or kind, and includes such activities
associated with casino;
(ii) a Registrar or Sub-Registrar
appointed under section 6 of the
Registration Act, 1908, as may be
notified by the Central Government;
(iii) real estate agent, as may be
notified by the Central Government;
(iv) dealer in precious metals,
precious stones and other high value
goods, as may be notified by the
Central Government;
15 of 1992.
74 of 1952.
42 of 1956.
16 of 1908.

37
(v)  person engaged in safe-
keeping and administration of cash
and liquid securities on behalf of
other persons, as may be notified by
the Central Government; or
(vi)  person carrying on such
other activities as the Central
Government may, by notification, so
designate, from time to time;
(sb) “precious metal” means gold,
silver, platinum, palladium or rhodium
or such other metal as may be notified
by the Central Government;
(sc) “precious stone” means
diamond, emerald, ruby, sapphire or any
such other stone as may be notified by
the Central Government;’;
(x) after clause (v), the following shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation. —For the removal of
doubts, it is hereby clarified that the term
“property” includes property of any kind
used in the commission of an offence
under this Act or any of the scheduled
offences;
(va) “real estate agent” means a real
estate agent as defined in clause (88) of
section 65 of the Finance Act, 1994;’;
(xi) after clause (w), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(wa)  “reporting entity” means a
banking company, financial institution,
intermediary or a person carrying on a
designated business or profession;’.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for the
words “proceeds of crime and projecting”, the
words “proceeds of crime including its
concealment, possession, acquisition or use and
projecting or claiming” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
3.
32 of 1994.

38
4. In section 4 of the principal Act, the words
“which may extend to five lakh rupees” shall be
omitted.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, for sub-
section (1), the following sub-section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(1) Where the Director or any other
officer not below the rank of Deputy Director
authorised by the Director for the purposes
of this section, has reason to believe (the
reason for such belief to be recorded in
writing), on the basis of material in his
possession, that—
(a) any person is in possession of any
proceeds of crime;
(b) such proceeds of crime are likely
to be concealed, transferred or dealt with
in any manner which may result in
frustrating any proceedings relating to
confiscation of such proceeds of crime
under this Chapter,
he may, by order in writing, provisionally
attach such property for a period not
exceeding one hundred and eighty days from
the date of the order, in such manner as may
be prescribed:
Provided that no such order of attachment
shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled
offence, a report has been forwarded to a
Magistrate under section 173 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person authorised to investigate
the offence mentioned in that Schedule, before
a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of
the scheduled offence, as the case may be, or a
similar report or complaint has been made or filed
under the corresponding law of any other country:
Provided further that, notwithstanding
anything contained in clause (b), any property of
Amendment
of section
4.
Amendment
of section
5.
2 of 1974.

39
any person may be attached under this section
if the Director or any other officer not below the
rank of Deputy Director authorised by him for
the purposes of this section has reason to believe
(the reasons for such belief to be recorded in
writing), on the basis of material in his possession,
that if such property involved in money-
laundering is not attached immediately under this
Chapter, the non-attachment of the property is
likely to frustrate any proceeding under this
Act.”.
6. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words and
figure “section 5, or, seized”, the words “or
frozen” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (3),—
(a) in the opening portion, for the
words “record seized under section 17
or section 18 and record a finding to that
effect, such attachment or retention of the
seized property”, the words “record
seized or frozen under section 17 or
section 18 and record a finding to that
effect, whereupon such attachment
or retention or freezing of the seized
or frozen property” shall be
substituted;
(b) in clause (a) , for the words
“scheduled offence before a court; and”,
the words “offence under this Act before
a court or under the corresponding law
of any other country, before the
competent court of criminal jurisdiction
outside India, as the case may be; and”
shall be substituted;
(c) for clause (b), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(b) becomes final after an order of
confiscation is passed under sub-section
(5) or sub-section (7) of section 8 or
Amendment
of section
8.

40
section 58B or sub-section (2A) of section
60 by the Adjudicating Authority”;
(iii) in sub-section (4), for the words
“possession of the attached property”, the
following shall be substituted, namely:—
“possession of the property attached
under section 5 or frozen under sub-
section (1A) of section 17, in such manner
as may be prescribed:
Provided that if it is not practicable
to take possession of a property frozen
under sub-section (1A) of section 17, the
order of confiscation shall have the same
effect as if the property had been taken
possession of.”;
(iv) for sub-sections (5) and (6), the following
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(5) Where on conclusion of a trial of an
offence under this Act, the Special Court finds
that the offence of money-laundering has
been committed, it shall order that such
property involved in the money-laundering
or which has been used for commission of
the offence of money-laundering shall stand
confiscated to the Central Government.
(6) Where on conclusion of a trial under
this Act, the Special Court finds that the
offence of money-laundering has not taken
place or the property is not involved in
money-laundering, it shall order release of
such property to the person entitled to receive
it.
(7) Where the trial under this Act cannot
be conducted by reason of the death of the
accused or the accused being declared a
proclaimed offender or for any other reason
or having commenced but could not be
concluded, the Special Court shall, on an
application moved by the Director or a person

41
claiming to be entitled to possession of a
property in respect of which an order has
been passed under sub-section (3) of section
8, pass appropriate orders regarding
confiscation or release of the property, as the
case may be, involved in the offence of
money-laundering after having regard to the
material before it.”.
7. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the opening portion, for the words,
brackets and figures “sub-section (6) of
section 8”, the words, brackets and figures
“sub-section (5) or sub-section (7) of section
8 or section 58B or sub-section (2A) of section
60” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the first proviso,—
(a)  for the words “ Adjudicating
Authority”, the words “Special Court or
the Adjudicating Authority, as the case
may be,” shall be substituted;
(b) after the words “or seized”, the
words “or frozen” shall be inserted.
8. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), for the words, brackets and figures
“sub-section (6) of section 8”, the words, brackets
and figures “sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) or
sub-section (7) of section 8 or section 58B or
sub-section (2A)  of section 60” shall be
substituted.
9. For section 12 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“12. (1) Every reporting entity shall—
(a)  maintain a record of all
transactions, including information
relating to transactions covered
under clause (b), in such manner as to
Amendment
of section
9.
Amendment
of section
10.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 12.
Reporting
entity to
maintain
records.

42
enable it to reconstruct individual
transactions;
(b) furnish to the Director within
such time as may be prescribed,
information relating to such transactions,
whether attempted or executed, the
nature and value of which may be
prescribed;
(c) verify the identity of its clients in
such manner and subject to such
conditions, as may be prescribed;
(d) identify the beneficial owner, if
any, of such of its clients, as may be
prescribed;
(e) maintain record of documents
evidencing identity of its clients and
beneficial owners as well as account files
and business correspondence relating to
its clients.
(2) Every information maintained,
furnished or verified, save as otherwise
provided under any law for the time being
in force, shall be kept confidential.
(3) The records referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (1) shall be maintained for a
period of ten years from the date of
transaction between a client and the reporting
entity.
(4) The records referred to in clause (e)
of sub-section (1) shall be maintained for a
period of ten years after the business
relationship between a client and the
reporting entity has ended or the account has
been closed, whichever is later.
(5) The Central Government may, by
notification, exempt any reporting entity or
class of reporting entities from any obligation
under this Chapter.”.

43
10. After section 12 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“12A. (1) The Director may call for from
any reporting entity any of the records
referred to in sub-section (1) of section 12
and any additional information as he
considers necessary for the purposes of this
Act.
(2) Every reporting entity shall furnish
to the Director such information as may be
required by him under sub-section (1) within
such time and in such manner as he may
specify.
(3) Save as otherwise provided under any
law for the time being in force, every
information sought by the Director under
sub-section (1), shall be kept confidential.”.
11. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “call
for records referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 12 and may make such inquiry or
cause such inquiry to be made, as he thinks
fit”, the words “make such inquiry or cause
such inquiry to be made, as he thinks fit to
be necessary, with regard to the obligations
of the reporting entity , under this Chapter”
shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) If at any stage of inquiry or
any other proceedings before him, the
Director having regard to the nature and
complexity of the case, is of the opinion
that it is necessary to do so, he may direct
the concerned reporting entity to get its
records, as may be specified, audited by
an accountant from amongst a panel of
accountants, maintained by the Central
Government for this purpose.
Insertion of
new section
12A.
Access to
information.
Amendment
of section
13.

44
(1B) The expenses of, and incidental
to, any audit under sub-section (1A) may
be determined by the Director and shall
be paid by the reporting entity and in
default of such payment, shall be
recoverable from such reporting entity
in the manner provided in section 69.”;
(iii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) If the Director, in the course of
any inquiry, finds that a reporting entity
or its designated director on the Board
or any of its employees has failed to
comply with the obligations under this
Chapter, then, without prejudice to any
other action that may be taken under any
other provisions of this Act, he may—
(a) issue a warning in writing; or
(b) direct such reporting entity or its
designated director on the Board or any
of its employees, to comply with specific
instructions; or
(c) direct such reporting entity or its
designated director on the Board or any
of its employees, to send reports at such
interval as may be prescribed on the
measures it is taking; or
(d) by an order, impose a monetary
penalty on such reporting entity or its
designated director on the Board or any
of its employees, which shall not be less
than ten thousand rupees but may extend
to one lakh rupees for each failure.”;
(iv) after sub-section (3), the following
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.— For the purpose of
this section, “accountant” shall mean a
chartered accountant within the meaning
of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.”.
38 of 1949.

45
12. For section 14 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“14. Save as otherwise provided in
section 13, the reporting entity, its directors
and employees shall not be liable to any civil
or criminal proceedings against them for
furnishing information under clause  (b)  of
sub-section (1) of section 12.”.
13. For section 15 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“15. The Central Government may, in
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India,
prescribe the procedure and the manner of
maintaining and furnishing information by a
reporting entity under sub-section (1) of
section 12 for the purpose of implementing
the provisions of this Act.”.
14. In section 17 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1),—
(a) in clause (iii),  after the word
“money-laundering,” , the word “or”
shall be inserted;
(b) after clause (iii), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iv)  is in possession of any
property related to crime,”;
(c) in clause (d), after the words “such
record or”, the words “property, if
required or” shall be inserted;
(d) for the proviso, the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that no search shall be
conducted unless, in relation to the
Substitution
of new
section for
section 14.
No civil or
criminal
proceedings
against
reporting
entity , its
directors
and
employees
in certain
cases.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 15.
Procedure
and manner
of furnish-
ing
information
by report-
ing entities.
Amendment
of section
17.

46
scheduled offence, a report has been
forwarded to a Magistrate under
section 157 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person, authorised to
investigate the offence mentioned in
the Schedule, before a Magistrate or
court for taking cognizance of the
scheduled offence, as the case may
be, or in cases where such report is
not required to be forwarded, a
similar report of information
received or otherwise has been
submitted by an officer authorised
to investigate a scheduled offence to
an officer not below the rank of
Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or equivalent
being head of the office or Ministry
or Department or Unit, as the case
may be, or any other officer who may
be authorised by the Central
Government, by notification, for this
purpose.”;
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) Where it is not practicable to
seize such record or property, the officer
authorised under sub-section (1), may
make an order to freeze such property
whereupon the property shall not be
transferred or otherwise dealt with,
except with the prior permission of the
officer making such order, and a copy of
such order shall be served on the person
concerned:
Provided that if, at any time before
its confiscation under sub-section (5) or
(7) of section 8 or section 58B or sub-
section (2A) of section 60, it becomes
practical to seize a frozen property , the
officer authorised under sub-section (1)
may seize such property.”;
2 of 1974.

47
(iii) in sub-section (2), after the words,
“immediately after search and seizure” the
words “or upon issuance of a freezing order”
shall be inserted;
(iv) for sub-section (4), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The authority seizing any record
or property under sub-section (1) or
freezing any record or property under
sub-section (1A) shall, within a period of
thirty days from such seizure or freezing,
as the case may be, file an application,
requesting for retention of such record
or property seized under sub-section (1)
or for continuation of the order of
freezing served under sub-section (1A),
before the Adjudicating Authority .”.
15. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), for the proviso, the following proviso
shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that no search of any person
shall be made unless, in relation to the
scheduled offence, a report has been
forwarded to a Magistrate under section 157
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or
a complaint has been filed by a person,
authorised to investigate the offence
mentioned in the Schedule, before a
Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of
the scheduled offence, as the case may be, or
in cases where such report is not required to
be forwarded, a similar report of information
received or otherwise has been submitted by
an officer authorised to investigate a
scheduled offence to an officer not below the
rank of Additional Secretary to the
Government of India or equivalent being
head of the office or Ministry or Department
or Unit, as the case may be, or any other
officer who may be authorised by the Central
Government, by notification, for this
purpose.”;
Amendment
of section
18.
2 of 1974.

48
16. For sections 20 and 21 of the principal
Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“20. (1) Where any property has been
seized under section 17 or section 18 or frozen
under sub-section (1A) of section 17 and the
officer authorised by the Director in this
behalf has, on the basis of material in his
possession, reason to believe (the reason for
such belief to be recorded by him in writing)
that such property is required to be retained
for the purposes of adjudication under
section 8, such property may , if seized, be
retained or if frozen, may continue to remain
frozen, for a period not exceeding one
hundred and eighty days from the day on
which such property was seized or frozen,
as the case may be.
(2) The officer authorised by the Director
shall, immediately after he has passed an
order for retention or continuation of freezing
of the property for purposes of adjudication
under section 8, forward a copy of the order
along with the material in his possession,
referred to in sub-section (1) , to the
Adjudicating Authority, in a sealed envelope,
in the manner as may be prescribed and such
Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order
and material for such period as may be
prescribed.
(3) On the expiry of the period specified
in sub-section  (1) , the property shall be
returned to the person from whom such
property was seized or whose property was
ordered to be frozen unless the Adjudicating
Authority permits retention or continuation
of freezing of such property beyond the said
period.
(4) The Adjudicating Authority, before
authorising the retention or continuation of
freezing of such property beyond the period
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 20
and section 21.
Retention of
property

49
specified in sub-section (1), shall satisfy
himself that the property is prima facie
involved in money-laundering and the
property is required for the purposes of
adjudication under section 8.
(5) After passing the order of confiscation
under sub-section (5) or sub-section (7) of
section 8, the Court or the Adjudicating
Authority, as the case may be, shall direct
the release of all property other than
the property involved in money-laundering
to the person from whom such property
was seized or the persons entitled to
receive it.
(6) Where an order releasing the property
has been made by the Court under sub-
section (6) of section 8 or by the Adjudicating
Authority under section 58B or sub-section
(2A) of section 60, the Director or any officer
authorised by him in this behalf may
withhold the release of any such property
for a period of ninety days from the date of
such order, if he is of the opinion that such
property is relevant for the appeal
proceedings under this Act.
21. (1) Where any records have been seized,
under section 17 or section 18 or frozen under
sub-section (1A)  of section 17 and the
Investigating Officer or any other officer
authorised by the Director in this behalf has
reason to believe that any of such records are
required to be retained for any inquiry under
this Act, such records may if seized, be retained
or if frozen, may continue to remain frozen, for
a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty
days from the day on which such records were
seized or frozen, as the case may be.
(2) The person, from whom records
seized or frozen, shall be entitled to obtain
copies of records.
Retention
of records.

50
(3) On the expiry of the period specified
under sub-section (1), the records shall be
returned to the person from whom such records
were seized or whose records were ordered to
be frozen unless the Adjudicating Authority
permits retention or continuation of freezing
of such records beyond the said period.
(4) The Adjudicating Authority, before
authorising the retention or continuation of
freezing of such records beyond the period
specified in sub-section (1), shall satisfy
himself that the records are required for the
purposes of adjudication under section 8.
(5)  After passing of an order of
confiscation under sub-section (5) or sub-
section (7) of section 8, the Adjudicating
Authority shall direct the release of the
records to the person from whom such
records were seiged.
(6) Where an order releasing the records
has been made by the Court under sub-
section (6) of section 8 or by the Adjudicating
Authority under section 58B or sub-section
(2A) of section 60, the Director or any officer
authorised by him in this behalf may
withhold the release of any such record for
a period of ninety days from the date of such
order, if he is of the opinion that such record
is relevant for the appeal proceedings under
this Act.”.
17. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), after the words “a survey or a search,”,
the words “or where any record or property is
produced by any person or has been resumed or
seized from the custody or control of any person
or has been frozen under this Act or under any
other law for the time being in force,” shall be
inserted.
18. In section 23 of the principal Act, for the
words and figure “under section 8, it shall, unless
otherwise proved to the satisfaction of the
Amendment
of section
22.
Amendment
of section
23.

51
Adjudicating Authority”, the words “under
section 8 or for the trial of the money-laundering
offence, it shall unless otherwise proved to the
satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority or the
Special Court” shall be substituted.
19. For section 24 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“24. In any proceedings relating to
proceeds of crime under this Act, unless the
contrary is proved, it shall be presumed that
such proceeds of crime is involved in money-
laundering.”.
20. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), for the words “banking company,
financial institution or intermediary”, the words
“reporting entity” shall be substituted.
21. In section 28 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section  (1) , for the words “he
is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court
or of a High Court or is qualified to be a
Judge of the High Court”, the words “he is
a sitting or retired Judge of the Supreme
Court or a sitting or retired Chief Justice of
a High Court” shall be substituted.
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) A person shall not be qualified
for appointment as a Member of the
Appellate Tribunal unless he is a person
of ability, integrity and standing who has
shown capacity in dealing with problems
relating to handling of matters of proceeds
of crime and has qualification and
experience of finance, economics, taxation,
accountancy, law or administration.”;
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words “of
a High Court”, the words “Chief Justice of
a High Court” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
24.
Burden of
Proof.
Amendment
of section
26.
Amendment
of section
28.

52
22. For section 42 of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“42. Any person aggrieved by any
decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal
may file an appeal to the Supreme Court
within sixty days from the date of
communication of the decision or order of
the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question
of law arising out of such order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if
it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal
within the said period, allow it to be filed
within a further period not exceeding sixty
days.
42A. Every appeal filed before a High
Court but pending before it immediately
before the commencement of the Prevention
of Money-laundering (Amendment) Act, 2011
shall continue to be an appeal before the High
Court and shall be dealt with by that High
Court as if the Prevention of Money-
laundering (Amendment) Act, 2011 had not
been passed.”.
23. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1),—
(i) in clause (a), in the proviso, the word
“or” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
(ii)  in clause (b) , for the words
“cognizance of the offence for which the
accused is committed to it for trial” the words
“cognizance of offence under section 3,
without the accused being committed to it
for trial” shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (b), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(c) if the court which has taken
cognizance of the scheduled offence is
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 42.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Continua-
tion of
certain
appeals
before the
High Court.
Amendment
of section
44.

53
other than the Special Court which has
taken cognizance of the complaint of the
offence of money-laundering under sub-
clause (b), it shall, on an application by
the authority authorised to file a
complaint under this Act, commit the
case relating to the scheduled offence to
the Special Court and the Special Court
shall, on receipt of such case proceed to
deal with it from the stage at which it
is committed.
(d) a Special Court while trying the
scheduled offence or the offence of
money-laundering shall hold trial in
accordance with the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as it
applies to a trial before a Court of
Session.”.
24. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (1), in clause (b), for the words “banking
company or a financial institution or a company,”,
the words “reporting entity” shall be substituted.
25. In section 54 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the opening portion, for the word
“officers”, the words “officers and others”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(d) members of the recognised stock
exchange referred to in clause (f) of
section 2 and the officers of the stock
exchanges recognised under section 4 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1956;
(iii) after clause (h), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ha)  officers of the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority
established under section 3 of the
Amendment
of section
50.
Amendment
of section
54.
2 of 1974.
42 of 1956.

54
Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority Act, 1999;
(hb) officers of the Forward Markets
Commission established under section 3
of the Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1952;
(hc) officers and members of the
recognised association recognised under
section 6 of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952;
(hd) officers of the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority;
(he) officers of the Department of
Posts in the Government of India;
(hf)  Registrars or Sub-Registrars
appointed by the State Governments
under section 6 of the Registration Act,
1908;
(hg) registering authority empowered
to register motor vehicles under
Chapter IV of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988;
(hh) officers and members of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India constituted under section 3 of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949;
(hi)  officers and members of the
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants
of India constituted under section 3 of
the Cost and Works Accountants Act,
1959;
(hj)  officers and members of the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India
constituted under section 3 of the
Company Secretaries Act, 1980;”;
(iv) in clause  (j) for the words “banking
companies”, the words “reporting entities”
shall be substituted.
41 of 1999.
74 of 1952.
74 of 1952.
16 of 1908.
59 of 1988.
38 of 1949.
23 of 1959.
56 of 1980.

55
26. After section 58, the following sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“58A. Where on closure of the criminal case
or conclusion of a trial in a criminal court
outside India under the corresponding law
of any other country, such court finds that
the offence of money-laundering has not
taken place or the property in India is not
involved in money-laundering, the Special
Court shall, on an application moved by the
concerned person or the Director, after notice
to the other party, order release of such
property to the person entitled to receive it.
58B. Where the trial under the
corresponding law of any other country
cannot be conducted by reason of the death
of the accused or the accused being declared
a proclaimed offender or for any other reason
or having commenced but could not be
concluded, the Central Government shall, on
receipt of a letter of request from a court or
authority in a contracting State requesting for
confiscation or release of property, as the case
may be, forward the same to the Director to
move an application before the Special Court
and upon such application the Special Court
shall pass appropriate orders regarding
confiscation or release of such property
involved in the offence of money-
laundering.”.
27. In section 60, of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words and
figures “property under section 5 or where
an Adjudicating Authority has made an order
confirming such attachment or confiscation
of any property under section 8”, the words,
figures, brackets and letter “property under
section 5 or for freezing under sub-section
(1A) of section 17 or where an Adjudicating
Insertion of
new
sections
58A and
58B.
Special
Court to
release the
property.
Letter of
request of a
contracting
State or
authority
for
confiscation
or release
of the
property.
Amendment
of section
60.

56
Authority has made an order relating to a
property under section 8 or where a Special
Court has made an order of confiscation
relating to a property under sub-section (5)
or sub-section (6) of section 8” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) for the words “attachment or
confiscation”, the words “attachment,
seizure, freezing or confiscation” shall be
substituted;
(b) for the word and figure “section
3”, the words “a corresponding law”
shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A)  Where on closure of the
criminal case or conclusion of trial in a
criminal court outside India under the
corresponding law of any other country,
such court finds that the offence of
money-laundering under the
corresponding law of that country has
been committed, the Adjudicating
Authority shall, on receipt of an
application from the Director for
execution of confiscation under sub-
section (2), order, after giving notice to
the affected persons, that such property
involved in money-laundering or which
has been used for commission of the
offence of money-laundering stand
confiscated to the Central Government.”.
28. In section 63 of the principal Act, after
sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained
in clause (c) of sub-section (2), a person who
intentionally disobeys any direction issued
under section 50 shall also be liable to be
Amend-
ment of
section 63.

57
prosecuted against under section 174 of the
Indian Penal Code.”.
29. For section 69 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“69. Where any fine or penalty imposed
on any person under section 13 or section 63
is not paid within six months from the day
of imposition of fine or penalty, the Director
or any other officer authorised by him in this
behalf may proceed to recover the amount
from the said person in the same manner as
prescribed in Schedule II of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 for the recovery of arrears and he
or any officer authorised by him in this behalf
shall have all the powers of the Tax Recovery
Officer mentioned in the said Schedule for
the said purpose.”.
30. In section 70 of the principal Act, the
Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 1
thereof and after Explanation 1 as so numbered,
the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Explanation  2.—For the removal of
doubts, it is hereby clarified that a company
may be prosecuted, notwithstanding whether
the prosecution or conviction of any legal
juridical person shall be contingent on the
prosecution or conviction of any individual.”.
31. In section 72 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2), for the words “High Court”, wherever
they occur, the words “Supreme Court” shall be
substituted.
32. In section 73 of the principal Act, in sub-
section (2),—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa)  the manner of provisional
Substitution
of new
section for
section 69.
Recovery of
fine or
penalty.
Amendment
of section
70.
Amendment
of section
72.
Amendment
of section
73.
45 of 1860.
43 of 1961.

58
attachment of property under sub-section (1)
of section 5;”;
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ee) the manner of seizing or taking
possession of property attached under
section 5 or frozen under sub-section (1A)
of section 17 or under sub-section (4) of
section 8;”;
(iii) clause (h) shall be omitted;
(iv) in clause (i), for the words “the time
within which”, the words “the nature and
value of transactions and the time within
which” shall be substituted;
(v) for clause (j), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(j) the manner and the conditions
in which identity of clients shall be
verified by the reporting entities under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12;
(jj)  the manner of identifying
beneficial owner, if any, from the clients
by the reporting entities under clause (d)
of sub-section (1) of section 12;
(jjj) the period of interval in which
the reports are sent by the reporting
entities or any of its employees under
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section
13;”;
(vi) after clause (p), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(pp)  the manner in which the
forwarding of the order for retention or
continuation of freezing of the property
and the period of keeping such order and
material under sub-section (2) of section
20;”.

59
33. In the Schedule to the principal Act,—
(i) for Part A, the following Part shall be
substituted, namely:—
“PART A
PARAGRAPH 1
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
(45 OF 1860)
Section Description of offence
120B Criminal conspiracy.
121 Waging or attempting to wage war
or abetting waging of war, against
the Government of India.
121A Conspiracy to commit offences
punishable by section 121 against the
State.
255 Counterfeiting Government stamp.
257 Making or selling instrument for
counterfeiting Government stamp.
258 Sale of counterfeit Government
stamp.
259 Having possession of counterfeit
Government stamp.
260 Using as genuine a Government
stamp known to be counterfeit.
302 Murder.
304 Punishment for culpable homicide
not amounting to murder.
307 Attempt to murder.
308 Attempt to commit culpable
homicide.
327 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort
property , or to constrain to an illegal
act.
Amendment
of the
Schedule.

60
329 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to
extort property, or to constrain to an
illegal act.
364A Kidnapping for ransom, etc.
384 to 389 Offences relating to extortion.
392 to 402 Offences relating to robbery and
dacoity.
411 Dishonestly receiving stolen
property .
412 Dishonestly receiving property stolen
in the commission of a dacoity.
413 Habitually dealing in stolen property.
414 Assisting in concealment of stolen
property .
417 Punishment for cheating.
418 Cheating with knowledge that
wrongful loss may ensue to person
whose interest offender is bound to
protect.
419 Punishment for cheating by
personation.
420 Cheating and dishonestly inducing
delivery of property.
421 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property to prevent
distribution among creditors.
422 Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing
debt being available for creditors.
423 Dishonest or fraudulent execution of
deed of transfer containing false
statement of consideration.
424 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property.
467 Forgery of valuable security , will, etc.
471 Using as genuine a forged document
or electronic record.
Section Description of offence

61
472 and 473 Making or possessing counterfeit
seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery.
475 and 476 Counterfeiting device or mark.
481 Using a false property mark.
482 Punishment for using a false
property mark.
483 Counterfeiting a property mark used
by another.
484 Counterfeiting a mark used by a
public servant.
485 Making or possession of any
instrument for counterfeiting a
property mark.
486 Selling goods marked with a
counterfeit property mark.
487 Making a false mark upon any
receptacle containing goods.
488 Punishment for making use of any
such false mark.
489A Counterfeiting currency notes or
bank notes.
489B Using as genuine, forged or
counterfeit currency notes or bank
notes.
PARAGRAPH 2
OFFENCES UNDER THE N ARCOTIC D RUGS AND
PSYCHOTROPIC S UBSTANCES A CT, 1985
(61 OF 1985)
Section Description of offence
15 Contravention in relation to poppy
straw.
16 Contravention in relation to coca
plant and coca leaves.
Section Description of offence

62
17 Contravention in relation to prepared
opium.
18 Contravention in relation to opium
poppy and opium.
19 Embezzlement of opium by
cultivator.
20 Contravention in relation to cannabis
plant and cannabis.
21 Contravention in relation to
manufactured drugs and
preparations.
22 Contravention in relation to
psychotropic substances.
23 Illegal import into India, export from
India to transhipment of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances.
24 External dealings in narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances in
contravention of section 12 of the
Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985.
25A Contravention of orders made under
section 9A of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
27A Financing illicit traffic and
harbouring offenders.
29 Abetment and criminal conspiracy.
PARAGRAPH 3
OFFENCES UNDER THE E XPLOSIVE S UBSTANCES
ACT, 1908
(6 OF 1908)
Section Description of offence
3 Causing explosion likely to endanger
life or property .
Section Description of offence

63
4 Attempt to cause explosion, or for
making or keeping explosives with
intent to endanger life or property.
5 Making or possessing explosives
under suspicious circumstances.
PARAGRAPH 4
OFFENCES UNDER THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
(PREVENTION) ACT, 1967
( 37 OF 1967)
Section Description of offence
10 read P enalty for being member of an
with unlawful association, etc.
section 3
11 read Penalty for dealing with funds of an
with unlawful association.
section 3
13 read Punishment for unlawful activities.
with
section 3
16 read Punishment for terrorist act.
with
section 15
16A Punishment for making demands of
radioactive substances, nuclear
devices, etc.
17 Punishment for raising fund for
terrorist act.
18 Punishment for conspiracy, etc.
18A Punishment for organising of
terrorist camps.
18B Punishment for recruiting of any
person or persons for terrorist act.
19 Punishment for harbouring, etc.
20 Punishment for being member of
terrorist gang or organisation.

64
21 Punishment for holding proceeds of
terrorism.
38 Offence relating to membership of a
terrorist organisation.
39 Offence relating to support given to
a terrorist organisation.
40 Offence of raising fund for a terrorist
organisation.
PARAGRAPH 5
OFFENCES UNDER THE ARMS A CT, 1959
(54 OF 1959)
Section Description of offence
25 To manufacture, sell, transfer,
convert, repair or test or prove or
expose or offer for sale or transfer or
have in his possession for sale,
transfer, conversion, repair, test or
proof, any arms or ammunition to
contravention of section 5 of the
Arms Act, 1959.
To acquire, have in possession or
carry any prohibited arms or
prohibited ammunition in
contravention of section 7 of the
Arms Act, 1959.
Contravention of section 24A of the
Arms Act, 1959 relating to
prohibition as to possession of
notified arms in disturbed areas, etc.
Contravention of section 24B of the
Arms Act, 1959 relating to
prohibition as to carrying of notified
arms in or through public places in
disturbed areas.
Other offences specified in section 25.
Section Description of offence

65
26 To do any act in contravention of any
provisions of section 3, 4, 10 or
section 12 of the Arms Act, 1959 in
such manner as specified in sub-
section (1) of section 26 of the said
Act.
To do any act in contravention of any
provisions of sections 5, 6, 7 or section
11 of the Arms Act, 1959 in such
manner as specified in sub-section (2)
of section 26 of the said Act.
Other offences specified in
section 26.
27 Use of arms or ammunitions in
contravention of section 5 or use of
any arms or ammunition in
contravention of section 7 of the
Arms Act, 1959.
28 Use and possession of fire arms or
imitation of fire arms in certain
cases.
29 Knowingly purchasing arms from
unlicensed person or for delivering
arms, etc., to person not entitled to
possess the same.
30 Contravention of any condition of a
licence or any provisions of the Arms
Act, 1959 or any rule made
thereunder.
PARAGRAPH 6
OFFENCES UNDER THE W ILD L IFE (P ROTECTION)
ACT, 1972
(53 OF 1972)
Section Description of offence
51 read with Hunting of wild animals.
section 9
Section Description of offence

66
51 read with Contravention of provisions of
section 17A section 17A relating to
prohibition of picking,
uprooting, etc., of specified
plants.
51 read with Contravention of provisions of
section 39 section 39 relating to wild
animals, etc., to be Government
property .
51 read with Contravention of provisions of
section 44 section 44 relating to dealings in
trophy and animal articles
without licence prohibited.
51 read with Contravention of provisions of
section 48 section 48 relating to purchase
of animal, etc., by licensee.
51 read with Contravention of provisions of
section 49B section 49B relating to
prohibition of dealings in
trophies, animals articles, etc.,
derived from scheduled animals.
PARAGRAPH 7
OFFENCES UNDER THE I MMORAL T RAFFIC
(PREVENTION) ACT, 1956
(104 OF 1956)
Section Description of offence
5 Procuring, inducing or taking person
for the sake of prostitution.
6 Detaining a person in premises
where prostitution is carried on.
8 Seducing or soliciting for purpose of
prostitution.
9 Seduction of a person in custody .
Section Description of offence

67
PARAGRAPH 8
OFFENCES UNDER THE P REVENTION OF C ORRUPTION
ACT, 1988
(49 OF 1988)
Section Description of offence
7 Public servant taking gratification
other than legal remuneration in
respect of an official act.
8 Taking gratification in order, by
corrupt or illegal means, to influence
public servant.
9 Taking gratification for exercise of
personal influence with public
servant.
10 Abetment by public servant of
offences defined in section 8 or
section 9 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.
13 Criminal misconduct by a public
servant.
PARAGRAPH 9
OFFENCES UNDER THE E XPLOSIVES A CT, 1884
(4 OF 1884)
Section Description of offence
9B Punishment for certain offences.
9C Offences by companies.
PARAGRAPH 10
OFFENCES UNDER THE ANTIQUITIES AND ARTS
TREASURES ACT, 1972
(52 OF 1972)
Section Description of offence
25 read Contravention of export trade in
with antiquities and art treasures.
section 3

68
28 Offences by companies.
PARAGRAPH 11
OFFENCES UNDER THE S ECURITIES AND E XCHANGE
BOARD OF I NDIA A CT, 1992
(15 OF 1992)
Section Description of offence
12A read Prohibition of manipulative and
with deceptive devices, insider trading
section 24 and substantial.
24 Acquisition of securities or control.
PARAGRAPH 12
OFFENCES UNDER T HE C USTOMS
ACT, 1962
(52 OF 1962)
Section Description of offence
135 Evasion of duty or prohibitions.
PARAGRAPH 13
OFFENCES UNDER THE B ONDED L ABOUR S YSTEM
(ABOLITION) A CT, 1976
(19 OF 1976)
Section Description of offence
16 Punishment for enforcement of
bonded labour.
18 Punishment for extracting bonded
labour under the bonded labour
system.
20 Abetment to be an offence.
Section Description of offence

69
PARAGRAPH 14
OFFENCES UNDER THE C HILD L ABOUR (P ROHIBITION
AND R EGULATION) ACT, 1986
(61 OF 1986)
Section Description of offence
14 Punishment for employment of any
child to work in contravention of the
provisions of section 3.
PARAGRAPH 15
OFFENCES UNDER THE T RANSPLANTATION OF H UMAN
ORGANS ACT, 1994
(42 OF 1994)
Section Description of offence
18 Punishment for removal of human
organ without authority.
19 Punishment for commercial dealings
in human organs.
20 Punishment for contravention of any
other provisions of this Act.
PARAGRAPH 16
OFFENCES UNDER THE J UVENILE J USTICE (C ARE AND
PROTECTION OF C HILDREN) A CT, 2000
(56 OF 2000)
Section Description of offence
23 Punishment for cruelty to juvenile or
child.
24 Employment of juvenile or child for
begging.
25 Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor
or narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance to juvenile or child.

70
26 Exploitation of juvenile or child
employee.
PARAGRAPH 17
OFFENCES UNDER THE E MIGRATION ACT, 1983
(31 OF 1983)
Section Description of offence
24 Offences and penalties.
PARAGRAPH 18
OFFENCES UNDER THE P ASSPORTS ACT, 1967
(15 OF 1967)
Section Description of offence
12 Offences and penalties.
PARAGRAPH 19
OFFENCES UNDER THE F OREIGNERS ACT, 1946
(31 OF 1946)
Section Description of offence
14 Penalty for contravention of
provisions of the Act, etc.
14B Penalty for using forged passport.
14C Penalty for abetment.
PARAGRAPH 20
OFFENCES UNDER THE C OPYRIGHT ACT, 1957
(14 OF 1957)
Section Description of offence
63 Offence of infringement of copyright
or other rights conferred by this Act.
Section Description of offence

71
63A Enhanced penalty on second and
subsequent convictions.
63B Knowing use of infringing copy of
computer programme.
68A Penalty for contravention of section
52A.
PARAGRAPH 21
OFFENCES UNDER THE T RADE M ARKS A CT, 1999
(47 OF 1999)
Section Description of offence
103 Penalty for applying false trade
marks, trade descriptions, etc.
104 Penalty for selling goods or
providing services to which false
trade mark or false trade description
is applied.
105 Enhanced penalty on second or
subsequent conviction.
107 Penalty for falsely representing a
trade mark as registered.
120 Punishment of abetment in India of
acts done out of India.
PARAGRAPH 22
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY
ACT, 2000
(21 OF 2000)
Section Description of offence
72 Penalty for breach of confidentiality
and privacy.
Section Description of offence

72
75 Act to apply for offence or
contravention committed outside
India.
PARAGRAPH 23
OFFENCES UNDER THE B IOLOGICAL D IVERSITY
ACT, 2002
(18 OF 2003)
Section Description of offence
55 read Penalties for contravention of section
with 6, etc.
section 6
PARAGRAPH 24
OFFENCES UNDER THE P ROTECTION OF P LANT
VARIETIES AND F ARMERS’ RIGHTS
ACT, 2001
(53 OF 2001)
Section Description of offence
70 read P enalty for applying false
with denomination, etc.
section 68
71 read Penalty for selling varieties to which
with false denomination is applied.
section 68
72 read P enalty for falsely representing a
with variety as registered.
section 68
73 read P enalty for subsequent offence.
with
section 68
Section Description of offence

73
PARAGRAPH 25
OFFENCES UNDER THE E NVIRONMENT P ROTECTION
ACT, 1986
(29 OF 1986)
Section Description of offence
15 read P enalty for discharging
with environmental pollutants, etc., in
section 7 excess of prescribed standards.
15 read P enalty for handling hazardous
with substances without complying with
section 8 procedural safeguards.
PARAGRAPH 26
OFFENCES UNDER THE W ATER (P REVENTION AND
CONTROL OF P OLLUTION) A CT, 1974
(6 OF 1974)
Section Description of offence
41(2) Penalty for pollution of stream or
well.
43 Penalty for contravention of
provisions of section 24.
PARAGRAPH 27
OFFENCES UNDER THE AIR (P REVENTION AND
CONTROL OF P OLLUTION) A CT, 1981
(14 OF 1981)
Section Description of offence
37 Failure to comply with the
provisions for operating industrial
plant.

74
PARAGRAPH 28
OFFENCES UNDER THE S UPPRESSION OF U NLAWFUL
ACTS A GAINST S AFETY OF M ARITIME N AVIGATION
AND F IXED P LATFORMS ON C ONTINENTAL
SHELF ACT, 2002
(69 OF 2002)
Section Description of offence
3 Offences against ship, fixed platform,
cargo of a ship, maritime
navigational facilities, etc.”;
(ii) in Part B, paragraphs 1 to 25 shall be
omitted;
(iii) in Part C, serial number (2) and the
entries relating thereto shall be omitted.

75
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 was enacted to
prevent money-laundering and to provide for confiscation of property
derived from, or involved in, money-laundering and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. The aforesaid Act also addresses the
international obligations under the Political Declaration and Global
Programme of Action adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations to prevent money-laundering. The Act was amended in the year
2005 and 2009 to remove the difficulties arisen in implementation of the
Act.
2. The problem of money-laundering is no longer restricted to the
geo political boundaries of any country. It is a global menace that cannot
be contained by any nation alone. In view of this, India has become a
member of the Financial Action Task Force and Asia Pacific Group on
money-laundering, which are committed to the effective implementation
and enforcement of internationally accepted standards against money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism. Consequent to the submission
of an action plan to the Financial Action Task Force to bring anti money-
laundering legislation of India at par with the international standards
and to obviate some of the deficiencies in the Act that have been
experienced by the implementing agencies, the need to amend the
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 has become necessary.
3. The Prevention of Money-Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2011,
inter alia,  seeks to—
(a) introduce the concept of ‘corresponding law’ to link the
provisions of Indian law with the laws of foreign countries
and provide for transfer of the proceeds of the foreign
predicate offence in any manner in India;
(b) introduce the concept of ‘reporting entity’ to include therein
a banking company, financial institution, intermediary or a
person carrying on a designated business or profession;
(c) enlarge the definition of offence of money-laundering to
include therein the activities like concealment, acquisition,
possession and use of proceeds of crime as criminal activities
and remove existing limit of five lakh rupees of fine under
the Act;

76
(d) make provision for attachment and confiscation of the
proceeds of crime even if there is no conviction so long as
it is proved that offence of money-laundering has taken place
and property in question is involved in money-laundering;
(e) confer power upon the Director to call for records of
transactions or any additional information that may be
required for the purposes of the Prevention of money-
laundering and also to make inquiries for non-compliance of
reporting obligations cast upon them;
(f) make the reporting entity, its designated directors on the
Board and employees responsible for omissions or
commissions in relation to the reporting obligations under
Chapter IV of the Act;
(g) provide that in any proceedings relating to proceeds of crime
under the aforesaid Act, unless the contrary is proved, it
shall be presumed that such proceeds of crime is involved
in money-laundering;
(h) provide for appeal against the orders of the Appellate Tribunal
directly to the Supreme Court;
(i) provide for the process of transfer of the cases of Scheduled
offence pending in a court which had taken cognizance of
the offence to the Special Court for trial of offence of money-
laundering and also provide that the Special Court shall, on
receipt of such case proceed to deal with it from the stage
at which it is committed.
(j) putting all the offences listed in Part A and Part B of the
Schedule to the aforesaid Act into Part A of that Schedule
instead of keeping them in two Parts so that the provision
of monetary threshold does not apply to the offences.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE
The 16th December, 2011.

77
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause  1.—This clause provides for the short title and
commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Prevention
of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 relating to definitions. This clause,
inter alia, seeks to modify , amend or substitute certain definitions and to
insert certain other new definitions. Sub-clause (i) seeks to insert the
definition of the expression “beneficial owner” to mean an individual
who ultimately owns or controls a client of a reporting entity or the
person on whose behalf a transaction is being conducted and includes
a person who exercises ultimate effective control over a juridical person.
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to define the term “client” to mean a person who
is engaged in a financial transaction or activity with a reporting entity
and includes a person on whose behalf the person who engaged in the
transaction or activity, is acting. Sub-clause (iii) seeks to insert two new
definitions relating to “corresponding law” to mean any law of any foreign
country corresponding to any of the provisions of the Act or dealing with
offences in that country corresponding to any of the scheduled
offences and the definition of the term “dealer” to provide the same
meaning as assigned to it in clause (b) of section 2 of the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956.
Sub-clause (v) seeks to substitute the existing definition of the
expression “financial institution” to mean a financial institution as defined
in clause (c) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and
includes a chit fund company, a housing finance institution, an authorised
person, a payment system operator, a non-banking financial company
and the Department of Posts in the Government of India. Sub-clause (vi)
seeks to substitute clause (n) of section 2 so as to substitute the expression
“intermediary” to mean a stock-broker, sub-broker, share transfer agent,
banker to an issue, trustee to a trust deed, registrar to an issue, merchant
banker, underwriter, portfolio manager, investment adviser or any other
intermediary associated with securities market and registered under
section 12 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; or
an association recognised or registered under the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952 or any member of such association; or intermediary
registered by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority;
or a recognised stock exchange referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of
the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. Sub-clause (vii) seeks to

78
amend clause (q) to omit the words “and includes a person carrying on
designated business or profession”.
Sub-clause (ix) seeks to insert certain new definitions such as,—
(i) “person carrying on designated business or profession” to mean a
person carrying on activities for playing games of chance for cash or
kind, and includes such activities associated with casino; a Registrar or
Sub-Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908;
real estate agent; dealer in precious metals, precious stones and other
high value goods, and any person engaged in safekeeping and
administration of cash and liquid securities on behalf of other persons;
or person carrying on such other activities as the Central Government
may, by notification, so designate, from time to time; (ii) “precious metals”
to mean gold, silver, platinum, palladium or rhodium or such other metal
as may be notified by the Central Government; (iii) “precious stone” to
mean diamond, emerald, ruby, sapphire or any such other stone as may
be notified by the Central Government. Sub-clause (x) seeks to insert, for
the removal of doubts, an Explanation after clause (v) of sub-section (1)
of section 2, that the term “property” includes property of any kind used
in the commission of an offence under this Act or any of the Scheduled
offences. Sub-clause (xi) seeks to define the term “reporting entity” to
mean a banking company, financial institution, intermediary or a person
carrying on a designated business or profession.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend section 3 of the Act relating
to offence of money-laundering. This clause seeks to include acts of
concealment, acquisition, possession and use of the proceeds of crime
within the provision of offence of money-laundering.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to amend section 4 of the Act relating
to punishment for money-laundering to omit the fine of five lakh rupees,
since the limit of fine on legal persons under Act being very small.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section
(5) of the principal Act relating to attachment of property involved in
money-laundering to facilitate attachment of proceeds of crime in all
cases, irrespective of in whose possession the property is, and also provides
for attachment in cases where report has been filed under the
corresponding law of any other country. Further this clause seeks to
increase the period of provisional attachment from existing one hundred
and fifty days to one hundred and eighty days.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 8 of the Act relating
to adjudication to delink the attachment of the property to the pendency
of the proceedings relating to the Scheduled offence and links it to the

79
money laundering offence. It further seeks to delink the attachment to
conviction. It also seeks to broaden the scope of seizing by also enabling
freezing of property and documents which cannot be seized. It also seeks
to take away the powers of the adjudicating authority to release the
attached properties, where the scheduled offence itself is found not to
have been committed or the attached property is not involved in money-
laundering and vest the same with the Special Court.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 9 of the Act relating
to vesting of property in Central Government by taking away the power
to confiscate the attached property from the Adjudicating Authority and
vesting it with the Special Court.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to make the consequential changes in
section 10 of the Act relating to management of properties confiscated
under this Chapter as the provisions relating to confiscation has been
provided under some of the sub-sections of section 8.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to substitute section 12 and to introduce
the expression “reporting entity” in the place of “banking company,
financial institution or intermediary” in section 12 of the Act. It also
widens the scope of maintenance of record that is prescribed for reporting.
This clause also seeks to omit the words “series of transactions integrally
connected” in section 12.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 12A relating
to access to information to empower the Director to call for records of
transaction or any additional information that may be required and for
the power to make enquires for non-compliance of reporting entities to
the obligations imposed upon such reporting entities.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 13 of the Act relating
to powers of Director to impose fine by the Director on the designated
Directors and the employees of the reporting entities. It further seeks to
empower the director for appointment of a chartered accountant from
amongst a panel of accountants, maintained by the Central Government.
It also seeks to make the designated directors on the board of a company
alongwith the employees responsible for omissions or commissions of
any reporting entities in their failure and to impose monetary penalty
on such reporting entity , or its designated director on the Board or any
of its employees, which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but
may extend to one lakh rupees for each such failure.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to substitute new section for section
14 not to make liable to any civil or criminal proceedings against the

80
reporting entity, its directors and employees in certain cases for furnishing
information under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 12.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to substitute a new section for section
15 of the Act relating to procedure and manner of furnishing information
by reporting entities. It provides that the Central Government may, in
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, prescribe the procedure and
the manner of maintaining and furnishing information by a reporting
entity under sub-section (1) of section 12 for the purpose of implementing
the provisions of the Act.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 17 of the Act relating
to search and seizure and includes provision for freezing any property,
so that it can be seized or attached and confiscated later. Sub-clause (ii)
seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) after sub-section (1) to provide
that no search shall be conducted unless, in relation to the scheduled
offence, a report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under section 157
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has been filed
by a person, authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in the
Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the
scheduled offence, as the case may be, or in cases where such report is
not required to be forwarded, a similar report of information received
or otherwise has been submitted by an officer authorised to investigate
a scheduled offence to an officer not below the rank of Additional Secretary
to the Government of India or equivalent being head of the office or
Ministry or Department or Unit, as the case may be, or any other officer
who may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification, for
this purpose.
Sub-clause (iv) seeks to substitute sub-section (4) with new sub-
section to provide that the authority seizing any record or property under
sub-section (1) or freezing any record or property under sub-section (1A)
shall, within a period of thirty days from such seizure or freezing, as
the case may be, file an application, requesting for retention of such
record or property seized under sub-section (1) or for continuation of
the order of freezing served under sub-section (1A), before the
Adjudicating Authority.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 18 of the Act relating
to search of persons. It seeks to substitute the existing proviso with a
new proviso in sub-section (1) of section 18 so as to provide that, no
search of any person shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled
offence, a report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under section 157
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has been filed
by a person, authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in the

81
Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the
scheduled offence, as the case may be, or in cases where such report is
not required to be forwarded, a similar report of information received
or otherwise has been submitted by an officer authorised to investigate
a scheduled offence to an officer not below the rank of Additional Secretary
to the Government of India or equivalent being head of the office or
Ministry or Department or Unit, as the case may be, or any other officer
who may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification, for
this purpose.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to substitute new sections for section
20 and section 21of the Act relating to retention of property and retention
of records respectively. It proposes,  inter alia,  to increase the period of
withholding of releasing of property or records, as the case may be, from
the existing forty-five days to ninety days so as to allow sufficient time
to the officers of Enforcement Directorate to file appeal and obtain a stay
in the cases required.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the Act relating
to presumption as to records or property also to include cases such
as where any record or property is produced by any person or
it has been seized from the custody or control of any person or has
been frozen under the Act or under any other law for the time being
in force.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 23 of the Act relating
to presumption in inter-connected transactions to include the Special
Court also alongwith the Adjudicating Authority for the purposes of
adjudication or confiscation under section 8 or for trial of the money-
laundering offence.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to substitute section 24 of the principal
Act relating to burden of proof. This clause proposes that in any
proceedings relating to proceeds of crime under the proposed legislation,
unless the contrary is proved, it shall be presumed that such proceeds
of crime is involved in money-laundering so as to ensure the property
related to the offence is not passed off to someone to avoid confiscation.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the Act relating
to Appeals to the Appellate Tribunal by replacing reference relating to
“banking company, financial institution or intermediary” with the term
“reporting entity”.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the principal
Act relating to qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and member
of the Appellate Tribunal.

82
Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend the sub-section (1) of section 28 to
substitute the words “he is a sitting or retired Judge of the Supreme
Court or a sitting or retired Chief Justice of a High Court” for the words
“he is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court or
is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court”. Sub-clause (ii) seeks to
substitute sub-section (2) of the said section to provide for qualification
of appointment as a Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless such person
is of ability, integrity and standing who has shown capacity in dealing
with problems relating to handling of matters of proceeds of crime and
has qualification and experience of finance, economics, taxation,
accountancy, law or administration.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to substitute the existing section 42
of the Act relating to Appeals to High Court with a new section relating
to Appeal to Supreme Court. This clause provides that any person
aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file
an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him
on any question of law arising out of such order. However, the Supreme
Court may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed
within a further period not exceeding sixty days. This clause further
provides for continuation of certain appeals filed before the High Court
but pending before it immediately before the commencement of the
proposed legislation to continue to be an appeal before the High Court
and to be dealt with by that High Court as if the proposed legislation
had not been passed.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 44
of the Act relating to offences triable by Special Courts. Sub-clause (ii)
provides that if the court which has taken cognizance of the scheduled
offence is other than the Special Court which has taken cognizance of
the complaint of the offence of money-laundering under sub-clause (b),
it shall, on an application by the authority authorised to file a complaint
under the proposed legislation, commit the case relating to the scheduled
offence to the Special Court and the Special Court shall, on receipt of
such case proceed to deal with it from the stage at which it is committed.
Sub-clause (iii) seeks to insert a new clause (c) after clause (b) in the said
section provides that a Special Court while trying the scheduled offence
or the offence of money-laundering shall hold trial in accordance with
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as it applies to
a trial before a Court of Session.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to amend section 50 of the Act relating
to powers of authorities regarding summons, production of documents

83
and to give evidence. It seeks to make a consequential amendment to
substitute the words “banking company or a financial institution or a
company,” with the words “reporting entity”.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to amend section 54 of the Act relating
to certain officers to assist in inquiry, etc. It seeks to provide for enlarging
the scope of section 54 so as to include new set of officials and persons
who will be expected to assist the authorities in the enforcement of the
Act by bringing various departments, entities and members of
organisations under the coverage of the Act, such as the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority , the Department of Posts, the
Forward Markets Commission, the Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority, the Registrar or Sub-Registrars appointed under
the Registration Act, 1908, the registering Authority empowered to register
motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicle Act,1988, the recognised stock
exchanges, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, the Institute
of Cost and Works Accountants of India and the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to insert new sections 58A and 58B.
The proposed new section 58A relating to Special Court to release the
property , this new clause provides that, if on closure of the criminal case
or conclusion of a trial in a criminal court outside India under the
corresponding law of any other country, such court finds that the
offence of money-laundering has not taken place or the property in India
is not involved in money-laundering, the Special Court shall, on an
application moved by the concerned person or the Director, after notice
to the other party, order release of such property to the person entitled
to receive it. The proposed new section 58B relating to letter of request
of a contracting State or authority for confiscation or release the property
provides that, if the trial under the corresponding law of any other country
cannot be conducted by reason of the death of the accused or the accused
being declared a proclaimed offender or for any other reason or having
commenced but could not be concluded, the Central Government shall,
on receipt of a letter of request from a court or authority in a contracting
State requesting for confiscation or release of property, as the case may
be, forward the same to the Director to move an application before the
Special Court and upon such application the Special Court shall pass
appropriate orders regarding confiscation or release of such property
involved in the offence of money-laundering.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 60 of the Act relating
to attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc., of property in a contracting
State or India. Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend sub-section (1) of the said
section to substitute for the words and figures “property under section 5
or where an Adjudicating Authority has made an order confirming such

84
attachment or confiscation of any property under section 8”, with the
words , figures, brackets and letter “property under section 5 or for
freezing under sub-section (1A) of section 17 or where an Adjudicating
Authority has made an order relating to a property under section 8 or
where a Special Court has made an order of confiscation relating to a
property under sub-section (5) or sub section (6) of section 8”. Sub-clause
(ii) proposes to amend sub-section (2) of the said section so as to substitute
the words “attachment or confiscation”, with the words “attachment,
seizure, freezing or confiscation”. Sub-clause (iii) seeks to insert a new
sub-section after sub-section (2) of the said Act which provides that, if
on closure of the criminal case or conclusion of trial in a criminal court
outside India under the corresponding law of any other country, such
court finds that the offence of money-laundering under the corresponding
law of that country has been committed, the Adjudicating Authority shall,
on receipt of an application from the Director for execution of confiscation
under sub-section (2), order, after giving notice to the affected persons,
that such property involved in money-laundering or which has been
used for commission of the offence of money-laundering stand confiscated
to the Central Government.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 63 of Act relating
to punishment for false information or failure to give information. It
seeks to insert a new sub-section after sub-section (3) which provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) of sub-section (2), a
person who intentionally disobeys any direction issued under section 50
shall also be liable to be proceeded against under section 174 of the
Indian Penal Code.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to substitute section 69 relating to
recovery of fine or penalty. It provides that, if any fine or penalty imposed
on any person under section 13 or section 63 is not paid within six
months from the day of imposition of fine or penalty, the Director or
any other officer authorised by him in this behalf may proceed to recover
the amount from the said person in the same manner as prescribed in
Schedule II of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the recovery of arrears and
he or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall have all the
powers of the Tax Recovery Officer mentioned in the said Schedule for
the said purpose.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to amend section 70 of the Act relating
to offences by companies. It seeks to insert a new Explanation after the
existing Explanation to clarity that a company may be prosecuted,
notwithstanding whether the prosecution or conviction of any legal
juridical person shall be contingent on the prosecution or conviction of
any individual.

85
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to amend section 72 of the Act relating
to continuation of proceedings in the event of death or insolvency . It
seeks to substitute the words “High Court”, wherever they occur, with
the words “Supreme Court”. It is a consequential change in the said
section.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to amend section 73 of the Act relating
to power to make rules. It proposes to insert clauses (aa), (ee) and clause
(pp), to omit clause (h) and to substitute clause (j) with new clause (j),
(jj) and (jjj) specifying the matters in respect of which rules may be made.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to amend the Schedule to the Act.
Sub-clause (i) seeks to substitute Part A, with new Part so as to include
the existing paragraphs 1 to 25 of Part B in Part A. Sub-clause (ii) seeks
to omit the paragraphs 1 to 25 and sub-clause (iii) proposes to amend
Part C to omit the entries relating to serial number (2).

86
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules for provisional attachment of property.
2. Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide the period within which the reporting entity to furnish
information to Director relating to transaction, the nature and value of
such transaction; to verify the identity of its client and the identity of
beneficial owner of such clients. This clause further empowers the Central
Government to notify exempting any reporting entity or class of entities
from the obligation.
3. Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide the period of interval at which the reporting entity or
its designated director on the Board or any of its employees to send
reports on the measures taken by it.
4. Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, to provide the
procedure and the manner of maintaining and furnishing information by
reporting entity for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the
Act.
5. Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules to provide the manner in which the officer shall forward a copy
of the order alongwith the materials in his possession to the Adjudicating
Authority .
6. The rules as may be made by the Central Government are
required to be laid before the Parliament. The matters in respect of which
rules may be made by the Central Government in accordance with the
provisions of the Act are matters of procedure and administrative details
and it is not practical to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

87
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE P REVENTION OF M ONEY-
LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
** * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
* *** *
(l)  “financial institution” means a
financial institution as defined in clause (c)
of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934 and includes a chit fund company,
a co-operative bank, a housing finance
institution and an authorised person, a
payment system operator and a non-banking
financial company;
* *** *
(n) “intermediary” means a stock-broker,
sub-broker, share transfer agent, banker to
an issue, trustee to a trust deed, registrar to
an issue, merchant banker, underwriter,
portfolio manager, investment adviser and
any other intermediary associated with
securities market and registered under
section 12 of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992;
* *** *
(q) “non-banking financial company”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to
it in clause (f) of section 45-I of the Reserve
Definitions.
2 of 1934.
15 of 1992.

88
Bank of India Act, 1934 and includes a person
carrying on designated business or
profession.
* *** *
(ra)  “offence of cross border
implications”, means—
(i) any conduct by a person at a place
outside India which constitutes an
offence at that place and which would
have constituted an offence specified in
Part A, Part B or Part C of the Schedule,
had it been committed in India and if
such person remits the proceeds of such
conduct or part thereof to India; or
(ii) any offence specified in Part A,
Part B or Part C of the Schedule which
has been committed in India and the
proceeds of crime, or part thereof have
been transferred to a place outside India
or any attempt has been made to transfer
the proceeds of crime, or part thereof
from India to a place outside India.
Explanation. —Nothing contained in this
clause shall adversely affect any investigation,
enquiry, trial or proceeding before any authority
in respect of the offences specified in Part A or
Part B of the Schedule to the Act before the
commencement of the Prevention of Money-
laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009.
* *** *
CHAPTER II
O
FFENCE OF MONEY-LAUNDERING
3. Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts
to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is
a party or is actually involved in any process or
activity connected with the proceeds of crime and
Offence of
money
launder-
ing.
2 of 1934.

89
projecting it as untainted property shall be guilty
of offence of money-laundering.
4. Whoever commits the offence of money-
laundering shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than three years but which may extend to seven
years and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees:
Provided that where the proceeds of crime
involved in money-laundering relates to any
offence specified under paragraph 2 of Part A of
the Schedule, the provisions of this section shall
have effect as if for the words “which may extend
to seven years”, the words “which may extend
to ten years” had been substituted.
CHAPTER III
A
TTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND C ONFISCATION
5. (1) Where the Director, or any other officer
not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised
by him for the purposes of this section, has reason
to believe (the reason for such belief to be
recorded in writing), on the basis of material in
his possession, that—
(a) any person is in possession of any
proceeds of crime;
(b) such person has been charged of
having committed a scheduled offence; and
(c) such proceeds of crime are likely to
be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any
manner which may result in frustrating any
proceedings relating to confiscation of such
proceeds of crime under this chapter,
he may , by order in writing, provisionally
attach such property for a period not exceeding
one hundred and fifty days from the date of the
order, in the manner provided in the Second
Punishment
for money
laundering.
Attachment
of property
involved in
money-
laundering.

90
Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the
Director or the other officer so authorised by him,
as the case may, shall be deemed to be an officer
under sub-rule (e) of rule 1 of that Schedule:
Provided that no such order of attachment
shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled
offence, a report has been forwarded to a
Magistrate under section 173 of the code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person, authorised to investigate
the offence mentioned in the Schedule, before a
Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the
scheduled offence, as the case may be:
Provided further that, notwithstanding
anything contained in clause (b), any property of
any person may be attached under this section
if the Director or any other officer not below the
rank of Deputy Director authorised by him for
the purposes of this section has reason to believe
(the reasons for such belief to be recorded in
writing), on the basis of material in his possession,
that if such property involved in money-
laundering is not attached immediately under this
Chapter, the non-attachment of the propoerty is
likely to frustrate any proceeding under this Act.
* *** *
8. (1) On receipt of a complaint under sub-
section (5) of section 5, or applications made
under sub-section (4) of section 17 or under sub-
section (10) of section 18, if the Adjudicating
Authority has reason to believe that any person
has committed an offence under section 3 or is
in possession of proceeds of crime, it may serve
a notice of not less than thirty days on such
person calling upon him to indicate the sources
of his income, earning or assets, out of which or
by means of which he has acquired the property
attached under sub-seciton (1) of section 5, or,
seized under section 17 or section 18, the evidence
on which he relies and other relevant information
and particulars, and to show cause why all or
Adjudica-
tion.
43 of 1961.
2 of 1974.

91
any of such properties should not be declared to
be the properties involved in money-laundering
and confiscated by the Central Government:
Provided that where a notice under this sub-
section specifies any property as being held by
a person on behalf of any other person, a copy
of such notice shall also be served upon such
other person:
Provided further that where such property
is held jointly by more than one person, such
notice shall be served to all persons holding such
property .
* *** *
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority decides
under sub-section (2)  that any property is
involved in money-laundering, he shall, by an
order in writing, confirm the attachment of the
property made under sub-section (1) of section
5 or retention of property or record seized under
section 17 or section 18 and record a finding to
that effect, such attachment or retention of the
seized property or record shall—
(a) continue during the pendency of the
proceedings relating to any scheduled offence
before a court; and
* *** *
(4) Where the provisional order of attachment
made under sub-section (1) of section 5 has been
confirmed under sub-section (3), the Director or
any other officer authorised by him in this behalf
shall forthwith take the possession of the attached
property .
(5) Where on conclusion of a trial for any
scheduled offence, the person concerned is
acquitted, the attachment of the property or
retention of the seized property or record under
sub-section (3) and net income, if any, shall cease
to have effect.

92
(6) Where the attachment of any property or
retention of the seized property or record
becomes final under clause (b) of sub-section (3),
the Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to the person
concerned, make an order confiscating such
property .
9. Where an order of confiscation has
been made under sub-section (6) of section 8 in
respect of any property of a person, all the rights
and title in such property shall vest absolutely
in the Central Government free from all
encumbrances:
Provided that where the Adjudicating
Authority, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to any other person interested in the
property attached under this Chapter, or seized
under Chapter V , is of the opinion that any
encumbrance on the property or lease-hold
interest has been created with a view to defeat
the provisions of this Chapter, it may, by order,
declare such encumbrance or lease-hold
interest to be void and thereupon the aforesaid
property shall vest in the Central Government
free from such encumbrances or lease-hold
interest:
Provided further that nothing in this section
shall operate to discharge any person from any
liability in respect of such encumbrances which
may be enforced against such person by a suit
for damages.
10. (1) * * * *
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub-
section (1) shall receive and manage the property
in relation to which an order has been made
under sub-section (6) of section 8 in such manner
and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
* *** *
Vesting of
property in
Central
Govern-
ment.
Manage-
ment of
properties
confiscated
under this
Chapter.

93
CHAPTER IV
OBLIGATIONS OF B ANKING C OMPANIES, F INANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS AND I NTERMEDIARIES
12. (1) Every banking company, financial
institution and intermediary shall—
(a) maintain a record of all transactions,
the nature and value of which may be
prescribed, whether such transactions
comprise of a single transaction or a series
of transactions integrally connected to each
other, and where such series of transactions
take place within a month;
(b) furnish information of transactions
referred to in clause (a) to the Director within
such time as may be prescribed;
(c) verify and maintain the records of the
identity of all its clients, in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that where the principal officer
of a banking company or financial institution
or intermediary, as the case may be, has
reason to believe that a single transaction or
series of transactions integrally connected to
each other have been valued below the
prescribed value so as to defeat the provisions
of this section, such officer shall furnish
information in respect of such transactions
to the Director within the prescribed time.
(2) (a) The records referred to in clause
(a) of sub-section (1) shall be maintained for
a period of ten years from the date of
transactions between the clients and the
banking company or financial institution or
intermediary, as the case may be.
(b) The records referred to in clause (c)
of sub-section (1) shall be maintained for a
period of ten years from the date of cessation
of transactions between the clients and the
Banking
companies,
financial
institutions
and
intermediar-
ies to
maintain
records.

94
banking company or financial institution or
intermediary, as the case may be.
13. (1) The Director may, either of his own
motion or on an application made by any
authority, officer or person, call for records
reffered to in sub-section (1) of section 12 and
may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to
be made, as he thinks fit.
(2) If the Director, in the course of any inquiry ,
finds that a banking company, financial
institutions or an intermediary or any of its
officers has failed to comply with the provisions
contained in section 12, then, without prejudice
to any other action that may be taken under any
other provisions of this Act, he may, by an order,
levy a fine on such banking company or financial
institution or intermediary which shall not be
less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to
one lakh rupees for each failure.
* *** *
14. Save as otherwise provided in section 13,
the banking companies, financial institutions,
intermediaries and their officers shall not be liable
to any civil proceedings against them for
furnishing information under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 12.
* *** *
17. (1) Where the Director or any other officer
not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised
by him for the purposes of this section, on the
basis of information in his possession, has reason
to believe (the reason for such belief to be
recorded in writing) that any person—
* *** *
(iii)  is in possession of any records
relating to money-laundering, then, subject
to the rules made in this behalf, he may
Powers of
Director to
impose fine.
No civil
proceedings
against
banking
companies,
financial
institutions,
etc., in
certain
cases.
Search and
seizure.

95
authorise any officer subordinate to him to—
* *** *
(d) place marks of identification on
such record or make or cause to be made
extracts or copies therefrom;
(e) make a note or an inventory of
such record or property;
(f) examine on oath any person, who
is found to be in possession or control
of any record or property, in respect of
all matters relevant for the purposes of
any investigation under this Act:
Provided that no search shall be
conducted unless, in relation to the scheduled
offence, a report has been forwarded to a
Magistrate under section 157 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has
been filed by a person, authorised to
investigate the offence mentioned in the
Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for
taking cognizance of the scheduled offence,
as the case may be.
(2) The authority, who has been authorised
under sub-section (1) shall, immediately after
search and seizure, forward a copy of the reasons
so recorded along with material in his possession,
referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating
Authority in a sealed envelope, in the manner,
as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating
Authority shall keep such reasons and material
for such period, as may be prescribed.
* *** *
(4) The authority, seizing any record or
property under this section, shall, within a period
of thirty days from such seizure, file an
application, requesting for retention of such
record or property, before the Adjudicating
Authority.
2 of 1974.

96
18. (1) If an authority, authorised in this behalf
by the Central Government by general or special
order, has reason to believe (the reason for such
belief to be recorded in writing) that any person
has secreted about his person or in anything
under his possession, ownership or control, any
record or proceeds of crime which may be useful
for or relevant to any proceedings under this Act,
he may search that person and seize such record
or property which may be useful for or relevant
to any proceedings under this Act:
Provided that no search shall be made unless,
in relation to the scheduled offence, a report has
been forwarded to a Magistrate under section
173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or
a complaint has been filed by a person, authorised
to investigate the offence mentioned in the
Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking
cognizance of the scheduled offence, as the case
may be.
* *** *
20. (1) Where any property has been seized
under section 17 or section 18, and the officer
authorised by the Director in this behalf has, on
the basis of material in his possession, reason to
believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded
by him in writing) that such property is required
to be retained for the purposes of adjudication
under section 8, such property may be retained
for a period not exceeding three months from
the end of the month in which such property
was seized.
(2) The officer authorised by the Director
immediately after he has passed an order for
retention of the property for purposes of
adjudication under section 8 shall forward a copy
of the order alongwith the material in this
possession, referred to in sub-section (1), to the
Adjudicating Authority, in a sealed envelope, in
the manner as may be prescribed and such
Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order and
Search of
persons.
Retention of
property.
2 of 1974.

97
material for such period as may be prescribed.
(3) On the expiry of the period specified in
sub-section (1), the property shall be returned to
the person from whom such property was seized
unless the Adjudicating Authority permits
retention of such property beyond the said
period.
(4)  The Adjudicating Authority, before
authorising the retention of such property beyond
the period specified in sub-section (1), shall satisfy
himself that the property is prima facie involved
in money-laundering and the property is required
for the purposes of adjudication under section 8.
(5) After passing the order of confiscation
under sub-section (6)  of section 8, the
Adjudicating Authority shall direct the release
of all properties other than the properties
involved in money-laundering to the person from
whom such properties were seized.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (5) , the Director or any officer
authorised by him in this behalf may withhold
the release of any property until filing of appeal
under section 26 or forty-five days from the date
of order under sub-section (5), whichever is
earlier, if he is of the opinion that such property
is relevant for the proceedings before the
Appellate Tribunal.
21. (1) Where any records have been seized,
under section 17, or section 18, and the
Investigating Officer or any other officer
authorised by the Director in this behalf has
reason to believe that any of such records are
required to be retained for any inquiry under
this Act, he may retain such records for a period
not exceeding three months from the end of the
month in which such records were seized.
(2) The person, from whom records were
seized, shall be entitled to obtain copies of records
retained under sub-section (1).
Retention of
records.

98
(3) On the expiry of the period specified
under sub-section (1) , the records shall be
returned to the person from whom such records
were seized unless the Adjudicating Authority
permits retention of such records beyond the said
period.
(4)  The Adjudicating Authority, before
authorising the retention of such records beyond
the period mentioned in sub-section (1), shall
satisfy himself that the records are required for
the purposes of adjudication under section 8.
(5) After passing of an order of confiscation
under sub-section (6)  of section 8, the
Adjudicating Authority shall direct the release
of the records to the person from whom such
records were seized.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (5) , the Director or any officer
authorised by him in this behalf may withhold
the release of any records until filing of appeal
under section 26 or after forty-five days from the
date of order under sub-section (5), whichever is
earlier, if he is of the opinion that such records
are relevant for the proceedings before the
Appellate Tribunal.
22. (1) Where any records or property are or
is found in the possession or control of any person
in the course of a survey or a search, it shall be
presumed that—
(i) such records or property belong or
belongs to such person;
(ii) the contents of such records are true;
and
(iii) the signature and every other parts
of such records which purport to be in the
handwriting of any particular person or
which may reasonably be assumed to have
been signed by, or to be in the handwriting
of, any particular person, are in that person’s
Presump-
tion as to
records or
property in
certain
cases.

99
handwriting, and in the case of a record,
stamped, executed or attested, that it was
executed or attested by the person by whom
it purports to have been so stamped, executed
or attested.
* *** *
23. Where money-laundering involves two
or more inter-connected transactions and one or
more such transactions is or are proved to be
involved in money-laundering, then for the
purposes of adjudication or confiscation under
section 8, it shall, unless otherwise proved to the
satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority , be
presumed that the remaining transactions from
part of such inter-connected transactions.
24. When a person is accused of having
committed the offence under section 3, the burden
of proving that proceeds of crime are untainted
property shall be on the accused.
* *** *
26. (1)** * *
(2)  Any banking company, financial
institution or intermediary aggrieved by any
order of the Director made under sub-section (2)
of seciton 13, may prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal.
* *** *
28. (1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as Chairperson unless he is or has
been a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High
Court or is qualified to be a Judge of the High
Court.
(2)  A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Member unless he—
* *** *
Presump-
tion in
intercon-
nected
transactions.
Burden
proof.
Appeal to
Appellate
Trubunal.
Qualifica-
tions for
appoint-
ment.

100
(b) has been a member of the India Legal
Service and has held a post in Grade I of that
Service for at least three years; or
(c) has been a member of the Indian
Revenue Service and has held the post of
Commissioner of Income-tax equivalent post
in that Service for at least three years;
(d) has been a member of the Indian
Economic Service and has held the post of
Joint Secretary or equivalent post in that
Service for at least three years; or
(e) has been a member of the Indian
Customs and Central Excise Service and has
held the post of a Joint Secretary or equivalent
post in that Service for at least three years;
or
(f) has been in the practice of accontancy
as a chartered accountant under the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 or as a
registered accountant under any law for the
time being in force or partly as a registered
accountant and partly as a chartered
accountant for at least ten years:
Provided that one of the members of the
Appellate Tribunal shall be from category
mentioned in clause (f), or
(g) has been a member of the Indian
Audit and Accounts Service and has held the
post of Joint Secretary or equivalent post in
that Service for at least three years.
(3) No sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or
of a High Court shall be appointed under this
section except after consultation with the Chief
Justice of India.
* *** *
38 of 1949.

101
42. any person aggrieved by any decision or
order of the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal
to the High Court within sixty days from the
date of communication of the decision or order
of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question
of law or fact arising out of such order:—
Provided that the High Court may, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the
said period, allow it to be filed within a further
period not exceeding sixty days.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
“High Court” means—
(i) the High Court within the jurisdiction
of which the aggrieved party ordinarily
resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain; and
(ii) where the Central Government is the
aggrieved party, the High Court within the
jurisdiction of which the respondent, or in a
case where there are more than one
respondent, any of the respondents,
ordinarily resides or carries on business or
personally works for gain.
* *** *
44. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedue, 1973,—
(a) The scheduled offence and the offence
punishable under section 4 shall be triable
only by the Special Court constituted for the
area in which the offence has been committed:
Provided that the Special Court,
trying a scheduled offence before the
commencement of this Act, shall continue to
try such scheduled offence; or
(b)  A Special Court may, upon a
complaint made by an authority authorised
Appeal to
High Court.
Offences
triable by
Special
Courts.
2 of 1974.

102
in this behalf under this Act take cognizance
of the offence for which the accused is
committed to it for trial.
* *** *
50. (1) The Director shall, for the purposes
of section 13, have the same powers as are vested
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) Discovery and inspection;
(b)  enforcing the attendance of any
person, including any officer of a banking
company or a financial institution or a
company, and examining him on oath;
* *** *
54. The following officers are hereby
empowered and required to assist the authorities
in the enforcement of this Act, namely:—
* *** *
(d)  officers of the stock exchange
recognised under section 4 of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
* *** *
(j) such other officers of the Central
Government, State Government, local
authorities or banking companies as the
Central Government may, by notification,
specify, in this behalf.
* *** *
60. (1) Where the Director has made an order
for attachment of any property under section 5
or where an Adjudicating Authority has made
an order confirming such attachment or
confiscation of any property under section 8, and
Powers of
authorities
regarding
summons,
production
of docu-
ments and
to give
evidence,
etc.
Certain
officers to
assist in
inquiry , etc.
Attachment,
sezure and
confiscation,
etc., of
property in
a contacting
State or India.
5 of 1908.
42 of 1956.

103
such property is suspected to be in a contracting
State, the Special Court, on an application by the
Director or the Administrator appointed under
sub-section (1) of section 10, as the case may be,
may issue a letter of request to a court or an
authority in the contracting State for execution
of such order.
(2) where a letter of request is received by
the Central Government from a court or an
authority in a contracting State requesting
attachment or confiscation of the property in
India, derived or obtained, directly or indirectly ,
by any person from the commission of an offence
under section 3 committed in that contracting
State, the Central Government may forward such
letter of request to the Director, as it thinks fit,
for execution in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
* *** *
69. Where any fine imposed on any person
under section 13 or section 63 is not paid within
six months from the day of imposition of fine,
the Director or any other officer authorised by
him in this behalf may proceed to recover the
amount from the said person in the same manner
as prescribed in Schedule II of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 for the recovery of arrears and he or
any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall
have all the powers of the Tax Recovery Officer
mentioned in the said Schedule for the said
purpose.
* *** *
72. (1) *** *
(2) Where—
(a) after passing of a decision or order
by the Appellate Tribunal, no appeal has been
preferred to the High Court under section
42; or
Recovery of
fines.
Continua-
tion of
proceedings
in the event
of death or
insolvency .
43 of 1961.

104
(b) any such appeal has been preferred
to the High Court,—
then—
(i) in a case referred to in clause (a), the
person entitled to file the appeal dies or is
adjudicated an insolvent before preferring an
appeal to the High Court, or
(ii) in a case referred to in clause (b), the
person who had filed the appeal dies or is
adjudicated an invsolvent during the
pendency of the appeal before the High
Court, then, it shall be lawful for the legal
representatives of such person, or the official
assignee or the official receiver, as the case
may be, to prefer an appeal to the High Court
or to continue the appeal before the High
Court in place of such person and the
provisions of section 42 shall, so far as may
be, apply, or continue to apply, to such
appeal.
73.(1)* * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
* *** *
(h) the nature and value of transactions
in respect of which records shall be
maintained under clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 12;
(i) the time within which the information
of transactions under clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of section 12 shall be furnished;
(j) the manner in which records shall be
verified and maintained by banking
companies, financial institutions and
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make rules.

105
intermediaries under clause (c) of sub-section
(1) of section 12;
* *** *
THE SCHEDULE
[SEE SECTION 2( Y)]
PART A
PARAGRAPH 1
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
Section Description of offence
121 Waging, or attempting to wage war
or abetting waging of war, against
the Government of India.
121A Conspiracy to commit offences
punishable by section 121 against the
State.
“489A Counterfeiting currency notes or
bank notes.
489B Using as genuine, forged or
counterfeit currency notes or bank
notes.”;
PARAGRAPH 2
OFFENCES UNDER THE N ARCOTIC D RUGS AND
PSYCHOTROPIC S UBSTANCES A CT, 1985
Section Description of offence
“15 Contravention in relation to poppy
straw.
16 Contravention in relation to coca
plant and coca leaves.
17 Contravention in relation to prepared
opium.

106
18 Contravention in relation to opium
poppy and opium.
19 Embezzlement of opium by
cultivator.
20 Contravention in relation to cannabis
plant and cannabis.
21 Contravention in relation to
manufactured drugs and
preparations.”;
PARAGRAPH 3
OFFENCES UNDER THE E XPLOSIVE S UBSTANCES
ACT, 1908
Section Description of offence
3 Causing explosion likely to endanger
life or property .
4 Attempt to cause explosion, or for
making or keeping explosives with
intent to endanger life or property.
5 Making or possessing explosives
under suspicious circumstances.
PARAGRAPH 4
OFFENCES UNDER THE U NLAWFUL ACTIVITIES
(PREVENTION) ACT, 1967
Section Description of offence
10 read P enalty for being member of an
with unlawful association, etc.
section 3
11 read Panalty for dealing with funds of an
with unlawful association.
sections 3
and 7
Section Description of offence

107
13 read Punishment for unlawful activities.
with
section 3
16 read Punishment for terrorist act.
with
section 15
16A Punishment for making demands of
radioactive substances, nuclear
devices, etc.
17 Punishment for raising fund for
terrorist act.
18 Punishment for conspiracy, etc.
18A Punishment for organising of
terrorist camps.
18B Punishment for recruiting of any
person or persons for terrorist act.
19 Punishment for harbouring, etc.
20 Punishment for being member of
terrorist gang or organisation.
21 Punishment for holding proceeds of
terrorism.
38 Offence relating to membership of a
terrorist organisation.
39 Offence relating to support given to
a terrorist organisation.
40 Offence of raising fund for a terrorist
organisation.;
PART B
PARAGRAPH 1
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NDIAN P ENAL C ODE
Section Description of offence
120B Criminal conspiracy.
255 Counterfeiting Government stamp.
Section Description of offence

108
257 Making or selling instrument for
counterfeiting Government stamp.
258 Sale of counterfeit Government
stamp.
259 Having possession of counterfeit
Government stamp.
260 Using as genuine a Government
stamp known to be counterfeit.
302 Murder.
304 Punishment for culpable homicide
not amounting to murder.
307 Attempt to murder.
308 Attempt to commit culpable
homicide.
327 Voluntarily causing hurt to extort
property , or to constrain to an illegal
act.
392 Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to
extort property, or to constrain to an
illegal act.
364A Kidnapping for ransom, etc.
384 to 389 Offences relating to extortion.
392 to 402 Offences relating to robbery and
dacoity.
411 Dishonestly receiving stolen
property .
412 Dishonestly receiving property stolen
in the commission of a dacoity.
413 Habitually dealing in stolen property.
414 Assisting in concealment of stolen
property .
417 Punishment for cheating.
Section Description of offence

109
418 Cheating with knowledge that
wrongful loss may ensue, to person
whose interest offender is bound to
protect.
419 Punishment for cheating by
personation.
420 Cheating and dishonestly inducing
delivery of properties.
421 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property to prevent
distribution among creditors.
422 Dishonestly or fraudulently
preventing debt being available for
creditors.
423 Dishonest or fraudulent execution of
deed of transfer containing false
statement of consideration.
424 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or
concealment of property.
467 Forgery of valuable security , will, etc.
471 Using as genuine a forged document
or electronic record.
472 & 473 Making or possessing counterfeit
seal, etc., with intent to commit
forgery.
475 & 476 Counterfeiting device or mark.
481 Using a false property mark.
482 Punishment for using a false
property mark.
483 Counterfeiting a property mark used
by another.
484 Counterfeiting a mark used by a
public servant.
485 Making or possession of any
instrument for counterfeiting a
property mark.
Section Description of offence

110
486 Selling goods marked with a
counterfeit property mark.
487 Making a false mark upon any
receptacle containing goods.
488 Punishment for making use of any
such false mark.’’ ;
PARAGRAPH 2
OFFENCES UDNER THE ARMS A CT, 1959
Section Description of offence
25 To manufacture, sell, transfer,
convert, repair or test or prove or
expose or offer for sale or transfer or
have in his possession for sale,
transfer, conversion, repair, test or
proof, any arms or ammunition in
contravention of section 5 of the
Arms Act, 1959. To acquire, have in
possession or carry any prohibited
arms or prohibited ammunition in
contravention of section 7 of the
Arms Act, 1959.
Contravention of section 24A of the
Arms Act, 1959 relating to
prohibition as to possession of
notified arms in disturbed areas, etc.
Contravention of section 24B of the
Arms Act, 1959 relating to
prohibition as to carrying of notified
arms in or through public places in
disturbed areas.
Other offences specified in section 25.
26 To do any act in contravention of any
provisions of section 3, 4, 10 or 12 of
the Arms Act, 1959 in such manner
as specified in sub section (1) of
section 26 of the said Act.
Section Description of offence

111
To do any act in contravention of any
provisions of sections 5, 6, 7 or 11 of
the Arms Act, 1959 in such manner
as specified in sub section (2) of
section 26 of the said Act.
Other offences specified in section 26.
27 Use of arms or ammunitions in
contravention of section 5 or use of
any arms of ammunition in
contravention of section 7 of the
Arms Act, 1959.
28 Use and possession of fire arms or
imitation fire arms in certain cases.
29 Knowingly purchasing arms from
unlicensed person or for delivering
arms, etc., to person not entitled to
possess the same.
30 Contravention of any condition of a
licence or any provisions of the Arms
Act, 1959 or any rule made
thereunder.
PARAGRAPH 3
OFFENCES UNDER THE W ILD L IFE (P ROTECTION)
ACT, 1972
Section Description of offence
[51 read Hunting of wild animals.]
with
section 9
51 read Contravention of provisions of
with section 17A relating to prohibition of
section picking, uprooting etc., of specified
17A plants.
51 read Contravention of provisions of
with section 39 relating to wild animals,
section 39 etc., to be Government property.
Section Description of offence

112
51 read Contravention of provisions of
with section 44 relating to dealings in
section 44 trophy and animal articles without
licence prohibited.
51 read Contravention of provisions of
with section 48 relating to purchase of
section 48 animal etc., by licence.
51 read Contravention of provisions of
with section 49B relating to prohibition of
section dealings in trophies animal articles,
49B etc., derived from scheduled animals.
PARAGRAPH 4
OFFENCES UNDER THE I MMORAL T RAFFIC
(PREVENTION) ACT, 1956
Section Description of offence
5 Procuring, inducing or taking person
for the sake of prostitution.
6 Detaining a person in premises
where prostitution is carried on.
8 Seducing or soliciting for purpose of
prostitution.
9 Seduction of a person in custody .
PARAGRAPH 5
OFFENCES UNDER THE P REVENTION OF C ORRUPTION
ACT, 1988
Section Description of offence
7 Public servant taking gratification
other than legal remuneration in
respect of an official act.
8 Taking gratification in order, by
corrupt or illegal means, to influence
public servant.
Section Description of offence

113
9 Taking gratification for exercise of
personal influence, with public servant.
10 Abetment by public servant of
offences defined in section 8 or
section 9 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988.
[13 Criminal misconduct by a public
servant.]
“PARAGRAPH 6
OFFENCES UNDER THE E XPLOSIVES A CT, 1884
Section Description of offence
9-B Punishment for certain offences.
9-C Offences by companies.
PARAGRAPH 7
OFFENCES UNDER THE ANTIQUITIES AND ARTS
TREASURES ACT, 1972
Section Description of offence
25 read Contravention of export trade in
with antiquities and art treasures.
section 3
28 Offences by companies.
PARAGRAPH 8
OFFENCES UNDER THE S ECURITIES AND E XCHANGES
BOARD OF I NDIA A CT, 1992
Section Description of offence
12A read Prohibition of manipulative and
with deceptive devices, insider trading
section 24 and substantial acquisition of
securities or control.
Section Description of offence

114
PARAGRAPH 9
OFFENCES UNDER THE C USTOMS A CT, 1962
Section Description of offence
135 Evasion of duty or prohibitions.
PARAGRAPH 10
OFFENCES UNDER THE B ONDED L ABOUR S YSTEM
(ABOLITION) A CT, 1976
Section Description of offence
16 Punishment for enforcement of
bonded labour.
18 Punishment for extracting bonding
labour under the bonded labour
system.
20 Abetment to be an offence.
PARAGRAPH 11
OFFENCES UNDER THE C HILD L ABOUR (P ROHIBITION
AND R EGULATION) ACT, 1986
Section Description of offence
14 Punishment for employment of any
child to work in contravention of the
provisions of section 3.
PARAGRAPH 12
OFFENCES UNDER THE T RANSPLANTATION OF H UMAN
ORGANS ACT, 1994
Section Description of offence
18 Punishment for removal of human
organ without authority.
19 Punishment for commercial dealings
in human organs.
20 Punishment for contravention of any
other provision of this Act.

115
PARAGRAPH 13
OFFENCES UNDER THE J UVENILE J USTICE (C ARE AND
PROTECTION OF C HILDREN) A CT, 2000
Section Description of offence
23 Punishment for cruelty to juvenile or
child.
24 Employment of juvenile or child for
begging.
25 Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor
or narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance to juvenile or child.
26 Exploitation of juvenile or child
employee.]
PARAGRAPH 14
OFFENCES UNDER THE E MIGRATION ACT, 1983
Section Description of offence
24 Offences and penalties.]
PARAGRAPH 15
OFFENCES UNDER THE P ASSPORTS ACT, 1967
Section Description of offence
12 Offences and penalties.]
PARAGRAPH 16
OFFENCES UNDER THE F OREIGNERS ACT, 1946
Section Description of offence
14 Penalty for contravention of
provisions of the Act, etc.
14B Penalty for using forged passport.
14C Penalty for abetment.]

116
PARAGRAPH 17
OFFENCES UNDER THE C OPYRIGHT ACT, 1957
Section Description of offence
63 Offence of infringement of copyright
or other rights conferred by this Act.
63A Enhanced penalty on second and
subsequent convictions.
63B Knowing use of infringing copy of
computer programme.
68A Penalty for contravention of section
52A.]
PARAGRAPH 18
OFFENCES UNDER THE T RADE M ARKS A CT, 1999
Section Description of offence
103 Penalty for applying false trade
marks, trade descriptions, etc.
104 Penalty for selling goods or
providing services to which false
trade-mark or false trade description
is applied.
105 Enhanced penalty on second or
subsequent conviction.
107 Penalty for falsely representing a
trade mark as registered.
120 Punishment of abetment in India of
acts done out of India.]
PARAGRAPH 19
OFFENCES UNDER THE I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY
ACT, 2000
Section Description of offence
72 Penalty for breach of confidentiality
and privacy.

117
75 Act to apply for offence or contraven-
tion committed outside India.
PARAGRAPH 20
OFFENCES UNDER THE B IOLOGICAL D IVERSITY
ACT, 2002
Section Description of offence
55 read Penalties for contravention of section
with 6, etc.
section 6
PARAGRAPH 21
OFFENCES UNDER THE P ROTECTION OF P LANT
VARIETIES AND F ARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001
Section Description of offence
70 read P enalty for applying false
with denomination, etc.
section 68
71 read Penalty for selling varieties to which
with false denomination is applied.
section 68
72 read P enalty for falsely representing a
with variety as registered.
section 68
73 read Penalty for subsequent offence.
with
section 68
PARAGRAPH 22
OFFENCES UNDER THE E NVIRONMENT P ROTECTION
ACT, 1986
Section Description of offence
15 read P enalty for discharging
with environmental pollutants.
section 7
Section Description of offence

118
15 read P enalty for handling hazardous
with substance.
section 6
PARAGRAPH 23
OFFENCES UNDER THE W ATER (P REVENTION AND
CONTROL OF P OLLUTION) A CT, 1974
Section Description of offence
41(2) Penalty for pollution of stream or
well.
43 Penalty for contravention of provisions of
section 24.
PARAGRAPH 24
OFFENCES UNDER THE AIR (P REVENTION AND
CONTROL OF P OLLUTION) A CT, 1981
Section Description of offence
37 Failure to comply with the provisions
for operating industrial plant
PARAGRAPH 25
OFFENCES UNDER THE S UPRESSION OF U NLAWFUL
ACTS AGAINST S AFETY OF M ARITIME N AVIGATION
AND F IXED P LATFORMS ON C ONTINENTAL
SHELF ACT, 2002
Section Description of offence
3 Offences against ship, fixed platform,
cargo of a ship, maritime
navigational facilities, etc.”;
Section Description of offence

119
“PART C”
An offence which is the offence of cross
border implications and is specified in:—
(1) Part A; or
(2) Part B without any monetary
threshold; or
(3) the offences against property under
Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code.”

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
Further to amend the Prevention of Money-Laundering
Act, 2002.
_______
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of  Finance )

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”