STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY
BANKS LAWS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2009
31
lR;eso t;rs
THIRTY FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)


THIRTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY
BANKS LAWS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2009
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 25 January, 2011
Presented to Lok Sabha on February, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on February, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.O.F. No. 31
Price : Rs. 44.00
© 2011 B Y LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The Indian Press,
Delhi-110 033.

(i)
CONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
14
16
18
22
C
OMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ...................................................
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................
REPORT
I. Background ........................................................................
II. Clause 5 – Amendment of Section 7 – issued capital of new
banks.................................................................................
III. Clause 10 – Amendment of Section 63 – Power of State Bank
to make regulations............................................................
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 25 November,
2010 and 21 December, 2010.............................................
II. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2009...........................................................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
12. Smt. Jayaprada
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Vacant*
16. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
17. Shri G .M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri N. Dharam Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
*Shri Y .S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, MP resigned on 29 November, 2010.
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Y .P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty-First Report on
the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2009.
2. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill,
2009 introduced in Lok Sabha on 12 December, 2009, was referred to the
Committee on 18 December, 2009 for examination and report thereon, by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions
contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Reserve Bank of
India, State Bank of India, State Bank of Hyderabad, State Bank of Indore,
State Bank of Travancore, State Bank of Mysore, State Bank of Bikaner and
Jaipur, State Bank of Patiala, Indian Banks Association and All India Bank
Officers’ Association.
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 24 November, 2010 took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) and State Bank of India.
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 21 December, 2010
considered and adopted the draft report and authorised the Chairman to
finalise the same and present it to the Speaker/Parliament.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) and the represen-
tatives of State Bank of India for appearing before the Committee and
furnishing the requisite material and information which were desired in
connection with the examination of the Bill.
(v)

8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Reserve Bank
of India, State Bank of Hyderabad, State Bank of Indore, State Bank of
Travancore, State Bank of Mysore, State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, State
Bank of Patiala, Indian Banks Association and All India Bank Officers’
Association for placing before them their considered views on the Bill in the
form of memoranda.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
 N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 December, 2010 Chairman,
06 Pausa, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
I. BACKGROUND
In 1951, the Reserve Bank of India had appointed a Committee of
Directors for conducting an all India rural credit survey. The General Report
of the Survey made comprehensive recommendations relating to numerous
aspects of problem of rural credit. One of the important recommendations
and an integral part of the solution of rural credit problem propounded
by the Committee was the setting up of a State Bank of India  as one
strong integrated State-partnered commercial banking institution with an
effective machinery of the branches spread over the whole country for
stimulating banking development by providing vastly extended remittance
facilities for Co-operative and other banks and following a policy which
would be in effective consonance with national policies adopted by
Government without departing from the canons of sound business. It was
envisaged that such a State Bank of India should come into being
by the amalgamation of the Imperial Bank of India and with certain
“State associated” banks . On the 28th December, 1954, Government
announced that they accepted in principle this recommendation of the
Committee and they had decided as a first step towards the setting up
of such an institution, to assume effective control over the Imperial Bank.
The State Bank of India Bill was introduced subsequently, which after
having been passed by both the Houses of the Parliament, received the
assent of the President of India on 8th May, 1955.
(i) The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959
2. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959  [Act
No. 38 of 1959]  was enacted to provide for the formation of certain
Government or Government associated banks as subsidiaries of the State
Bank of India and for the constitution, management and control of the
subsidiary banks so formed, and for matters connected therewith, or
incidental thereto.

2
3. The Chairman, State Bank of India while deposing before the
Standing Committee on Finance on 25.11.2010, made the following
submission regarding the conversion of the banks owned by princely States
into Subsidiary Banks of the State Bank of India:—
“…. as regards our subsidiary banks, this is historical.  The subsidiary
banks were there even before Independence and after Independence
it was decided that instead of banks being owned by the erstwhile
princely States, to convert them into an instrument of the Indian
State.  Sir, as a result, about eight subsidiary banks were formed.
Two of them – State Bank of Bikaner and another one State Bank
of Jaipur were combined to make the State Bank of Bikaner and
Jaipur.  So, that is one amalgamation which took place at that point
of time. Even at that point of time, the intention was not to have
so many separate banks, but to put them together in one bank under
the umbrella of the State Bank of India. For reasons which I do
not remember at this point of time, there were some technical reasons
that it could not be done and, therefore, as a via media , a separate
Subsidiary Banks Act was created”.
(ii) The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2006
4. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2006 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 22 May, 2006 and was
referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for examination and report
thereon. The amendments/changes proposed in the Subsidiary Banks laws
in terms of the provisions of the Bill included:—
(i) allowing the chairman of the SBI (amendment to Section (25)(a)
of the Act) to nominate an official of the SBI as the Chairman
of the Board of a subsidiary bank, with the approval of the
RBI;
(ii) omitting the provisions relating to nomination of official of the
RBI (amendment to Section (25)(b) of the Act) on the Board
of Directors of subsidiary bank and to make provisions for
nomination of additional director by the RBI as and when

3
considered necessary, in the interest of banking policy and
depositors’ interest etc.; and
(iii) including certain matters in respect of which regulations could
be made (amendment of Section 63 relating to power of the
State Bank to make regulations).
5. On the issues listed as (i), (ii) and (iii) above, the observations/
recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Finance, in their
50th Report on State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2006, read inter alia  as follows:—
 (i) “…The Committee are of the view that extending the scope of
the proposed Section 25(1)(a) to include the executives of the
subsidiary banks also to be considered for the post would not
effect the cohesive nature of the SBI Group Banks. The
Committee are, therefore, inclined to recommend for a re-look
at the proposed provision so as to include the executives of
subsidiary banks also for being considered for nomination as
Chairman of a subsidiary bank”;
(ii)  “…In terms of the proposals as made applicable to nationalized
banks, in lieu  of doing away with the Reserve Bank’s nominee,
an official with ‘experience and expertise in regulation or
supervision of commercial banks’ would be nominated to serve
on the Boards by the Central Government on the recommendation
of the Reserve Bank”…The Committee, accordingly, recommend
that similar changes, on lines with the related proposal pertaining
to nationalized banks be carried out in Section 25(10)(b) instead
of doing away with it; and
(iii) “...convinced of the need for enabling adequate autonomy and
independence …..appropriate changes be carried out in the
existing provisions of the Section 63” (to empower the Board
of Directors of the Subsidiary Banks to make regulations).
6. The recommendations contained in the 50th Report of the
Standing Committee on Finance on the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2006 enumerated in the preceding paragraphs

4
were incorporated appropriately  in the State Bank of India (Amendment)
Act, 2007.
(iii) The State Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2007
7. The transfer of ownership of the State Bank of India from the
Reserve Bank of India to the Central Government was carried out pursuant
to the coming into force of the State Bank of India (Amendment) Act,
2007.
8. The transfer of ownership of the State Bank of India from the
Reserve Bank of India to the Central Government was, as per the
Government’s submission effected on the basis of report of the Committee
on Banking Sector Reforms (Narasimhan II, 1998), which had observed
that : “ the Reserve Bank as a regulator of the monetary system should
not be also the owner of a bank in view of the potential for conflict
of interest ”.
(iv) The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2009
9. As per the statement of objects and reasons of the State Bank
of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2009 there are certain
provisions in State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 and the
State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 dealing with the approval of or
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India (in the capacity as owner
of State Bank of India) in the management and functioning of the subsidiary
banks. Due to the change in the ownership, those provisions need to be
suitably modified to reflect the change in ownership.
10. The Bill, as introduced in the Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2010
and referred to the Standing Committee on Finance for examination and
report thereon by the Hon’ble Speaker on 29 December, 2010 proposes
to amend the said Acts inter alia :—
(a) confer power on the Central Government instead of the Reserve
Bank of India, but after consultation with the Reserve Bank of
India, to approve:—
(i) increase or reduction of the authorised capital of a
subsidiary bank;

5
(ii) fixation of the issued capital of subsidiary banks by the
State Bank of India;
(iii) raising of issued capital by preferential allotment or private
placement or public issue by the subsidiary banks;
(iv) issuing of bonus shares to the existing equity shareholders;
(v) permitting the Chairman of the State Bank of India to
nominate an official of the State Bank of India or the
subsidiary bank as the Chairman of the Board of a subsidiary
bank;
(vi) appointment of the Managing Director, fixation of the term
of the office, salary and allowances and removal of the
Managing Director;
(vii) supersession of the Board of Directors of subsidiary banks
in public interest or for depositors’ interest or for securing
the proper management of the subsidiary banks on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank of India and
appointment of an administrator and a committee to assist
the administrator; and
(viii) making of regulations by the Board of the subsidiary banks;
and
(b) confer power on the Central Government in place of the Reserve
Bank of India under section 31 to approve the removal from
office of directors nominated and elected under clauses ( c) and
(d) respectively, of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 of the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
(v) Subsidiary Banks Laws
11. Questioned inter-alia as to why the amendments to the acts
regulating the State Bank and its subsidiaries were being brought about
in a piece-meal manner, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial
Services) in a written reply, stated inter alia :—
“With enactment of State Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2007
(30 of 2007), the transfer of ownership of the State Bank from
the Reserve Bank to the Central Government was carried out and

6
the actual transaction of transfer of ownership was effected on
29th June, 2007. The consequential changes in the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Bank) Act, 1959 relating to ownership changes could
be effected only after the ownership is actually transferred. A Cabinet
Note suggesting the consequential changes in the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Bank) Act, 1959 was considered and approved by the
Cabinet in its meeting held on 24th July, 2008 which was introduced
in the 14th Lok Sabha on 24th February, 2009. However, the
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2009
could not be taken up for consideration and passing due to the
dissolution of the 14th Lok Sabha. In July, 2009, a Cabinet Note
was again submitted to the Cabinet for this purpose and the Cabinet
meeting held in July, 2009 has considered and approved the proposal.
Accordingly, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws)
Amendment Bill, 2009 (Bill No. 141 of 2009) was introduced In
the Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2009. This explains the reasons
for submission of the current Bill”.
12. The Ministry was asked to give their comments on the submission
made by All India Bank Officers Association in the memorandum submitted
to the Committee which states “… many of the amendments made in
Subsidiary Bank Act, 1959 through the amendment Acts of 2007 are yet
not implemented and being overlooked …” In this regard, the reply of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) reads
inter alia :—
“While the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 has
been amended in the year 2007, the consequential amendments to
the Regulations are under the consideration of the concerned
authorities. However, this has not come in the way of the efficient
functioning of the subsidiary banks”.
13. Further, the Ministry furnished the following written reply on
the reasons for not implementing or overlooking the amendments made
vide the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Amendment Act, 2007:—
“Amendments were made in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Bank)
Act, 1959 in the year 2007. Pursuant to the said amendments in
the Act, the regulations are required to be amended so that the

7
amendments are reflected in the regulations of the Subsidiary Banks.
It may be stated that in terms of the existing provisions under the
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Bank) Act, 1959, the Board of
Directors of a subsidiary bank is empowered to frame regulations
after consultation with the State Bank of India and with previous
approval of the RBI. Therefore, amended regulations were forwarded
to RBI for its prior approval. However, RBI has advised that the
consequential amendments to the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks) Act, 1959 are under consideration of the Parliament and
therefore, it would be proper to wait for the amendments to be passed
before the regulations can be framed”.
(vi)  Merger Of Subsidiary Banks With SBI
14. The State Bank of Saurashtra and the State Bank of Indore were
merged with the State Bank of India vide notification nos. GSR 589(E)
dated 13.08.2008 and GSR 638(E) dated 28.07.2010 respectively.
15. To a specific query on the policy of the Government on merger
of banks, the reply of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial
Services) is stated as below:
“The current policy of the Government on consolidation leaves the
initiative for consolidation to come from the managements of the
banks themselves with Government playing a supportive role as the
common shareholder.  No directive on consolidation has been issued
either by the Government or the Reserve Bank of India.  The Boards
of the two merging banks have to take a decision in this regard
based on the synergy levels of the merging entities. While supporting
any merger proposal, Government ensures that the interests of the
stakeholders and employees of the merging banks are adequately
protected”.
16. Questioned on the appropriation of pursuing the policy of merging
the subsidiary banks with the State Bank of India without first seeking
the approval of the Parliament, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Financial Services) in a post evidence reply inter-alia stated as follows:—
“…...State Bank of India can take over the business of its own
subsidiaries under Section 35 of the SBI Act without first seeking

8
the approval of the Parliament as Section 35 of the SBI Act does
not call for approval of the Parliament. Section 35 of the State Bank
of India Act, 1955 provides the legal framework and is a complete
code for the acquisition of a banking institution by State Bank of
India.  The State Bank of India Act, 1955 does not require any
legislative sanction or approval of the Parliament for acquisition of
any bank including a subsidiary bank by State Bank of India. Further,
though the provisions of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, do not
expressly so require, the Scheme of acquisition of the State Bank
of Saurashtra by the State Bank of India was laid before both Houses
of the Parliament, post-merger”.
17. Asked further on the policy stance of the Government on merging
the subsidiaries with SBI, the reply furnished by the Ministry states
inter alia :—
“…….the Bank (SBI) envisages consolidation of all subsidiary banks
with SBI within a period of 12 to 18 months.
Preparations towards consolidation of the banking subsidiaries within
the State Bank group has been systematically planned by bringing
all associate banks and SBI under the same state-of-the-art core
banking technology platform. All the associate banks also have
products, services and processes broadly similar to that of SBI.
The consolidation is thus seen as the next logical step so as to bring
in economies of scale, reduce administrative overheads, re-deploy and
channelise trained manpower to business development and, in the
process, also reduce avoidable competition from different arms of
the same group engaged in the same activity in the same segments
and geography.
The consolidation is aimed at making the State Bank Group a stronger
and more resilient organization”.
18. On the rationale for seeking to merge the Subsidiaries with SBI,
the response furnished by the Ministry of Finance  (Department of Financial
Services) reads as follows:—
“The merger/acquisition of its subsidiary banks by SBI is not merger
in the conventional sense but is more in the nature of restructuring

9
within the Group as SBI already holds 75% or more stake in all
its subsidiary banks. The merger of subsidiary banks with itself is
thus more in the nature of a consolidation or restructuring within
State Bank group leaving size, market share etc. of the group
unchanged but leading to better operational efficiency. Such
restructuring or amalgamation within the group will be immensely
beneficial to the group for the following reasons:
(a) Such an amalgamation will free up a large number of employees
from administrative functions, to be deployed in business
development leading to all round growth in business and
profitability.
(b) Unnecessary competition within the group, in the same
geographical areas and for the same segments of business will
be avoided leading to substantially better operational efficiency
for the Group.  Overall levels of competition, which is necessary
to ensure better customer service at affordable prices, will not,
however, come down because most of public sector banks and
large private banks are present in the main operational areas
of these subsidiary banks.
(c) The technology platform of the State Bank of India and that
of subsidiary banks is the same. Many of the policies of SBI
and the subsidiary banks such as Loan Policy, Investment Policy
etc. are very similar to each other. The products and services
offered are also largely the same. It would, therefore, be
operationally much easier to amalgamate the State Bank Group
to achieve economies of scale.
(d) The major operations of the subsidiary banks are confined
mostly to one or two states resulting in some amount of
geographical concentration risk.
The Indian economy is growing rapidly and the growth
momentum is expected to continue. In this scenario the needs
of Indian corporates are also increasing in terms of the size
and complexities of the financial services/products provided by
Banks. A number of corporates are also pursuing growth

10
opportunities abroad. All these require that SBI and a few other
Indian banks grow in size and financial muscle to cater to the
growing needs of such corporates, failing which such clientele
and their business would be taken over by foreign banks.
Moreover, although SBI is the largest Bank in India, it ranks
only 68th amongst the world’s large banks. Considering the growing
role and importance of India in the world economy, it is desirable
that the country’s largest Bank is sufficiently strong in terms of
Balance Sheet size to cater to the growing requirements especially
of Indian-origin multinational companies. While SBI has also stepped
up its efforts to grow organically, the inorganic growth through
mergers would also help the Bank in scaling up within an acceptable
time frame, to enable it to compete on an equal footing with foreign
banks, not only in India but in the international economic arena as
well.”
19. On issues relating to career prospects of employees of the merged
Subsidiary banks vis-à-vis employees of the State Bank of India, the written
reply of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
states:—
“Various issues relating to HR area arising out of the merger have
been handled in a fair and equitable manner balancing the interests
of the employees of the merging Bank as also SBI.”
“ …………. it has been ensured that the pay and allowances (after
merger) of the employees of Banks which have been merged, are
not less than the overall pay and allowances which they would have
drawn in that Bank.”
20. The Chairman, State Bank of India made the following submission
in this regard while tendering evidence before the Committee:—
“The State Bank of Saurashtra was merged two years ago. After
merger, there was not a ripple in the Indian media. There was no
newspaper report, no television report, no protest and demonstration.
It went as smooth as silk. All the employees of the erstwhile State
Bank of Saurashtra today enjoy the better status in terms of
remuneration, perks and privileges. Even today, what the associate

11
bank employees get is slightly less than what the State Bank of India
officials get. Therefore, on merger, it was decided that their
remuneration would be raised to that of the State Bank of India.
So, not only all the remuneration, perks etc. have been raised but
also wherever they had something additional or different, that has
been retained plus they have all been given the benefit of pension
which was not there in these banks”.
21. He also added:—
“In terms of employees dissatisfaction, there is nil. Even in the State
Bank of Indore, there is nothing. When it was subsequently merged,
the State Bank of Indore had conducted a web-based voting to elicit
the response of the employees to the merger. More than 90 per cent
were for pro-merger. It is true that there were certain people who
did not want merger for whatever reason but an overwhelming
majority of them wanted merger. The State Bank of Indore has since
been merged. Apart from a court case, which has been instituted
by certain people, there is no protest, no opposition, no demonstration
of any kind. There are five banks remaining. We have representations
from various association leaders, etc. from these five banks which
want these banks also to be merged with the State Bank of India
simply because it is primarily good for the employees in multiple
ways.”
22. Asked whether it was true that there were no specific regulations
or provisions for protecting the interest of retired employees of merged
subsidiary banks either in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act
or the State Bank of India Act, and if so, to detail the measures proposed/
required to address this issue, the reply furnished by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) states as under:—
“It is true that there is no specific Regulation or provision as of
now to protect the interest of the retired employees (employees who
retired before the merger) of merged Subsidiary Banks in terms of
enhancement of Pension and other benefits either in State Bank of
India Act, 1955 or in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks)
Act, 1959. (The employees who retired after the merger and
who had opted to join SBI, with SBI superannuation benefits are

12
being paid pension on par with the employees of the State Bank
of India.)
It is proposed to carry out amendments in State Bank of India Pension
Fund Rules to take care of payment of pension to the retired
employees of merged subsidiary banks ( i.e., employees who retired
before the merger). The said amendments will also take care of
enhancement, if any, to be made in the pension payable to such
retired employees. The Board of State Bank of India/Trustees of the
pension fund will be authorised (as proposed) to make payment of
pension to the retired employees of merged subsidiaries and to decide
the amount/quantum of the pension. The said amount/quantum will
be decided on the basis of the pension payable to similarly placed
retired employees of other subsidiary banks. Hence the pension and
other non-discretionary benefits provided by the merged bank will
continue to be provided by State Bank of India.”
23.   The Committee note that the amendment proposals of
the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill,
2009 have been necessitated owing to the transfer of ownership of
the State Bank of India (SBI) from the Reserve Bank (RBI) to the
Central Government, which was effected pursuant to the enactment
of the State Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2007.  While in terms
of the existing provisions of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks) Act, 1959, the SBI is allowed, with approval from the RBI,
to take certain actions regarding the functioning of subsidiary banks,
the Bill now requires approval from the Central Government in
consultation with RBI for taking such actions.  Matters on which
approval by the Central Government will be required in terms of
the Bill include, inter-alia, (i) increase of issued capital of the
subsidiary banks, (ii) composition of the Board of Directors,
(iii) nominations or appointment of Directors and (iv) regulations
relating to the subsidiary banks.
24.  The Committee, while expressing agreement about the
necessity of the amendment proposals at a broader plane,
nevertheless, cannot help noting that there is a strong element of
adhocism in the policy stance and approach of the Government in

13
bringing in legislative changes in the Acts regulating the SBI and
its subsidiaries in particular.  For instance, though the amendments
carried out earlier vide the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks
Laws) Amendment Act, 2007 remain to be given effect to, and the
present Bill is pending before Parliament, the Government has
embarked on merging two of the subsidiary banks with SBI.  The
submission made that proposals of merger ‘come from the
management of banks themselves’ with the Government playing a
supportive role as a common shareholder is, in the opinion of the
Committee, indicative of ambivalence in the Government’s approach
on merger and consolidation of banks.  With reference to SBI group
of banks per se, the subsidiary banks carry the legacy of the past
with their operations mainly concentrated in the states of their
incorporation.   The Committee feel it to be expedient on the part
of the Government to make an in-depth analysis of issues relating
to mergers and consolidation of  public sector banks in general.  It
is also imperative to assess, in clear terms, the reasons for rising
NPAs in the SBI Group of Banks as well as the desirability of
pursuing the policy of merging the subsidiary banks with SBI,
particularly in the light of issues relating to manageability of large
sized banks.  The Committee expect the Government to spell out
the policy related aspects in this regard.
25. An issue of concern that the Committee feel the need to
once again highlight is the fact that the amendments made in the
subsidiary banks laws vide the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks
Laws) Amendment Act, 2007, which included provisions for enabling
the Chairman, SBI to nominate the Chairman of the Board of a
subsidiary bank from the functionaries of the subsidiary as well, and
entrusting the regulation making power with the Board of Directors
of the subsidiary banks remain to be given effect to.  Also,
amendments remain to be made in the State Bank of India Pension
Fund Rules, which is detrimental to the retirees of the merged
subsidiary banks. The Committee expect the Government to
expeditiously act on these matters.
Some of the amendment proposals of the Bill are discussed in
the subsequent paragraphs of this report.

II. CLAUSE 5 — AMENDMENT OF SECTION 7 – ISSUED
CAPITAL OF NEW BANKS
26. Sub-section (4) of Section 7 of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 as amended vide the State Bank of India
Subsidiary Banks Laws Amendment Act, 2007 reads as under:—
“A new bank may from time to time, with the approval of the State
Bank and the Reserve Bank, increase, whether by public issue or
by preferential allotment or private placement in accordance with the
procedure as may be prescribed, its issued capital by issue of equity
or preference shares.”
27. The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Bill, 2009 proposes the following amendment in sub-section (4) of
Section 7:—
“…in sub-section (4), for the words ‘with the approval of the State
Bank and the  Reserve Bank’, the words ‘with the approval of the
State Bank and the Central Government in consultation with the
Reserve Bank’ shall be substituted.”
28. On the provisions of Section 7 of Subsidiary Banks Laws Act
of 1959 the Reserve Bank of India, in a written memorandum, made the
following suggestion:—
“Subsidiary banks were allowed to raise capital by public issue or
by preferential allotment or private placement of its equity or
preferential shares in terms of the amendments made to Section 7
of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment
Act, 2007 ( w.e.f. 9.7.2007). They were allowed to increase
their issued capital by issue of bonus shares to existing equity
shareholders.
There is, however, no explicit provision in the Act for rights issue
of equity share as another mode of increasing the issued capital of
the subsidiary banks. ‘Rights issue’ is an important method of raising
14

capital by issuing equity shares to the existing equity shareholders.
Whereas private sectors banks can raise capital through rights issue,
public sector banks suffer from clear disadvantage in the absence
of explicit provision in their respective statutes/Acts enabling them
to do so.”
29. Questioned whether the Ministry of Finance concern with the
proposal made by the Reserve Bank for carrying out appropriate
amendments in sub-section (4) of Section 7 of SBI (Subsidiary Banks)
Act, 1959, sub-section (3) of Section 10 of SBH Act, 1956 and sub-
section 2B(C), 2BB and 2(C) of Section 3 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 so as to enable
the Subsidiary banks of SBI and other public sector banks to raise capital
through “right issues”, as is the case with private sector banks, the
response furnished to the Committee is stated as below:—
“We concur with the suggestion.
In view of the above, the following amendments could be proposed:–
(a) The words “rights issue” may be inserted in sub-section (4)
of Section 7 of State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
1959.
(b) The words “rights issue” may be inserted in sub-section (3)
of Section 10 of the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956.
(c) The words “rights issue” may be inserted in sub-sections,
2B(C), 2BB and (2C) of Section 3 of the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980.”
30. As pointed out by RBI, unlike the case with private sector
banks, there is no explicit provision in the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 or the Banking Companies (Acquisition
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 for enabling the
subsidiary banks and other public sector banks to raise equity capital
by way of ‘rights issue’ of shares as well.  The Committee expect
that, as agreed to appropriate amendments are carried out in Sub-
section (4) of Section 7 and the laws regulating the public sector
banks so as to enable the banks to raise capital through ‘rights issue’.
15

16
III. CLAUSE 10 – AMENDMENT OF SECTION 63 – POWER OF
STATE BANK TO MAKE REGULATIONS
31. Prior to the enactment of the amendment Act of 2007
Section 63(1) of the Act provided as under:—
“The State Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank [by
notification in the official Gazette] make in respect of a subsidiary
bank regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary
or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of
this Act ( w.e.f. 09.07.2007).”
32. Following the enactment of the subsidiary banks laws act, 2007
consequent to the presentation of the 50th Report of the Standing
Committee on Finance on the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws)
Amendment Bill, 2006, the provisions of Section 63(1) were amended to
read as follows:—
“The Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank may, after consultation
with the State Bank and with the previous permission of the Reserve
Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there under, too provide
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for
the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act or any
other law for the time being in force.”
33. The amendment proposed to Section 63(1) in terms of the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2009 is as
follows:—
“In sub-section (1), for the words ‘after consultation with the State
Bank and with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank’, the words
‘after consultation with the State Bank and the Reserve Bank and
with the previous approval of the Central Government’ shall be
substituted.”

 N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 December , 2010 Chairman,
6 Pausa , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
34. Despite the power of making regulations being vested with the
subsidiary banks following the amendment act of 2007 the marginal heading
of Section 63 of the Act continues to read as : “Power of the State Bank
to Make Regulations”. Asked whether it would not be appropriate to amend/
modify the marginal heading to the Section to read as, “Power of the
Subsidiary Banks to make regulations”, the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Financial Services) in reply informed:—
“We have no objection to amending/ modifying the Marginal Heading
to the Section, to read as, “Power of the Subsidiary Banks to make
regulations.” We agree with the observation of the Standing
Committee on Finance.”
35. Though the regulation making power is vested with the
Boards of Directors of subsidiary banks to be exercised in consultation
with the State Bank following the enactment of the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Act, 2007, the marginal
heading of section 63 continues to read as, ‘Power of the State Bank
to make Regulations’. As agreed to, the Committee expect that the
marginal heading of the section is amended to read as ‘Power of
the Subsidiary Banks to make Regulations’.
17

18
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 25th November, 2010 from
1530 hrs. to 1750 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
10. Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
12. Shri Piyush Goyal
13. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

19
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary
State Bank of India (SBI)
4. Shri O.P. Bhatt, Chairman
5. Shri R. Sridharan, Managing Director and Group Executive
(Associates and Subsidiaries)
6. Shri Jeevandas Narayan, General Manager (Human Resources–
Merger)
2. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Financial Services) and State Bank of India in
connection with the examination of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks
Laws) Amendment, Bill 2009. Major issues discussed included, the rationale
of merger of State Bank of India with its subsidiary banks in particular,
welfare and protection of interest of employees of merged banks, rising NPAs
of subsidiary banks, implementation of amendments of the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 2007 etc. The Chairman directed the representatives
to furnish written replies to the questions posed by Members within seven
days.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

20
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21st December, 2010 from
1115 hrs. to 1715 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
9. Shri Manicka Tagore
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
11. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
14. Shri Piyush Goyal
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
16. Shri Mahendra Mohan
17. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
18. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

21
PART-I
(1115 to 1345 hrs.)
2. *** *** *** ***
PART-II
(1445 to 1715 hrs.)
3. The Committee took up the draft report on the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Bill, 2009 for consideration and
adoption. The Committee adopted the draft report with minor modifications.
The Committee also authorised the Chairman to present the Report to
Parliament.
4. *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned..

Bill No. 141 of 2009
THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS LAWS)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 and the
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks ) Act, 1959.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the State Bank of India
(Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
APPENDIX II
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
22

2.  In sub-section ( 4) of section 9 of the State
Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 (hereafter in this
Chapter referred to as the State Bank of Hyderabad
Act), for the words “with the approval of the
Reserve Bank”, the words “in consultation with the
Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted.
3.  In section 10 of the State Bank of
Hyderabad Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1A), for the words
“with the approval of the Reserve Bank”, the
words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank
and with the approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 3), for the words
“with the approval of the State Bank and the
Reserve Bank”, the words “with the approval
of the State Bank and the Central Government
in consultation with the Reserve Bank” shall
be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 3B),—
(i) for the words “with the approval
of the State Bank and the Reserve Bank”,
the words “with the approval of the State
Bank and the Central Government in
consultation with the Reserve Bank” shall
be substituted;
(ii) for the words “with the
approval of the Reserve Bank”, the words
“in consultation with the Reserve Bank
and with the approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section
10.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE S TATE B ANK OF H YDERABAD A CT, 1956
79 of 1956.
23

24
4. In sub-section ( 4) of section 6 of the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for
the words “with the approval of the Reserve Bank”,
the words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank
and with the approval of the Central Government”
shall be substituted.
5. In section 7 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1A), for the words
“with the approval of the Reserve Bank”, the
words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank
and with the approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 4), for the words
“with the approval of the State Bank and the
Reserve Bank”, the words “with the approval
of the State Bank and the Central Government
in consultation with the Reserve Bank” shall
be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 6),—
(i) for the words “with the
approval of the State Bank and the
Reserve Bank”, the words “with the
approval of the State Bank and the
Central Government in consultation with
the Reserve Bank” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “with the
approval of the Reserve Bank”, the
words “in consultation with the Reserve
Bank and with the approval of
the Central Government” shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA (S UBSIDIARY B ANKS) A CT,
1959
38 of 1959.

6. In section 25 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause ( a), for the words “with the approval
of the Reserve Bank”, the words “in consultation with
the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “to be nominated
by the Reserve Bank”, the words “to be nominated by
the Central Government on the recommendation of the
Reserve Bank” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (6), for the words “in consultation
with the Reserve Bank”, the words “in consultation with the
Central Government” shall be substituted.
7. In section 29 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “and with the
approval of the Reserve Bank”, the words “and the Reserve
Bank, and with the approval of the Central Government” shall
be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 3),—
(i) in the proviso to clause ( a), for the words
“with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve
Bank”, the words “with the approval of the State Bank
and the Central Government in consultation with the
Reserve Bank” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clauses ( b) and ( c), for the words “with
the approval of the Reserve Bank”, the words “in
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the
approval of the Central Government” shall respectively
be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 5), for the words “with the approval
of the Reserve Bank”, the words “in consultation with the
Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 29.
25

26
8.  In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “with the
approval of the Reserve Bank”, the words “in
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval
of the Central Government” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (a) of sub-section (3), for the words
“with the approval of the Reserve Bank”, the words “in
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval
of the Central Government” shall be substituted.
9.  In section 35A of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words “Where the Reserve Bank,
on the recommendation of the State Bank”, the
words “Where the Central Government, on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank and in
consultation with the State Bank” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words “the Reserve Bank may”,
the words “the Central Government may” shall be
substituted;
(b) in sub-sections (2) and (5), for the words “The
Reserve Bank may”, the words “The Central Government
in consultation with the Reserve Bank may” shall
respectively be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 3), clause ( b) of sub-section
(4) and sub-sections ( 6) and ( 7), for the words “the
Reserve Bank”, wherever they occur, the words “the
Central Government” shall respectively be substituted.
10. In section 63 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “after
consultation with State Bank and with the previous
approval of the Reserve Bank”, the words “after
consultation with the State Bank and the Reserve Bank
and with the previous approval of the Central
Government” shall be substituted;
(b) sub-section ( 3) shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4), for the words “by the State
Bank”, the words “by the Board of Directors of a
subsidiary bank” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 31.
Amendment
of section
35A.
Amendment
of section 63.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The transfer of ownership of the State Bank of India from the
Reserve Bank of India to the Central Government was carried out pursuant
to the coming into force of the State Bank of India (Amendment) Act,
2007 (30 of 2007). There are certain provisions in the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 and the State Bank of Hyderabad Act,
1956 dealing with the approval of, or consultation with the Reserve Bank
of India (in the capacity as owner of State Bank of India) in the
management and functioning of the subsidiary banks. Due to the change
in the ownership, those provisions need to be suitably modified to reflect
the change in ownership. Further, the change of ownership in the
State Bank of India also necessitate following consequential changes in
the aforesaid Acts. The Bill proposes to amend the said two Acts,
inter alia , to—
(a) confer power on the Central Government instead of the
Reserve Bank of India, but after consultation with the Reserve Bank,
of India to approve:—
(i) increase or reduction of the authorised capital of a
subsidiary bank;
(ii) fixation of the issued capital of subsidiary banks by
the State Bank of India;
(iii) raising of issued capital by preferential allotment or
private placement or public issue by the subsidiary banks;
(iv) issuing of bonus shares to the existing equity
shareholders;
(v) permitting the Chairman of the State Bank of India
to nominate an official of the State Bank of India or the
subsidiary bank as the Chairman of the Board of a subsidiary
bank;
27

28
(vi) appointment of the Managing Director, fixation of the
term of the office; salary and allowances and removal of the
Managing Director;
(vii) supersession of the Board of Directors of subsidiary
banks in public interest or for depositors’ interest or for securing
the proper management of the subsidiary banks on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank of India and appointment
of an administrator and a committee to assist the administrator;
and
(viii) making of regulation by the Board of the subsidiary
banks;
(b) confer power on the Central Government in place of the
Reserve Bank of India under section 31 to approve the removal from
office of directors nominated and elected under clauses ( c) and ( d)
respectively, of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 of the State Bank of
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
 N EW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE.
The 20th November, 2009.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF H YDERABAD A CT, 1956
(79 OF 1956)
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
CAPITAL OF THE HYDERABAD BANK
9. (1) * * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), the State Bank may, with the approval
of the Reserve Bank, authorise the Hyderabad Bank
to increase or reduce its authorised capital.
10. (1) * * * * *
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1), the issued capital of the Hyderabad
Bank, shall consist of such amount as the State Bank
may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, fix,
and shall be divided into fully paid-up shares of such
denomination in accordance with sub-section ( 2) of
section 9.
* * * * *
(3) The Hyderabad Bank may, from time to
time, with the approval of the State Bank and the
Reserve Bank, increase, whether by public issue or
by preferential allotment or private placement in a
accordance with the procedure as may be specified
by regulations made under section 63 of the State
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, its
issued capital by issue of equity or preference shares.
* * * * *
(3B) The Hyderabad Bank may, with the
approval of the State Bank and the Reserve Bank,
Authorised
Capital.
Issued
capital.
38 of 1959.
29

30
increase from time to time by way of issuing bonus
shares to existing equity shareholders, its issued
capital in such manner as the State Bank, with the
approval of the Reserve Bank, direct.
* * * * *
————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE S TATE B ANK OF I NDIA
(SUBSIDIARY B ANKS) A CT, 1959
(38 OF 1959)
* * * * *
6. (1) * * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), the State Bank may, with the approval
of the Reserve Bank, authorise a new bank to
increase or reduce its authorised capital.
7. (1) * * * * *
1A. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( 1), the issued capital of a new bank
shall, consist of such amount as the State Bank may,
with the approval of the Reserve Bank, fix and shall
be divided into fully paid-up shares of such
denomination in accordance with sub-section ( 2) of
section ( 6).
* * * * *
(4) A new bank may from time to time, with
the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve Bank,
increase, whether by public issue or by preferential
allotment or private placement in accordance with
the procedure as may be prescribed, its issued capital
by issue of equity or preference shares.
* * * * *
(6) A new bank may with the approval of the
State Bank and the Reserve Bank, increase from time
Authorised
Capital of
New Bank.
Issued
Capital
of New
Banks.

31
to time by way of issuing bonus shares to existing
equity share holders, its issued capital in such manner
as the State Bank, with the approval of the Reserve
Bank, direct.
* * * * *
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(2) the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall
consist of the following:—
(a) The Chairman for the time being of
the State Bank, ex-officio or an official of the
State Bank or of the subsidiary bank nominated
by him as Chairman, with the approval of the
Reserve Bank;
* * * * *
(b) One director, possessing necessary
expertise and experience in the matters relating
to regulation or supervision of commercial
banks, to be nominated by the Reserve Bank;
* * * * *
(6) Any nomination or appointment of a director
made by the State Bank under this Act shall, except
in so far as it relates to an Officer of that bank,
be in consultation with the Reserve Bank.
* * * * *
29 (1) The State Bank shall, after consulting
the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank, and
with the approval of the Reserve Bank, appoint a
managing director for that subsidiary bank:
Provided that in the case of the first
appointment of the managing director no such
consultation with the Board of Directors of the
subsidiary bank shall be necessary.
 * * * * *
Composition
of the Board
of Directors.
Managing
Director.

32
(3) The Managing Director of a subsidiary
bank—
(a) shall devote his whole time to the affairs
of that bank:
Provided that the managing director of the
subsidiary bank may, with the approval of the State
Bank and the Reserve Bank, be a director of any
other institution;
(b) shall hold office for such term not
exceeding four years and subject to such conditions
as the State Bank may, with the approval of
the Reserve Bank, specify at the time of his
appointment;
(c) shall receive such salary and allowances as
may be determined by the State Bank with the
approval of the Reserve Bank.
* * * * *
(5) The State Bank may, with the approval of
the Reserve Bank, for any sufficient reason, remove
from office the managing director of a subsidiary
bank:
Provided that no such managing director shall
be removed from office unless he has been given
an opportunity of showing cause against such
removal.
* * * * *
31. (1) The State Bank may, with the approval
of the Reserve Bank, for any sufficient reason,
remove from office a director nominated under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 and not
being an officer of the State Bank.
* * * * *
Removal
from
office of
director.

(3) Any director elected under clause ( d) of
sub-section (1) of section 25, may be removed from
office—
(a) by the State Bank with the approval of the
Reserve Bank, if at the time of the removal there
are no shareholders other than the State Bank
registered in the books of the subsidiary bank
concerned;
* * * * *
35A. (1) Where the Reserve Bank, on the
recommendation of the State Bank is satisfied that
in the public interest or for preventing the affairs
of a subsidiary bank being conducted in a manner
detrimental to the interest, of the depositors or the
subsidiary bank or for securing the proper
management of the subsidiary bank, it is necessary
so to do, the Reserve Bank may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, by order, supersede the Board
of Directors of the subsidiary bank for a period not
exceeding six months as may be specified in the
order:
Provided that the period of supersession of the
Board of Directors may be extended from time to
time, so, however, that the total period shall not
exceed twelve months.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, on supersession
of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank
under sub-section ( 1), appoint, for such period as
it may determine, an Administrator (not being an
officer of the Central Government or a State
Government) who has experience in law, finance,
banking, economics or accountancy.
(3) The Reserve Bank may issue such
directions to the Administrator as it may deem
appropriate and the Administrator shall be bound to
follow such directions.
33
Supersession
of Board of
Directors in
certain cases.

(4) Upon making the order of supersession of
the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
* * * * *
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which
may, by or under this Act, or any other law for
the time being in force, be exercised and discharged
by or on behalf of the Board of Directors of such
subsidiary bank, or by resolution passed in general
meeting of the subsidiary bank, shall, until the
Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank is
reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the
Administrator appointed by the Reserve Bank under
sub-section ( 2):
Provided that the power exercised by the
Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that such
power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the
general meeting of the subsidiary bank.
(5) The Reserve Bank may constitute a
committee of three or more persons who have
experience in law, finance, banking, economics or
accountancy to assist the Administrator in the
discharge of his duties.
(6) The committee referred to in sub-section
(5) shall meet at such times and places and observe
such rules of procedure as may be specified by the
Reserve Bank.
(7) The salary and allowance payable to the
Administrator and the members of the committee
constituted under sub-section ( 5) by the Reserve
Bank shall be such as may be specified by the
Reserve Bank and be payable by the concerned
subsidiary bank.
* * * * *
34

63 (1) The Board of Directors of a subsidiary
bank may, after consultation with the State Bank and
with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations
not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which
provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose
of giving effect to the provisions of this Act or any
other law for the time being in force.
* * * * *
(3) All regulations under this section, except
the first regulations, shall be made in consultation
with the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank
concerned.
(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be
after it is made under this section by the State Bank,
be forwarded to the Central Government and that
Government shall cause a copy of the same to be
laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days, which may
be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation or, both
Houses agree that the regulation should not be made,
the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that regulation.
* * * * *
35
Power of
the State Bank
to make
Regulations.

36
LOK SABHA
________
A
BILL
further to amend the State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956 and the
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.
________
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance)

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.