18
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-10)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of
the Ministry of Planning)
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2010/ Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Third
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of
the Ministry of Planning)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  19  April, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/ Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................«««««««(iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................««««««««...... (iv)
CHAPTER I  Report ................................................................... ««««..... 1
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................««««««.. 18
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government¶s replies ««. .     37
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 38
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final reply
of the Government is still awaited ..............................«««.    44
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 15 April, 2010 ..«««.   45
                                            APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations
Contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on
Demands for Grants(2009-10) of the Ministry of Planning«««««      47
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman
MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara*
RAJYA SABHA
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Director
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP
(iii)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been
authorised by the Committee, present this Eighteenth Report on action taken by
Government on the recommendations contained in the Third Report of the
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry of  Planning
 2. The Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 2 December, 2009.  Replies indicating action taken on all the
recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on
20 January, 2010.
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 15 April, 2010.
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
New Delhi;      DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15  April, 2010                                       Chairman,
 25 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance.
(iv)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Third Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Planning,
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 December, 2009 and simultaneously laid in
Rajya Sabha on the same day.
2.  The Report contained 13 recommendations. Action taken notes have
been received from the Government in respect of all the recommendations contained
in the Report. These have been categorised as follows:
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 and13
(Total: 10)
(Chapter II)
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government¶s replies:
Nil
(Total : Nil)
(Chapter III)
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos.  2,7 and 11
(Total: 3)
(Chapter IV)
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Nil
(Total : Nil)
 (Chapter V)
3.  The Committee desire that the replies of the observations contained in
Chapter I be furnished to them expeditiously.
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on
some of their recommendations.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

A. Growth of Economy
Recommendation (Sl.No.2)
5. On the issue of achieving GDP growth rate of 9 percent per annum during 11 th
Plan, which has been set out to achieve µinclusive growth¶, the Committee, inter-alia,
recommended that the Planning Commission, which was engaged in the exercise of
mid-term appraisal of the 11 th Plan would formulate appropriate measures so that the
benefits of the growth of the economy were not confined to particular sections of the
population and benefit the deprived categories as well.  The Committee also desired
to be kept apprised of the effectiveness of the policy measures initiated by the
Government for reviving the growth momentum that had witnessed a major downward
slump since 2008-09.
6. The Government, in their action taken reply, inter-alia stated as follows:-
“The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) aims at achieving an
average growth rate of 9% with targeted growth rate of 4% per year in
the agricultural sector, 10 to 11% per year in the industrial sector and
9 to 11% per year in the services sector.  During the first year of
Eleventh Plan (2007-08) the growth rate of GDP is estimated at 9%
with 4.9% growth in agriculture, 8.1% in industry and 10.3% in
services sector.  It is true that, there has been a deceleration in the
growth rate in the Indian Economy on account of global slow down
and  negative growth rate in the agriculture sector due to drought
situation during 2008-09. The growth rate of GDP for 2008-09 is
estimated at 6.7% (Revised Estimates) with 1.6% growth in
agriculture, 4.2% in industry and 10% in services sector.
India has taken both monetary and fiscal measures in order to
restore the growth momentum ««These measures have been
supplemented with sector specific credit measures for exports,
housing, micro and small enterprises and infrastructure.
The estimates for the first quarter of 2009-10 reveal the GDP
growth at 6.1%, with 2.4% growth in agriculture, 6.2% in industry and
7.6% in services sector.  The latest estimates of growth rate of GDP
released by the Central Statistical Organization (CSO)  for the second
quarter of 2009-10 indicate the growth rate of GDP at 7.9%, industry
8.2% and the services sector at 9.6% reflecting the recovery of the
economy.  However, growth in agriculture sector continues to be an
area of concern.
It is true that the benefits of economic development have not
percolated amongst all the sections of the society in the desired
manner, but there has been an improvement in the standard of living
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

of people.  The average life expectancy at birth has improved for India
from 60.3 years in 1991-95 to 63.5 years in 2002-06.  The IMR at all
India level figures has declined significantly from 80 per thousand
people in 1991 to 53 per thousand people in 2008.  The literacy rate
for All India has improved from 52.2% in 1991 to 64.8% in 2001.  The
incidence of poverty in India declined from 36 percent in 1993-94 to
27.5 percent in 2004-05.
The measure of inclusive development articulated in the
Eleventh Plan is primarily meant to sufficiently spread the benefits of
high growth by way of renewed emphasis on education, health,
poverty alleviation and providing basic facilities determining the levels
of welfare of large sections of the population.
To ensure the flow of benefits to the target groups,
Government has taken initiatives through direct interventions by
implementing programmes such as: National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), «.Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
(SSA),«Jawaharalal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM), National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), etc.  To make the
implementation of these programmes effective so that actual benefits
of various programmes reach the intended target groups, emphasis
has been laid on intensive monitoring at various levels, encouraging
decentralized and participatory management, improving delivery
systems, brining transparency and promoting use of modern
technology for easy flow of information´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7. The specific concern expressed by the Committee has been on the
necessity of taking corrective measures, particularly in the course of the mid
term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan for ensuring that the growth process
contributes to the betterment of all sections of the population and thereby fulfill
the mandate of achieving ‘inclusive growth’ envisaged under the Plan.   The
action taken note of the Ministry is devoid of details of measures taken in this
direction, and instead, mainly spells out the factors attributable to the
deceleration in the growth process witnessed in the last two years i.e. the impact
of the global recession on the overall growth of the country’s economy, and the
drought situation during 2008-09, which led to the negative growth in agriculture
sector.   It is obvious that the Ministry have sought to deviate from addressing
the core concern expressed by the Committee.  Deceleration in the agriculture
growth rate, as admitted by the Government in the action taken note, is a matter
of serious concern which also adds to the inequities in sections of the
population.  The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the specific
policy measures proposed for accelerating the agriculture growth rate to the
targeted level.  The admission made in the action taken note that ‘the benefits of
economic development have not percolated amongst all the sections of the
society’ – which is similar to the submission made to the Committee by the
Planning Secretary – adds credence to the emphasis made by the Committee on
initiating corrective measures in the plan process so that the benefits of growth
do not remain confined to particular sections of the society.  It is apparent that
effective corrective measures need to be initiated and pursued so that the
avowed aim of achieving ‘inclusive growth’ does not remain a mere policy paper
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

proposition and the benefits of social welfare oriented programmes actually flow
to the target groups.   The Committee, therefore expect the Government to take
positive measures in this direction and be kept apprised of the details thereof,
particularly in regard to the efficacy of the measures in ensuring that the target
groups of social welfare programmes are actually benefited and contribute in
lessening societal inequities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

B.           Support to Planning at National, State and District Level
Recommendation (Sl.No.7)
8. As there was recurring delay in approval of the scheme ³Support to Planning
Process at National, State and District Level ´ which was intended to enable District
Planning Committees (DPCs) to prepare / consolidate district plans by the end of the
11th Plan, the Committee desired that Government assess the scheme for approval and
implementation without further loss of time.
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Planning have stated as under:-
³This scheme could not take off in 2008-09 as the scheme could
not be finalized in this year as the process of consultations and the
process of formulation of the scheme based on their views took a long
time. The EFC Memo for the scheme could be finalized at the fag end
of the financial year 2008-09.  Therefore, the scheme could not be
discussed by the EFC and the entire provision had to be surrendered.
Further, the meeting of the EFC could also not be convened in the
year 2009-10 as the Ministry of Finance decided that, in view of the
difficult fiscal situation this year and the need for effecting all possible
economy, only those schemes and programmes that are part of
budget announcements 2009-10, may be introduced in the current
financial year. The entire provision for this scheme made in BE 2009-
10 is, therefore, being surrendered´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10. It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee to note that as in the
earlier year 2008-09, the entire allocated amount of Rs. 200 crore for the scheme
“Support to Planning Process at National, State and District Level” would remain
unutilized in the current year, 2009-10 as well, as the Expenditure Finance
Commission (EFC) has not accorded approval for implementing the scheme.  As
per the submission made to the Committee at the time of examination of the
Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry, the District Planning Committees
(DPCs), are intended to function as technical secretariats in preparing the district
plans under the Scheme.  Considering the fact that the budgeted amounts for the
scheme have remained unutilized so far due to want of approvals, the Committee
expect to be furnished with a factual note detailing the entire gamut of issues on
the essentials of the scheme as planned, the reasons for the continued delay and
inability in obtaining the mandatory approvals for implementing the scheme and
the measures now proposed for taking up the scheme for implementation.  The
Committee desire to be furnished with the detailed factual note in this regard
within one month of the presentation of this report to Parliament.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C. Estimation of Poverty
                                     Recommendation (Sl.No.8)
11. The Committee had, inter-alia emphasized on the need for overcoming the
shortcomings in the estimating the BPL  population, and more particularly, the
divergence in the estimates of BPL population as brought out by the Planning
Commission, and by the State Governments.  The Committee desired that the
Government undertake concrete measures for overcoming the shortcomings in arriving
at an empirically correct and objective identification and assessment of the number of
BPL households across the country.  The Committee also recommended to be kept
apprised of the developments in this regard, particularly in regard to the proposed food
security legislation intended for benefiting the under privileged.
12. The Government, in their action taken reply, inter-alia, stated as follows:
³The Planning Commission is the only nodal agency in the
Government for estimation of poverty in the country.  The criteria for
fixing the poverty line to estimate the poverty has been reviewed from
time to time to  take into account the changed situation.«.
In 2005, an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Prof.  Suresh
D. Tendulkar was set up to Review the Methodology of Estimation of
Poverty.  The Expert Group has submitted its report recently on
08.12.2009.  The Government is determined to ensure that the
benefits of various poverty alleviation and other programmes reach
the poor and underprivileged.  An Expert group set up by the Ministry
of Rural Development under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena
has submitted its report on the methodology to identify the BPL
households in the rural areas´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13. The main concern expressed by the Committee has been on the necessity
of resolving the conflicting estimates of BPL households as brought out by the
Planning Commission and by the State Governments.  Instead of detailing the
measures taken in this direction, the action taken note only highlights the
methodology followed by the Planning Commission in estimating poverty in the
Country on the basis of recommendations of Expert Groups.  The plan panel
headed by Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar on reviewing the methodology of estimating
poverty, and the Dr. N.C. Saxena Committee appointed by the Ministry of Rural
Development to review the methodology of BPL census have since submitted their
reports.  The findings of both the above panels are found to be variance with the
Planning Commission estimates on poverty and BPL households.  The different
State Governments also have their own estimates on BPL for their PDS.  In view of
such contradictions and dis-harmony in poverty criteria and estimates, the
Committee are at a loss to understand as to how the Government proposes to
formulate the provisions of the proposed Food Security Bill.  It is very strange that
while different panels appointed by the Government have arrived at a much higher
estimate of poverty, the Planning Commission continues to adopt casual
approach to this critical issue.  The Committee would, therefore, expect the
Government and the Planning Commission to comprehend the ground realities
and reflect the same in their studies and estimates on poverty across the country.
The Government should thus harmonise their estimates on poverty while
addressing the critical issues central to the success of welfare oriented
programmes in a specific time frame of about three months.  The Committee
desire to be kept apprised of the developments in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

D.     National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGP)
Recommendation (Sl.No.9)
14. The Committee had desired to carry out an independent study on National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGP) inter-alia to assess the quantum of
assets created on account of NREGP without any further delay, and they be furnished
with a status report thereon within a period of three months.  The Committee also
desired that measures be taken for overcoming the lacunae in the field data for
objectively assessing the benefits of the programme, and corrective steps initiated for
ensuring that the programme achieves the intended objectives.  The Committee further
desired that the proposal to set up the Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO) as
an independent body for assessing the implementation of the flagship programmes and
providing critical inputs thereon be speeded up.
15. The Government in their action taken reply, stated as follows:
³«..Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) of Planning
Commission launched evaluation study on NREGA during the year
2007 and the report was released in June, 2009.
The study on evaluation of the NREGA Scheme was intended to
assess the impact of this scheme on the overall quality of life of
people by gauging different parameters associated with the
improvement of overall quality of life of people such as   impact on
income ± earning levels of each household, expenditure on food and
non-food items, household and cultivable assets creation by the
beneficiaries. This study also captured the impact of the scheme to
arrest out-migration, views and feed-back  of the beneficiaries on
various facets of implementation of the scheme at grass root level
right from the stage of issue of job cards etc.
With the above set of objectives, the study was carried out in 20
districts spread throughout India by targeting 300 beneficiaries from
each district. These beneficiaries are hailing from the diverse
geography and social background distributed evenly within the
selected districts. The data pertains to the year 2006-07 during which
period this scheme was launched in the first phase of 200 districts. By
way of open-ended questionnaires, data on several variables were
collected from these beneficiaries who are part of the NREGP´.
Further, the Government in their action taken have elucidated overall
impact of the scheme, the views expressed by the beneficiaries etc.
Some of them are given below:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

³««Majority of the rural households agreed that there is a
transparent mechanism followed for issue of job cards. Enrollment
and registration under the scheme is an open-ended one, however,
fifteen percent of the respondents opined otherwise who experienced
several visits to GP office for registration purpose.
Verification of all the registrants is done by Gram Sabha (GS)  as
expressed by majority of the House-Holds (HHs). Besides, review of
applications earlier rejected by the Gram Panchayat (GP) were also
taken up by GS in many districts. GS meetings took place on quarterly
basis rather than on monthly basis according to HHs. Migrant families
could not register for job card due to their absence.
««Job card was not designed to have sufficient space for all the
entries in detail as was observed from many entries in the job cards.
Eighty percent of the HHs expressed that they did not get the work
within the stipulated 15 days time of demand for work in writing,
neither were they paid any unemployment allowance. Further enquiry
with GP officials on this point revealed that they are struggling with
teething problems of this kind of gigantic scheme and it takes some
time to comply with such mandatory guidelines «.On the utility of
maximum number of days of works, only small fraction of HHs could
utilize more than 35 days of work, remaining still lagging behind. The
reason for non-utilisation of maximum permissible 100 days is late
starting of the scheme. NREG Scheme stipulates at least one-third of
the wage allocation i.e., person-days  to women beneficiaries.  It was
found that only in 42 percent households, the women could share the
1/3rd of the allocated person-days (wage days ).  However, in 22
percent of the households, the women folk did utilize more than one-
third of the utilized person-days in the household. In most of the work
sites, excepting crèche all the other facilities like shed, drinking water
are provided.
Payment for the wages earned is paid in cash either at the
worksite or at GP office at a later date. Fourteen percent of the HHs
did not agree that the names of workers, number of days, and the
amount is read out at the worksite by the mate of the worksite as
stipulated in the guidelines of the Act.
One of the significant objectives of the NREGA is to arrest out-
migration of unskilled, landless labour force from the rural areas to
urban areas by ensuring up to 100 days of wage employment within
their native jurisdiction so that these 100 days guaranteed wage
employment can be judiciously and rationally utilized by the landless
peasants during lean and distress seasons««.
Contrary to the general perception of better wages upon migration,
70 percent of the beneficiaries revealed that the migration is only for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

just wages and not for any better wages. This implies that there is a
distress migration for just minimum wages to eke out the livelihood
and for survival rather than for better wages. Notable among the
responses is that 82 and 67 percent of the HHs interviewed in the
eastern and northern region respectively expressed that the out-
migration is in search of work and meager wages rather than for
better earnings which can be viewed as a distress migration. They
preferred to stay in their native village if there is enough wage
employment available locally.
It is disappointing to note that 38 percent of the HHs did not agree
with the measures taken by GP to check out-migration. They
expressed that the GP did not take any measures to create
sustainable assets to generate wage employment within the village.
Only 40 percent agreed that GP is taking appropriate steps to create
wage employment. Rest of the beneficiaries did not give their opinion
at all about the capacity of GP. Most notable fact is that the eastern
region beneficiaries to the extent of 46 percent did not express any
confidence in their respective village GP about their efforts of
checking out-migration´.
16. Regarding creation of Independent Evaluation Office, the Ministry of Planning
have replied as under:
³The Development and Evaluation Advisory Committee (DEAC),
as apex body of Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) met on
11.11.09 under the Chairmanship of Deputy Chairman Planning
Commission and discussed about the setting up of an Independent
Evaluation Office (IEO) for evaluating the major centrally sponsored
schemes / flagship programmes of Government of India. It was
decided in that meeting that the details of the IEO would be discussed
and a concrete decision would be taken on the constitution of IEO
very shortly in the next meeting of DEAC. As a follow up action, PEO
has reconstituted DEAC and prepared a revise proposal of IEO. The
revised proposal has been submitted to Deputy Chairman for giving a
suitable date for convening the DEAC to take further action on IEO.
Duration of time for completion of study - It may be noted that PEO
usually takes at least one year for completing an evaluation study.
Therefore, PEO may not be able to prepare a status report on a
particular evaluation study within three months period´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

17. Taking note of the shortcomings in the implementation of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGP), the Committee recommended
carrying out an independent study inter-alia to assess the quantum of assets
created as a result of the programme.  Instead of addressing the
recommendation of the Committee on carrying out an independent study or
disclosing any details of the quantum of assets created under the programme,
the Ministry have chosen to cite the findings of the evaluation study carried out
by the Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO).  It is also a matter of serious
concern for the Committee to note that the reply is silent on the efforts made or
proposed by the Government to rectify the deficiencies reflected in the findings
of the evaluation study which include, non-allocation of work to 80 per cent of
households within the time limit of 15 days, non-payment of unemployment
allowance, non-utilization of maximum permissible 100 days of work, continued
migration of unskilled people and non-generation of wage employment by most
of the Gram Panchayats, etc.  These issues, as highlighted in the evaluation
study, seriously impinge the effectiveness of the programme. The Committee,
while reiterating the need for carrying out an independent assessment of the
assets created under the programme, also urge upon the Government to take
remedial steps to address the shortcomings highlighted in the evaluation study.
 The Committee also note from the action taken note that the proposal to
set up the Independent Evaluation Organization (IEO ) for assessing the
implementation of the flagship programmes which has been in the anvil since
long is yet to materialize.  Enabling independent and objective assessment of the
programmes being an imminent necessity for the success of the programmes,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the Committee expect the Government to urgently act on the proposal for setting
up the Independent Evaluation Organization.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

E. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)
       Recommendation (Sl.No.11)
18. In regard to the implementation of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), the
areas of concern noticed from the information furnished by the Ministry of Planning
include, elementary education level dropout rate having declined only by 8.57
percentage as compared to the position in 2001-02; continued inability of about 63%
of tribal girls to complete elementary education; persistence of high gender gaps in
enrolment for SCs and STs in primary and elementary levels; and existence of wide
regional disparities in school infrastructure as well as in the Pupil-Teacher Ratio
(PTR).  As per the submissions of the Ministry of Planning, these issues would have
to be addressed on priority in the 11 th Plan period.  The Committee desired that
these issues, as well as issues relating to improving the quality of teaching and
setting educational standards would be addressed in right earnest.  The Committee
wished to be kept apprised of the policy measures for overcoming the shortcomings
in the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme and their effectiveness.  The Committee
also wished to be apprised of the findings of the independent study commissioned
for assessing the present status of school dropouts in major States and Union
Territories and the action taken by the Government thereon.
19. The Ministry of Planning, in their action taken reply, have stated as follows:
         ³Between 2001-02 and 2006-07-
• Drop-out rate at primary level declined by 14.45%
• Drop-out rate for girls at primary level declined by 13.32%
• Drop-out rate at elementary level declined by 8.62%
• Drop-out rate for girls at elementary level declined by11.59%
The education of children belonging to disadvantaged categories
namely Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes & Girls, in particular, is a
focus area under the SSA programme. The following interventions are
available under SSA to promote the education of SC, ST & girls:-
• 2573 Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya ± the residential
school at upper primary level ± sanctioned to promote
education of girls belonging to disadvantaged categories
namely SC, ST, OBC & minority.  Presently, 1.97 lakh girls
stand enrolled in 2558 KGBV  which are operational
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• A special intervention of National Programme of
Education for Girls at Elementary Level (NPEGEL) is in place
to encourage girls education. NPEGEL is a holistic effort to
address obstacles to girls education at the micro level through
flexible, decentralized processes and decision making.
NPEGEL is implemented in educationally backward blocks
(EBB) and addresses the needs of girls who are µin¶ as well as
µout¶ of school.  NPEGEL also reaches out to girls who are
enrolled in school, but do not attend school regularly.
• Development of books in tribal languages to facilitate ST
student to transit from home language to school language
• To begin with, under SSA programme, girls and children
belonging to SC& ST were provided with free textbooks.
Subsequently this facility was extended to all the children from
2008-09
• Districts having concentrated population of SC, ST &
minorities and districts with large gender gap are treated as
special focus districts and are considered for focused attention
under SSA programme.
• Funds @ Rs. 15 lakh per district is available to the States
to introduce context specific interventions in respect of children
belonging to SC & ST.
20. Regarding study on assessment of school drop outs, the Ministry of Planning
have stated as under:-
³Ministry of Human Resource Development has commissioned a
study on assessment of out of school children through Social and Rural
Research Institute, New Delhi, a Division of IMRB International
(formerly 'Indian Market Research Bureau'), a corporate market
research company,  which had conducted sample survey of household
during February-May, 2009. According to MHRD, the Report is in an
advanced stage of compilation.  It has also been informed by MHRD
that the estimates provided by this survey are expected to be quite
reliable due to the following factors:
(i) The sample was quite adequate and representative of all regions
at the level of the country and for major states. It is to be noted
that the sample survey of households was conducted in all the
States and Union Territories of India during February ± May 2009
and data collected from a sample of 99,226 households; and
(ii) It was estimated that there were 190,582,581 children in the age
group 6-13 years.  Out of these, the estimated number of out-of-
school children in the country was 81, 50, 617, comprising 4.28%
of the total children in this age group´.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

21. The Committee had desired to know details of the policy measures for
overcoming the shortcomings in the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) programme
and their effectiveness. Instead of addressing the concern of the Committee, the
Ministry have chosen to list out certain measures of intervention that are
available under SSA to promote the education of SCs, STs & girls.  The reply is
silent on the details of the measures taken or proposed for bridging the wide
regional disparities in school infrastructure as well as in the Pupil-Teacher Ratio
(PTR).  The Committee are constrained to note the way the Ministry have chosen
to address this important issue. The Committee, while expressing their
unhappiness in this regard, would expect a categorical and detailed action taken
note from the Government. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of
Human Resource Development should conduct a critical study, highlighting the
status of the programme with regard to qualitative parameters like attendance of
teachers, standards of teaching and text books, hours of teaching, quality of
infrastructure/ building etc.  The Committee should be apprised of the outcome of
the study and the follow-up action initiated thereafter within three months of
presentation of this Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl No. 1)
The scrutiny of Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Planning
revealed significant and persistent shortfall in utilization of the Plan expenditure year
after year.  The shortfall witnessed in utilization of funds allocated for the Tsunami
Rehabilitation Programme was as much as 97% in 2006-07, 83% in 2007-08, and
99.98% in 2008-09.  Similarly, the shortfall in utilization for ³50th year initiative for
Planning´ was 63% in 2006-07, 25% in 2007-08 and 70% in 2008-09.  Recurrent and
substantial under-utilization of the funds allocated at the stage of Budget Estimates
(BE) as well as the Revised Estimates (RE) also occurred under various other Heads
of account.  For instance, in 2008-09, Rs. 300.00 crore allocated at the stage of BE in
2008-09 for the scheme, ³New Initiative in Skill Development through Public Private
Partnership (PPP) ´ was reduced drastically to Rs.0.10 crore at the stage of RE and
nothing was spent.  Similarly, despite incurring very little expenditure as compared to
the budgeted allocations for the scheme, ³Strengthening Evaluation Capacity in
Government´ in the preceding years i.e. Rs. 0.26 crore in 2006-07, Rs. 0.59 crore in
2007-08 and Rs.1.40 crore in 2008-09, the allocation for the scheme had been
increased substantially to Rs.12.00 crore in 2009-10. As this was indicative of serious
shortcomings in formulating the Budget Estimates and ineffectiveness in monitoring
utilization of the budgeted funds for implementing schemes and programmes, the
Committee felt it to be imperative on the part of the Ministry to take appropriate
corrective measures to arrest this trend of inappropriate projection of fund
requirements in formulating budget estimates for programmes and schemes, which
were left unutilized owing to factors such as lack of approvals, or delays in obtaining
approvals for implementing the schemes.  The Committee desired to be apprised of
the corrective measures initiated and pursued for ensuring an objective and realistic
formulation of the budget requirements of the Ministry.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for future compliance. It is
also stated that the observations will appropriately be taken care of while formulating
Budget Estimates for the current financial year and onwards so as to keep the same
as realistic as possible.  A close watch will be kept over the necessary formalities
including approvals in respect of new schemes / projects to ensure timely utilization of
budgeted allocations.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Recommendation (Sl.No.3)
The increase in the number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSs) to 128 in
2008-09 from 82 in 2006-07 was indicative of the fact that the policy of limiting the
number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) on the basis of Zero-Based
Budgeting (ZBB) as recommended by the Expert Group of the Planning Commission
in 2005 had been ineffective.   Also the recommendation of the Expert Group for
according approvals only to such new CSS with an approved annual outlay in excess
of Rs. 300 crore was being observed in the breach.  As for the implementation of the
CSSs, as per the submission of the Ministry of Planning, instructions had been issued
for conducting social audits of Major Flagship Programmes such as National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme and the  Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana.
Strengthening the monitoring mechanism of the large number of CSSs currently under
implementation being a necessity, the Committee would suggest that in addition to the
major flagship programmes cited by the Ministry, the system of undertaking social
audits should be extended to other CSSs as well.  The Committee felt that there was a
need to carry out an appraisal of the efficacy with which the exercise of zero based
budgeting was being carried out for restructuring the CSS.  The Committee desired to
be apprised of the measures taken in this direction.  The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the measures taken for increasing transparency and ensuring effective
implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry of Rural Development had issued  letters dated 19th June 2009
and 1st July 2009 to the States regarding enforcement of Social Audit under NREGA,
which needs to be extended for all CSSs.  For taking measures for increasing
transparency and ensuring effective implementation of CSSs, it is submitted that an
Advisory has been issued by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj vide their letter dated
19.1.2009 and reminded by Planning Commission ¶s letter dated 2nd March 2009.
Recently, a Delivery Monitoring Unit (DMU) has been set up in the Prime Minister ¶s
Office to review a select number of flagship programmes / initiatives / iconic projects;
suggesting DMU format for making the reports public on the concerned Ministry ¶s
website.  As regards ZBB exercise, Ministries concerned with the CSS monitoring
have been asked to initiate in-house action for preparing proposals for the next ZBB
exercise.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Recommendation (Sl.No.4)
 With the budgetary support of Rs.120.00 crore, a new scheme namely ³Unique
Identification Scheme (UID)´ had been launched in 2009-10 which envisages assigning
a 11 digit Unique Identification Number (UIN) to each resident of the country.  The UID
Authority (UIDA) set up for implementing the scheme was at a nascent stage. The
Committee¶s concern in regard to the scheme mainly centers on the fact that there had
been no clarity on the part of Ministry, particularly in regard to the definition and scope
of the term µresidents¶ who were proposed to be assigned the UIN.  The Committee,
therefore, desired the Government to clearly define and spell out the scope of the term
µresidents¶ who would be assigned the UIN under the scheme.  It would also be
imperative on the part of the Government to ensure that the UIN does not, in anyway,
lead to misuse or work out to the gain of illegal migrants who might be residing in the
Country.  For enabling operationalisation of the scheme, a committee on Data
Standards and Verification Processes had been set up on 9 th October, 2009, which
was expected to submit its report within 90 days.  The Committee desired to be kept
apprised of the progress of operationalising the scheme.  The Committee also trusted
that it would be ensured that the database to be created for implementing the UIN
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

scheme undergoes multi-stage cross verifications, and responsibility fixed for lapses, if
any, at each stage.
Action Taken by the Government
All residents of the country will be assigned Unique Identification Number.  It is
also to clarify that UID Number does not guarantee any rights or entitlement to the
person concerned.  The issues relating to the data to be collected and the processes to
verify the identity and addresses of the residents at the time of their enrolment to the
UID system have been comprehensively dealt with by Vittal Committee.  The Vittal
Committee constituted on 9th October, 2009 had to submit its report within 90 days
from the date of its constitution.  However, it has already submitted its report within 60
days (i.e., on 9th December, 2009).
For the purpose of verification of residents, Vittal Committee has suggested
three possible modes: (i) Document based, (ii) Introducer system and (iii) Public
scrutiny system to be followed by Registrar General, India at the time of creation of
National Population Register.
UIDAI has also constituted Biometric Standards Committee on 29th September,
2009 which is expected to submit its report by 29th December, 2009 (i.e., within 90
days of its constitution).  The Charter of Biometric Standards Committee is:
• To develop biometric standards that will ensure interoperability of devices,
systems and processes used by various agencies that use the UID system.
• To review the existing standards of Biometric and, if required, modify/ extend/
enhance them so as to serve the specific requirements of UIDAI relating to de-
duplication and Authentication.
UIDAI will keep on apprising the Parliament and the Standing Committee from time
to time and will ensure that the database to be created for implementing the UIN
scheme undergoes proper verification process as suggested by Vittal Committee and
responsibility fixed for lapses, if any, at each stage.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl.No.5)
It was a matter of serious concern to note that the new scheme  ³New Initiative
in Skill Development through Public Private Partnership (PPP) ´ which was introduced
in 2008-09 suffered at the take-off itself. The entire budget provision of Rs.300.00 crore
made for the scheme in 2008-09 was surrendered as the proposals of the Ministries of
Rural Development and Labour & Employment were intended for augmenting
resources for the existing schemes, and not for special initiatives on skill development
under the PPP model. The Committee failed to understand as to why grants were to be
extended only for skill development initiatives under the PPP model, and not for the
ongoing schemes of the Ministries.  The Committee desired an explanation on the
reasons for confining grants under the PPP model, and not for the ongoing schemes of
the Ministries.  Woefully, the new initiative in skill development had been relegated to
the background in the year 2009-10 as well with the allocation reduced drastically to a
sum of Rs. 15.00 crore.
The facts pertaining to the conceptualisation of the new initiative on skill
development, the budgetary proposals made for the scheme, and the surrendering of
the budgeted funds was indicative of a very sorry state of affairs.  Obviously, there
were serious shortcomings in the role being played by the Ministry of Planning in acting
as a facilitator in implementing the scheme in coordination with the Ministries
concerned.  This called for serious introspection, particularly by the Ministry of Planning
so that such instances of blockage of huge amounts earmarked for schemes that could
not be taken up during the year did not recur.
Action Taken by the Government
A budget provision of Rs. 300 crores was made during the Financial Year 2008-
09 for giving grants-in-aid assistance to the central Ministries for special initiatives in
the area of Skill Development outside their normal budgetary activities, through PPP.
It is submitted that for ongoing schemes, Planning Commission already provides
funds to the respective Ministries and this scheme was not viewed as a means to
augment the existing resources of the under Central Ministries their existing ongoing
schemes but was meant for special initiatives through PPP. This was specially
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

because it would not have been financially appropriate to formulate a new scheme in
the Ministry of Planning for augmenting to existing resources for the ongoing schemes.
It is reiterated that Planning Commission had received a proposal each Ministry
of Rural Development and Ministry of Labour and Employment to merely augment
resources under the existing schemes of Skill Development.  These schemes WERE
NOT for special initiatives under PPP and therefore the amount was surrendered.
However, the observations of the Honourable Committee regarding
conceptualization of the new initiative on Skill Development have been noted for future
guidance.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Recommendation (Sl.No.6)
The Committee are also of the view that the scheme, as conceived, which
involves the Central Ministries as well as the State Governments acting independently
in taking skill development initiatives may be unwieldy in assessing and implementing
skill development programmes, and in ensuring proper coordination. It would,
therefore, be necessary to have a formalized central structure for giving a well-focused
approach to the skill development initiatives. The Committee also wish to emphasise
here that the vast skilled force presently existing in different sectors should not be lost
sight of. The Committee, therefore, expect the Government to undertake and
implement appropriate policy measures for augmenting and benefiting the indigenous
skill capacity inter-alia by enabling for certification of the existing skilled force in
different sectors.
Action Taken by the Government
It is submitted that the Government has already created a three-tier institutional
structure for effective execution of the policies on Skill Development.  The Prime
Minister¶s National Council on Skill Development is the Apex body on National Skill
Development. Its main functions are to lay down overall broad Policy objectives,
financing and governance models and strategies relating to skill development, to
review the progress of schemes, and guide on mid-course corrections, additions and
closure of parts or whole of any particular programme/scheme, Coordinate Public
Sector/Private Sector Initiatives in a framework of collaborative action.  To support the
Council, National Skill Development Coordination Board (NSDCB), Chaired by the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, has been set up.  It functions include
enumerating strategies to implement the decisions of the Council, developing suitable
operational guidelines to achieve the objectives of skill development requirement of the
economy, addressing regional imbalance in skill development infrastructure, socio-
economic rural-urban and gender divides, encouraging the state Governments to put in
place similar institutional structures, establishment of skill inventory and database for
skill deficiency mapping,  coordinating and facilitating repositioning of employment
exchanges as outreach points for providing information on employment and skill
development, establishment of a credible accreditation system and monitoring,
evaluating and analyzing the outcomes of various schemes and programmes and
keeping the Council informed of the same.  The third body created by the government
on skill development is the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC), a non-
profit company under section 25 of the Companies Act under the Ministry of Finance.
Its operating arm is National Skill Development Fund (NSDF), a 100% Government
owned trust, to facilitate its mandate of coordinating and stimulating private sector
initiatives in the area of Skill Development with an enhanced flexibility and
effectiveness.  The NSDF would provide funds to the Corporation for furtherance of the
objective on Skill Development in accordance with the approved work and financial
plan.  The NSDC will play the role of funding and incentivising, enabling support
services and shaping and creating a momentum for large scale participation by private
sector in Skill Development.  It will also identify critical skill groups, develop models for
skill development and attract potential private players and provide support to their
efforts.
However, the observations of the Honorable Committee are noted for guidance.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl.No.8)
 As per the submission of the Planning Secretary, the current estimation of the
proportion of people living Below Poverty Line (BPL), which was primarily based on the
methodology drawn in 1973-74, was slated for review upon receipt of the report of the
Expert Group set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. Suresh Tendulkar in December,
2005 inter-alia to µrecommend any changes in the existing procedures of official
estimates of poverty ¶.   The next BPL survey was to be carried out on the parameters
fixed by the Expert Group, and would also form the basis for the proposed legislation
on Food Security. The Committee desired the Government to impress upon the Expert
Group, which had been granted repeated extensions in the last three years to finalise
and present their report without further delay.  The Committee had, in their earlier
reports too emphasized on the need for overcoming the shortcomings highlighted in the
estimation of BPL population, and more particularly, the divergence in the estimates of
BPL population as brought out by the Planning Commission, and by the State
Governments.  The Planning Secretary too admitted to the prevalence of the dichotomy
in the estimates, which had been attributed to the µbuilt-in incentives ¶ that come on
being categorized as poor.  The Committee recommended that the Government
undertake concrete measures for overcoming the shortcomings in arriving at an
empirically correct and objective identification and assessment of the number of BPL
households across the country.  The Committee also recommended to be kept
apprised of the developments in this regard, particularly in regard to the proposed food
security legislation intended for benefiting the under privileged.
Action Taken by the Government
The Planning Commission is the only nodal agency in the Government for
estimation of poverty in the country.  The criteria for fixing the poverty line to estimate
the poverty has been reviewed from time to time to  take into account the changed
situation.  The begin with, the Planning Commission in 1977, constituted a µTask Force
on Projection of Minimum Needs and Effective Consumption Demand ¶, which
submitted its report in 1979.  The Task Force defined the poverty line as per capita
consumption expenditure level of Rs. 49.09 per month in rural area and Rs. 56.64 per
capita per month in urban areas at 1973-74 prices at national level corresponding to a
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

basket of goods and services anchored on a norm of per capita daily calorie
requirement of 2400 cal in rural areas and 2100 cal in urban areas.  These poverty
lines were applied uniformly in all the States.  In September, 1989 an Expert Group on
µEstimation of Proportion and Number of Poor ¶ (Lakdawala Committee) was constituted
to look into the methodology for estimation of poverty and to redefine the poverty line, if
necessary.  The Expert Group which submitted its report in 1993 did not change the
definition of poverty defined by Task Force.  However, the Expert Group recommended
the disaggregation of the national poverty line into state wise poverty lines in order to
reflect the state wise price differences.  Since 1997, the percentage of people below
the poverty line is estimated on the basis of Expert Group methodology using state-
specific poverty lines and state-specific consumer expenditure distribution, obtained
from the large sample surveys on household consumer expenditure conducted by the
National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) once in approximately five years.
 In 2005, an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Prof.  Suresh D. Tendulkar
was set up to Review the Methodology of Estimation of Poverty.  The Expert Group has
submitted its report recently on 08.12.2009.  The Government is determined to ensure
that the benefits of various poverty alleviation and other programmes reach the poor
and underprivileged.  An Expert group set up by the Ministry of Rural Development
under the Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena has submitted its report on the
methodology to identify the BPL households in the rural areas.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter I)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl.No.9)
 On the specific issue of the ground reality in regard to implementation of the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGP) it was seen from the
submission of the Planning Secretary that the Planning Commission has under taken
the initiative of critically analysing the field data on implementation of the programme.
As per the Secretary ¶s submission, while there had been improvement in the timelines
for furnishing the field data, the ground reality on the implementation of the programme
µis not so¶.  Evidently, the Government appeared to be oblivious to the ground reality on
the implementation of the programme, involving thousands of crores of rupees.  Also,
although the Ministry had assured that an independent study would be carried out inter-
alia to assess the quantum of assets created on account of NREGP as recommended
by the Committee earlier, no progress appeared to have been made in this direction.
The Committee desired that, as assured earlier, the study was carried out without any
further delay, and they be furnished with a status report thereon within a period of three
months from now.  The Committee also desired that measures be taken for overcoming
the lacunae in the field data for objectively assessing the benefits of the programme,
and corrective steps initiated for ensuring that the programme achieves the intended
objectives.  The Committee further desired that the proposal to set up the Programme
Evaluation Organization (PEO) as an independent body for assessing the
implementation of the flagship programmes and providing critical inputs thereon be
speeded up.
Action Taken by the Government
Evaluation study on National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) ±
Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) of Planning Commission launched
evaluation study on NREGA during the year 2007 and the report was released in June,
2009.
The study on evaluation  of the NREGA Scheme was intended to assess the
impact of this scheme on the overall quality of life of people by gauging different
parameters associated with the improvement of overall quality of life of people such as
impact on income ± earning levels of each household,  expenditure on food and non-
food items, household and cultivable assets creation by the beneficiaries. This study
also captured the impact of the scheme to arrest out-migration, views and feed-back  of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the beneficiaries on various faucets of implementation of the scheme at grass root level
right from the stage of issue of job cards etc.
With the above set of objectives, the study was carried out in 20 districts spread
throughout India by targeting 300 beneficiaries from each district. These beneficiaries
are hailing from the diverse geography and social background distributed evenly within
the selected districts. The data pertains to the year 2006-07 during which period this
scheme was launched in the first phase of 200 districts. By way of open-ended
questionnaires, data on several variables were collected from these beneficiaries who
are part of the NREGA Scheme. Overall impact of the scheme, views expressed by the
beneficiaries etc. is elucidated in a nutshell in the following paras.
Female-headed household participation in the works is very encouraging
ranging from 12 to 52 percent. Though the scheme envisages at least one-third of the
total person-days to be earmarked for women participants, it is too early to judge on
this point since the effective time duration of the scheme in these 20 districts is uneven
and in some cases the scheme hardly taken off.  Most beneficiaries got their job cards
through Gram Sabha (GS) meetings and the rest by steps taken by Gram Panchayat
(GP). Majority of the rural households agreed that there is a transparent mechanism
followed for issue of job cards. Enrollment and registration under the scheme is an
open-ended one, however, fifteen percent of the respondents opined otherwise who
experienced several visits to GP office for registration purpose.
Verification of all the registrants is done by GS as expressed by majority of the
HHs. Besides, review of applications earlier rejected by the GP were also taken up by
GS in many districts. GS meetings took place on quarterly basis rather than on monthly
basis according to HHs. Migrant families could not register for job card due to their
absence.
Views of beneficiaries were also captured on the modalities followed to issue the
job card by the officials. One-tenth of the people revealed that ten percent of the
eligible adult members of the family are not included in the job card. The job card is in
the possession of GP officials in most of the districts of eastern region and only during
the season of works, the job cards are handed over to the beneficiaries for their
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

signature/thumb impression. Majority of the HHs agreed that the job card was issued
within couple of days of registration. Majority of households expressed that they got
their job cards without waiting for much time and without unnecessary visits to GP
office. Though affixing of photograph of the households is mandatory, it is not followed
in many districts, and in some places the beneficiary paid for it. Job card was not
designed to have sufficient space for all the entries in detail as was observed from
many entries in the job cards.
Eighty percent of the HHs expressed that they did not get the work within the
stipulated 15 days time of demand for work in writing, neither were they paid any
unemployment allowance. Further enquiry with GP officials on this point revealed that
they are struggling with teething problems of this kind of gigantic scheme and it takes
some time to comply with such mandatory guidelines.    As far as publicity of the
scheme and dissemination of information related to the scheme, all locally available
communication modes are utilized to spread the awareness and information about the
scheme. On the utility of maximum number of days of works, only small fraction of HHs
could utilize more than 35 days of work, remaining still lagging behind. The reason for
non-utilisation of maximum permissible 100 days is late starting of the scheme. NREG
Scheme stipulates at least one-third of the wage allocation i.e., person-days  to women
beneficiaries.  It was found that only in  42 percent households, the women could share
the 1/3rd of the allocated person-days (wage days ).  However, in 22 percent of the
households, the women folk did utilize more than one-third of the utilized person-days
in the household. In most of the work sites, excepting crèche all the other facilities like
shed, drinking water are provided.
Payment for the wages earned is paid in cash either at the worksite or at GP
office at a later date. Fourteen percent of the HHs did not agree that the names of
workers, number of days, and the amount is read out at the worksite by the mate of the
worksite as stipulated in the guidelines of the Act.
An enquiry is also made to assess the impact of the scheme on the overall
quality of life of the beneficiaries. Due to the income generation through this scheme,
the number of beneficiaries at the low earning level are reduced  to nearly half in size
resulting this on the rise of HHs with marginally higher income.  It was found that more
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

than half of the beneficiaries are agricultural and unskilled workers. There is also shift
in the beneficiaries expenditure pattern on food and non-food items. The survey
revealed that the number of families spending less on food has come down drastically
where as there is a rise of families who are spending more on food and non-food items.
Only two percent of the HHs opened bank account among the surveyed
beneficiaries. More than half of the HHs revealed that they purchased livestock like
sheep/goat etc. during the year. Four-fifths of the HHs do not have any outstanding
loan. In the western region, nearly 60% of the HHs have an outstanding loan either
from bank or local money lender. 3.3% of the beneficiaries bought a bicycle for the first
time, 1.5% of the beneficiaries did buy electric fan, or other appliance, 3.2 % of the
HHs purchased steel utensils etc. with the income generated from the scheme.
One of the significant objectives of the NREGA is to arrest out-migration of
unskilled, landless labour force from the rural areas to urban areas by ensuring up to
100 days of wage employment within their native jurisdiction so that these 100 days
guaranteed wage employment can be judiciously and rationally utilized by the landless
peasants during lean and distress seasons. One-fourth of the families surveyed opined
that there is migration from their respective village to towns/cities in search of job.
Almost fifty percent of the HHs in western region expressed that migration is taking
place from their villages. In the north eastern region, in the district of North Lakhimpur,
everyone agreed that there is migration from their villages.  There is migration taking
places from districts such as South Garo Hills (Meghalaya), Medak (AP), and Dahod
(Maharashtra) in addition to almost all the districts from the eastern region. In some of
these districts, the out-migration is to the extent of 40%.
Contrary to the general perception of better wages upon migration, 70 percent of
the beneficiaries revealed that the migration is only for just wages and not for any
better wages. This implies that there is a distress migration for just minimum wages to
eke out the livelihood and for survival rather than for better wages. Notable among the
responses is that 82 and 67 percent of the HHs interviewed in the eastern and northern
region respectively expressed that the out-migration is in search of work and meager
wages rather than for better earnings which can be viewed as a distress migration.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

They preferred to stay in their native village if there is enough wage employment
available locally.
It is disappointing to note that 38 percent of the HHs did not agree with the
measures taken by GP to check out-migration. They expressed that the GP did not
take any measures to create sustainable assets to generate wage employment within
the village. Only 40 percent agreed that GP is taking appropriate steps to create wage
employment. Rest of the beneficiaries did not give their opinion at all about the capacity
of GP. Most notable fact is that the eastern region beneficiaries to the extent of 46
percent did not express any confidence in their respective village GP about their efforts
of checking out-migration.
 The complete evaluation report has been placed in Planning Commission
website for the information of all concerned.
Creation of Independent Evaluation Office:
 The Development and Evaluation Advisory Committee (DEAC), as apex body of
Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) met on 11.11.09 under the Chairmanship
of Deputy Chairman Planning Commission and discussed about the setting up of an
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) for evaluating the major centrally sponsored
schemes / flagship programmes of Government of India. It was decided in that meeting
that the details of the IEO would be discussed and a concrete decision would be taken
on the constitution of IEO very shortly in the next meeting of DEAC. As a follow up
action, PEO has reconstituted DEAC and prepared a revise proposal of IEO. The
revised proposal has been submitted to Deputy Chairman for giving a suitable date for
convening the DEAC to take further action on IEO.
 Duration of time for completion of study - It may be noted that PEO usually takes
at least one year for completing an evaluation study.  Therefore, PEO may not be able
to prepare a status report on a particular evaluation study within three months period.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.17 of Chapter ± I)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation (Sl.No.10)
 The Committee noted that various components of Bharat Nirman, a time-
bound Plan, intended to build the essential rural infrastructure had registered
lower performance owing to constraints which include, delays in land acquisition,
lack of detailed project reports and absence of project implementation unit, etc.
While, as per the submissions of the Ministry, the achievement under the
programme in adding to the irrigation capacity, building all weather roads, and
ensuring electricity supply to BPL households had been to the extent of 61.38 %,
48.3% and 23.4% respectively vis-à-vis the targets envisaged, the ground reality
might not be so, as admitted by the Secretary, Ministry of Planning in the case of
the NREGP. The Committee desired that the achievement of the set targets be
assessed objectively and the reasons for the shortfalls analysed in detail for
formulating remedial measures for implementation.  The Committee also
emphasised on the need for devolving the plan model of development to the
village level with the districts and state administration playing a key role in the
planned development of the villages.
Action Taken by the Government
Bharat Nirman is a business plan for connecting rural India to
opportunities-physical connectivity through roads, electricity and telephones; basic
services through housing and water supply and improving agricultural
productivities and incomes through investments in irrigation within a definite time
frame (2005-09).
2.       Three goals viz. Rural Housing, Rural Water Supply and Rural Telephony
performed between 85-100% of targets.  As regards the performance under Rural
Roads, Electricity and Irrigation capacity is concerned,  it may be mentioned that
although target had not been achieved, the programme resulted in making
available connectivity in terms of roads to people, electricity for unconnected
houses and families and irrigation facility particularly in remote areas.
3. The shortfalls in achievement of targets and utilization of facility by the target
group is primarily on account of following reasons:
(1) Rural Roads: 90% of the shortfall in the targets is limited to about 5
states primarily due to lack of contracting capacity in states.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(2) Rural Electrification:
(a) Delay in sanction of continuation of scheme in the Eleventh Plan.
(b)Longer time taken in awarding the projects and allotment of land for
new sub-stations.
(c) Delay in release of BPL lists by States;
(d) Long time taken by States in settlement of entry tax and way bills.
3. Irrigation:
(a) Delay in land acquisition for dam, reservoir, and canal system.
(b) Delay in completing Resettlement and Rehabilitation work of project
affected persons.
(c) Escalation in cost of construction material as well as labour.
(d) Unsatisfactory infrastructure of States for execution of projects.
(e) Contract management problems and litigations
(f) Provision of inadequate State share by the State Governments.
4. The remedial Measures for improving the pace of implementation of
various goals include (i) strengthening of institutional capacity, (ii)
augmentation of contracting capacity, (iii) pro-active upfront action for
getting forest and environment clearance, (iv) overcoming the constraint of
getting the private land through good offices of Gram Panchayats and
Local Revenue Administration.
5. As per Article 243 ZD of the Constitution, it is the responsibility of the
District Planning Committee of every district to consolidate the plans of the
Panchayats and the Municipalities of the district into an Integrated District
Plan.  The Planning Commission issued guidelines on 25.08.2006 for
preparation of District Plans in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  Later, a
Manual for Integrated District Planning was prepared in November , 2008
by a Task Force set up by the Planning Commission.  This Manual is a
step by step guide to District Planning to assist planners at the local, district
and State levels.  A copy of this manual was sent in March, 2009 to all the
State Governments/Union Territory administrations for necessary action.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Recommendation (Sl.No.12)
The Committee were deeply concerned to note that owing to shortcomings
such as little experience of tsunami affected States/UTs in tackling a disaster of the
magnitude caused by Tsunami and their reluctance to conduct the critical studies for
impact assessment and interventions, the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme (TRP)
had suffered with lesser utilization of funds as compared to the outlay of Rs. 9135.66
crore during 2005-06 to 2008-09.  As per the submission of the Ministry of Planning,
the physical performance in the major sectors i.e. housing, agriculture and livelihood,
fisheries etc. had not been up to the mark.  What the Committee found to be surprising
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

to note in this regard was the fact that, while as per the submission of the Ministry, the
issue of extending the duration of the programme beyond 2008-09 was to be
considered separately, no budgetary allocation had been made for the programme in
the current year, 2009-10. Given the facts relating to the partial success of the
programme, the Committee desired that the contributory factors thereto be gone into
detail, and the necessity of extending the programme for a further period assessed
urgently, so that the intended objectives of the programme were fulfilled.
Action Taken by the Government
The EGoM approved TRP period was 4 years i.e., from 2005-06 to 2008-09. It
is a fact that in the initial years, the progress of work under TRP was slow. Since the
Tsunami affected States/UTs had little experience in tackling a disaster of the
magnitude caused by Tsunami, the administrative machinery took time during the first
two years to gear itself up. Things have since improved and pace of implementation
has picked up.
2. However, necessary budgetary provision (Rs 1200 crore) has been
made for Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme (TRP) in the current year (2009-10) for
the States and UTs, subject to EGoM ¶s approval of extension of TRP period by one
year i.e., up to March, 2010.
3. Since the approved 4 year period ended by March, 2009, Planning
Commission had sent a proposal to the Cabinet Secretariat on June 1, 2009, for
reconstitution of EGoM to decide upon the extension of the TRP period. The
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on TRP has now been reconstituted vide
Cabinet Secretariat letter No.511/2/1/2005-cab dated 23.11.2009. The extension of
the period of TRP beyond March, 2009, will be one of the agenda items for the
consideration by the EGoM in its next meeting.
4. As far as damaged works under TRP is concerned, based on the reports
obtained from States/UTs, the progress of projects till September, 2009, , especially in
the five important sectors of TRP- Housing, Agriculture & Livelihood, Fisheries &
Livelihood, Roads & Bridges, and Ports & Jetties, is given below.
Housing: Out of 86688 damaged houses, 70051 houses (81%) have been
completed.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Agriculture & Livelihood: All the works have been completed.
Fisheries & Livelihood: All works completed except Fish Landing Centres
(FLCs) in Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and ANI.
Roads & Bridges: Out of 1828.71 kms of damaged roads, 1773.27 kms (96%)
have been completed. Out of damaged 9 bridges, 7 bridges (78%) have been
completed.
Ports & Jetties: All the works are nearing completion and will be completed by
March, 2010.
5. The revised fund requirement of Rs. 9822.10 crore comprising
Rs.3332.43 crore as External Aided Projects (EAP) and Rs.6489.67 crore as
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) to States/UTs for implementation of the TRP was
approved by the EGOM. The expenditure till September, 2009, is Rs 5984.69 crore
(66%), comprising  Rs 4617.59 (80%) spent under ACA and Rs 1367.1 crore (41%)
spent under EAP.
[Ministry of Planning No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Recommendation (Sl.No.13)
The Committee were distressed to note that the Programme Evaluation
Organisation (PEO) was reeling under the shortage of manpower for a long
period. Modernization and strengthening of PEO without the required manpower
would not yield the desired benefits. Moreover, while only the allied activities, but
not the core ones were outsourced in most organizations, in case of the PEO
however, the main function of carrying out evaluation studies was being
outsourced.   This again had also proved to be disadvantageous owing to factors
such as delays in receipt of reports, lack of reliability and lesser utilization of the
funds earmarked, etc. The Committee, therefore, urged that sincere efforts should
be taken to fill up the vacancies in PEO so as to enable in improving the
development planning and implementation of programmes.
Action Taken by the Government
The shortage of Manpower in Programme Evaluation Organization (PEO)
is a major hindrance, causing delays in completion of evaluation in time.  In order
to address this issue, the following steps are being taken:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(a) In order to fill the vacant posts of SRO and RO in PEO
headquarters and its field units, the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA)
has been requested from time to time by Planning Commission
(Administration).  The Union Public Service Commission has also been
requested by Planning Commission (Adm.) to fill up the post of Economic
Officers in PEO.
(b) Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) and Union Public Service
Commission (UPSC) are being reminded to fill up the vacant posts in
Regional Evaluation Offices (REO) and Project Evaluation Offices (PEO)
located in various capital cities of the country.  PEO has been conducting
evaluation studies by utilizing the existing manpower in REOs and PEOs
and also some of the studies are being outsourced to the empanelled 37
research institutes of the country.  In order to outsource the evaluation
studies, PEO has been utilizing the Plan-fund called ³Strengthening
Evaluation Capacity in Government ´.  Due to the  procedure involved in
evaluating the project, PEO is not able to utilize 100% of the planned fund
on yearly basis.  As per our experience, it is found that the outsourcing
agencies are not able to submit the final evaluation report within a year as
per their agreement.  Therefore, the estimated sanctioned amount cannot
be released as per agreement during the span of one year.  This is a major
cause of unutilisation of planned fund in order to overcome the bottlenecks,
the following measures have been adopted by PEO:-
(i) Effective monitoring by the field units of PEO on the progress of the
outsourcing evaluation studies.
(ii) Rigorous scrutiny on the technical and financial bids received from
the agencies for evaluation by the members of the Consultancy
Evaluation cum Monitoring Committee (CEMC) setup for the study.
(iii)  Adequate training is being provided on various aspects of evaluation
to the evaluation team of outsourcing agencies including monitoring
staff of PEO.
[No. 38/16/2009/OM&C Planning Commission (OM&C)]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

 CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
N I L
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl No. 2)
While the 11 th Plan envisages a targeted GDP growth rate of 9 percent per
annum, the growth rate witnessed in the first two years of the plan period i.e. 2006-07
and 2007-08 averages to 7.8%.  There had been a significant decline in the growth
rate in 2008-09 to 6.7% with the agriculture and allied sectors, industry sector and
services sector witnessing a growth of 1.6%, 3.9% and 9.7% respectively mainly due
to the impact of the global financial crisis on the domestic economy.  The
effectiveness of the fiscal, monetary and other sector specific policy initiatives
undertaken by the Government for reviving the growth momentum remain to be
witnessed.  Of equal, if not more serious concern with regard to the growth process
envisaged in the 11 th Plan was the admission of the Secretary, Ministry of Planning
that the benefits of growth witnessed in the earlier years had not reached or benefited
all sections of the population. Ensuring that the benefits of the growth process
contribute to the betterment of all sections of the populace was essential to the
success of the 11th Plan process, which was set out to achieve µinclusive growth¶.  The
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Planning Commission, which was
engaged in the exercise of mid-term appraisal of the 11 th Plan would address this
issue with due seriousness and formulate appropriate remedial measures so that the
benefits of the growth of the economy were not confined to particular sections of the
population and benefit the deprived categories as well.  The Committee also desired
to be kept apprised of the effectiveness of the policy measures initiated by the
Government for reviving the growth momentum that had witnessed a major downward
slump since 2008-09.
Action Taken by the Government
The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) aims at achieving an average growth
rate of 9% with targeted growth rate of 4% per year in the agricultural sector, 10 to
11% per year in the industrial sector and 9 to 11% per year in the services sector.
During the first year of Eleventh Plan (2007-08) the growth rate of GDP is estimated at
9% with 4.9% growth in agriculture, 8.1% in industry and 10.3% in services sector.  It
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

is true that, there has been a deceleration in the growth rate in the Indian Economy on
account of global slow down and  negative growth rate in the agriculture sector due to
drought situation during 2008-09. The growth rate of GDP for 2008-09 is estimated at
6.7% (Revised Estimates) with 1.6% growth in agriculture, 4.2% in industry and 10%
in services sector.
India has taken both monetary and fiscal measures in order to restore the
growth momentum.  These steps, inter-alia, consist of expansionary plan expenditure,
reduction in indirect taxes, sector-specific measures for textiles, housing,
infrastructure, automobiles, micro and small sector and exports, authorization to
specified financial institutions to raise tax free bonds to fund infrastructure  projects,
farm loan waiver package etc The monetary and credit related measures taken by the
RBI relate to provisioning of adequate liquidity and  credit delivery, progressive
reduction in the Repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), reduction in
cash reserve and statutory liquidity ratios (CRR and SLR) for banks and improvement
in forex  liquidity while at the same time containing the financial contagion from the
global financial crisis.  These measures have been supplemented with sector specific
credit measures for exports, housing, micro and small enterprises and infrastructure.
The estimates for the first quarter of 2009-10 reveal the GDP growth at 6.1%,
with 2.4% growth in agriculture, 6.2% in industry and 7.6% in services sector.  The
latest estimates of growth rate of GDP released by the Central Statistical Organization
(CSO)  for the second quarter of 2009-10 indicate the growth rate of GDP at 7.9%,
industry 8.2% and the services sector at 9.6% reflecting the recovery of the economy.
However, growth in agriculture sector continues to be an area of concern.
It is true that the benefits of economic development have not percolated
amongst all the sections of the society in the desired manner, but there has been an
improvement in the standard of living of people.  The average life expectancy at birth
has improved for India from 60.3 years in 1991-95 to 63.5 years in 2002-06.  The IMR
at all India level figures has declined significantly from 80 per thousand people in 1991
to 53 per thousand people in 2008.  The literacy rate for All India has improved from
52.2% in 1991 to 64.8% in 2001.  The incidence of poverty in India declined from 36
percent in 1993-94 to 27.5 percent  in 2004-05.
The measure of inclusive development articulated in the Eleventh Plan is
primarily meant to sufficiently spread the benefits of high growth by way of renewed
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

emphasis on education, health, poverty alleviation and providing basic facilities
determining the levels of welfare of large sections of the population.
To ensure the flow of benefits to the target groups, Government has taken
initiatives through direct interventions by implementing programmes such as: National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar
Yojana (SGSY),  Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY), Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY), Swarna Jayanti Shahri Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), Integrated Child
Development Services (ICDS) Scheme, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Mid-day Meal
Scheme, Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY),
Jawaharalal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), National Rural
Health Mission (NRHM), etc.  To make the implementation of these programmes
effective so that actual benefits of various programmes reach the intended target
groups, emphasis has been laid on intensive monitoring at various levels, encouraging
decentralized and participatory management, improving delivery systems, brining
transparency and promoting use of modern technology for easy flow of information.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C /dated 20.1.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.7 of the Chapter ± I)
Recommendation (Sl.No.7)
The Committee regretted to note that the scheme µSupport to Planning Process
at National, State and District Level ¶, which was intended to enable in district plan
preparation / consolidation of district plans by District Planning Committees (DPCs) by
end of the 11th Plan was yet to be accorded necessary approvals.  The allocation of Rs.
200.00 crore made for the scheme at the stage of BE in 2008-09 was reduced to Rs.
0.20 crore at the stage of RE, and finally nothing was spent as the scheme was not
formalized for approval. A sum of Rs.200.00 crore had been earmarked for the scheme
once again for the year 2009-10. As per the submission of the Planning Secretary, the
scheme was now slated to be placed before the Expenditure Finance Committee for
being launched this year. The inordinate delay witnessed in finalizing the scheme for
approval left the Committee wondering as to how the Planning Commission would
achieve the envisaged objectives under the scheme in the next two years. The
Committee were also constrained to note that as in the case of the µnew initiative on
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

skill development¶, this a another instance where a huge amount of Rs. 200.00 crore of
the scarce resources was blocked owing to the inadequacies in the planning process.
The Committee, therefore, desired that Government assess the scheme for approval
and implementation without further loss of time. The Committee also desired that, once
taken up for implementation, the involvement of the State Governments under this
scheme should be ensured so that, as pointed out by the Secretary, Ministry of
Planning, the DPCs function as the technical secretariats for preparation of district
plans.
Action Taken by the Government
This scheme could not take off in 2008-09 as the scheme could not be finalized
in this year as the process of consultations and the process of formulation of the
scheme based on their views took a long time. The EFC Memo for the scheme could
be finalized at the fag end of the financial year 2008-09.  Therefore, the scheme could
not be discussed by the EFC and the entire provision had to be surrendered.
Further, the meeting of the EFC could also not be convened in the year 2009-10
as the Ministry of Finance decided that, in view of the difficult fiscal situation this year
and the need for effecting all possible economy, only those schemes and programmes
that are part of budget announcements 2009-10, may be introduced in the current
financial year. The entire provision for this scheme made in BE 2009-10 is, therefore,
being surrendered.
[Ministry Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No.10 of the Chapter ± I)
Recommendation (Sl.No.11)
 In regard to the implementation of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), the
areas of concern noticed from the information furnished by the Ministry of
Planning include, elementary education level dropout rate having declined only by
8.57 percentage as compared to the position in 2001-02; continued inability of
about 63% of tribal girls to complete elementary education; persistence of high
gender gaps in enrolment for SCs and STs in primary and elementary levels; and
existence of wide regional disparities in school infrastructure as well as in the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Pupil-Teacher Ratio (PTR).  As per the submissions of the Ministry of Planning,
these issues would have to be addressed on priority in the 11 th Plan period.  The
Committee desired that these issues, as well as issues relating to improving the
quality of teaching and setting educational standards would be addressed in right
earnest.  The Committee wished to be kept apprised of the policy measures for
overcoming the shortcomings in the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan programme and their
effectiveness.  The Committee also wished to be apprised of the findings of the
independent study commissioned for assessing the present status of school
dropouts in major States and Union Territories and the action taken by the
Government thereon.
Action Taken by the Government
Between 2001-02 and 2006-07
• Drop-out rate at primary level declined by 14.45%
• Drop-out rate for girls at primary level declined by 13.32%
• Drop-out rate at elementary level declined by 8.62%
• Drop-out rate for girls at elementary level declined by 11.59%
The education of children belonging to disadvantaged categories namely
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes & Girls, in particular, is a focus area under the
SSA programme. The following interventions are available under SSA to promote the
education of SC, ST & girls:-
• 2573 Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya ± the residential school at upper
primary level ± sanctioned to promote education of girls belonging to
disadvantaged categories namely SC, ST, OBC & minority.  Presently,
1.97 lakh girls stand enrolled in 2558 KGBV  which are operational
• A special intervention of National Programme of Education for Girls at
Elementary Level (NPEGEL) is in place to encourage girls education.
NPEGEL is a holistic effort to address obstacles to girls education at the
micro level through flexible, decentralized processes and decision making.
NPEGEL is implemented in educationally backward blocks (EBB) and
addresses the needs of girls who are µin¶ as well as µout¶ of school.
NPEGEL also reaches out to girls who are enrolled in school, but do not
attend school regularly.
• Development of books in tribal languages to facilitate ST student to transit
from home language to school language
• To begin with, under SSA programme, girls and children belonging to SC&
ST were provided with free textbooks.  Subsequently this facility was
extended to all the children from 2008-09
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

• Districts having concentrated population of SC, ST & minorities and
districts with large gender gap are treated as special focus districts and
are considered for focused attention under SSA programme.
• Funds @ Rs. 15 lakh per district is available to the States to introduce
context specific interventions in respect of children belonging to SC & ST.
Ministry of Human Resource Development has commissioned a study on
assessment of out of school children through Social and Rural Research Institute, New
Delhi, a Division of IMRB International     (formerly 'Indian Market Research Bureau'), a
corporate market research company,  which had conducted sample survey of
household during February-May, 2009. According to MHRD, the Report is in an
advanced stage of compilation.  It has also been informed by MHRD that the estimates
provided by this survey are expected to be quite reliable due to the following factors:
1. The sample was quite adequate and representative of all regions at the
level of the country and for major states. It is to be noted that the sample
survey of households was conducted in all the States and Union
Territories of India during February ± May 2009 and data collected from a
sample of 99,226 households.
2. It was estimated that there were 190,582,581 children in the age group 6-
13 years.  Out of these, the estimated number of out-of-school children in
the country was 81, 50, 617, comprising 4.28% of the total children in this
age group.
[Ministry of Planning O.M.No. 38/16/2009/OM&C/dated 20.1.2010)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of the Chapter ± I)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
N I L
New Delhi;      DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15 April, 2010                                         Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.   Shri Harischandra Chavan
3.   Shri Khagen Das
4.   Shri Nishikant Dubey
5.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
7.   Dr. M. Thambidurai
RAJYA SABHA
8.    Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
9.    Shri Mahendra Mohan
10.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad
11.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary
 2.   Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar   - Additional Director
 3.   Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary
 4.   Smt. B. Visala    - Deputy Secretary
    2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and
adoption:-
(i) Draft Report on Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill,
2009;
(ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and
Disinvestment);
(iii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue);
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iv) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning;
(v) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation;
(vi) Draft Reports on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of  Corporate
Affairs;
(vii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial
Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment);
(viii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(ix) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Planning;
(x) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(xi) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-
10) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3.    The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above with few
modifications/amendments as indicated in Annexures I, II and III.  The Committee
adopted the remaining draft reports without any change.  The Committee authorized
the Chairman to present all the reports to Parliament in the current session.
      The Committee adjourned at 1700 hours.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

ANNEXURE
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2009-2010) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING
              Total  % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations   13
(ii) Recommendations/observations which
have been accepted by the Government  10  76.92
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3,
4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 and13  )
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   Nil    0.00
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have  03  23.08
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 2,7 and 11 )
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect     Nil  00.00
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages