 1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION  
(ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011  
 
 
 
SEVENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013, Sravana, 1935 (Saka) 
73 


 2 
 
 
SEVENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
THE CONSTITUTION  
(ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7 August, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7 August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2013, Sravana, 1935 (Saka) 


 3 
CONTENTS 
Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee………………………………………. 
 
Introduction……………………………………………………………. 
 
REPORT 
PART -I 
I. GST Design         1 
II. Salient features of the Bill       7 
III. Impact of GST on :         
(a) Economy         11 
(b) Prices         15 
(c) Consumer prices – International experiences    17 
(d) Producing States and Consuming States    18 
(e) MSME and Employment Generation     19 
      
PART-II 
IV. Issues relating to Amendment Bill       22 
(a)  Power to make laws with respect to Goods & Services Tax  22 
 (b)  Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST)    24  
 (c)  GST Council        26 
 (d)  Goods & Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority   32  
 (e)  Declared Goods (Article 286)      35 
 (f)   Goods and Services Tax (Article 366)     36 
 (g)  Amendment of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution   40 
 (h)  Amendment of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution   41 
 (i)   Transitional Provision       44 
V. Administration and IT Mechanism      45  
VI. Compensation Mechanism        46  
  
VII. GST Monitoring Cell        47 
VIII. Alternative to GST Model       48 
IX. Latest position of the Empowered Committee of State   50 
Finance Ministers on the provisions of the Bill 
 
X. Consensus between Centre and States on GST Design and   53 
CST Compensation 
Part-III 
Observations / Recommendations        55 

 4 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Notes of Dissent submitted by Shri Naresh Agrawal , MP…………….. 
 
II. Minutes of sittings of the Committee held on 8 June, 2012, 15 June, 2012,   
27 June, 2012,  6 July, 2012, 13 July, 2012, 20 July, 2012, 27 July, 2012     
21 January, 2013, 28 June, 2013 and 19 July, 2013…………………………….. 
 
III.      The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011 ………………. 

 5 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay* 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Vacant** 
17.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  -  Under Secretary 
___________________________________________________ 
*      Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  13th December, 2012 
**    Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f 17.06.2013 consequent 
upon his induction to the Union Council of Ministers 

 6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Seventy -third Report on the 
Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011. 
2. The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Ame ndment) Bill, 2011 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 March, 2011, was referred to the Committee on 
29 March, 2011 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha.    
3. The Committee took briefing/oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) at their sitting held on 8 th June, 
2012. 
4. The Committee, at their sitting held on 8 th June, 2012 heard the views of 
Dr. Asim Kumar Dasgu pta, Former Finance Minister, West Bengal and Former 
Chairman, Empowered Committee of the State Finance Ministers.  At the sitting 
held on 15 th June, 2012, Shri Sushil Kumar Modi, Deputy Chief Minister, Bihar & 
Chairman, Empowered Committee of the State Fi nance Ministers, representative 
of Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Petroleum Federation of India 
(PETROFED) and International Spirits & Wines Association of India (ISWAI) 
presented their views before the Committee.  On 27 th June, 2012, the Committee 
heard the views of the representatives of Indian Merchants‘ Association (IMA), 
Film and Television Producers Guild of India, All India Federation of Tax 
Practitioner (AIFTP) and Bhartiya Udyo g Vyapar Mandal (BUVM).  The 
Committee at their sitting held on 6 th July, 2012 heard the views of the 
representatives of Government of Madhya Pradesh.  On 13 th July, 2012, the 
Committee heard the views of Dr. Parthasarathi Shome, Director & Chief 
Executive, Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations 
(ICRIER), Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Chairman, National Stock Exchange of India Ltd. 
(NSE) & Former Chairman Thirteenth Finance Commission, and the 

 7 
representatives of Governments of Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra.  The 
Committee also heard the views of the representatives of Government of Gujarat 
at their sitting held on 20 th July, 2012.  The Committee once again heard the 
views of Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar at their sitting held on 27th July, 2012.   
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report and authorized 
the Chairman to finalise the same and present it to the Parliament at their sittings 
held on 28 June, 2013 and 19 July, 2013. 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the offi cials of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue) concerned with the Bill for their cooperation 
and all the State Governments, Organisation, Associations and Experts for their 
valuable suggestions on the amendment Bill.      
7. For facility of refer ence, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                          YASHWANT SINHA, 
25 July, 2013                                                             Chairman, 
 03  Sravana, 1935 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Finance.  
 

 8 
REPORT 
 
Part - I 
 
 
 The Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011, 
which has been referred to the Standing Committee on Finance of Parliament  for 
detailed examination and Report seeks to bring fundamental systemic reforms in 
the indirect taxes dispensation prevailing in the country by integrating and 
harmonizing the tax structure across the country in the form of Goods and 
Services Tax (GST).  The proposed amendments in the Constitution are targeted 
to achieve the objective of conferring simultaneous power on Parliament and 
State legislatures to make laws for levying GST simultaneously on every 
transaction of supply and goods & services.  In add ition, the proposed 
amendments would allow subsuming of a number of indirect taxes presently 
being levied by Central & State Governments into GST and thus will remove 
cascading of taxes and provide a common national market for goods and 
services.  Before d iscussing at length the various issues emanating from the 
provisions of the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 
2011, it would be useful to have a brief overview of the proposed amendment 
Bill. 
 
I. GST Design 
 
2.    GST is recognized i nternationally as a destination based consumption tax 
which is least distortionary.  The broad objectives of introducing the Goods and 
Services Tax (GST) in India are to expand the tax base through wider coverage 
of economic activities and reduction in exe mptions; mitigate cascading and 
double taxation and enable better compliance through the lowering of overall tax 
burden on goods and services.  By removing hidden or embedded taxes, it would 
improve the competitiveness of domestic industry vis -à-vis import s and in 
international markets.  By harmonizing the tax structure across States, this 
reform would also lead to the development of a common national market for 
goods and services. 

 9 
3. The indirect tax system in the country has been going through a series of  
reforms over the last two decades.  At the Central level, a Value Added Tax 
called, CENVAT, providing credit of tax paid on inputs and capital goods was 
introduced upto the manufacturing stage. Subsequently, in 1994, a tax on 
services (commonly known as S ervice Tax) was introduced by the Centre. The 
Service Tax has grown consistently in scope to cover more services and now 
applies to about 115 service categories with commensurate growth in revenue 
from this tax. In 2004, the input tax credit scheme for CEN VAT and Service Tax 
was merged to permit cross flow of credit across these taxes. As for the States, 
they have switched over from a multiple point Sales tax to a Value Added Tax 
(VAT) covering all transactions of sale of goods within the State up to the re tail 
stage in a phased manner starting from 2005-06.  
4. Despite these measures, goods and services continue to be burdened 
with multiple indirect taxes at different stages of the value chain with significant 
tax cascading under the present indirect tax re gime. The important reasons for 
this are as under: 
a) In respect of taxation of goods, CENVAT is confined to the 
―manufacturing‖ stage and does not extend to the distribution chain 
beyond the factory gate. As such, CENVAT paid on goods cannot be 
neutralized against State VAT payable on subsequent sale of goods. 
This is true both for CENVAT collected on domestically produced 
goods as well as that collected as additional duty of customs on 
imported goods. 
b) CENVAT is itself made up of several components in the nat ure of 
cesses and surcharges such as the National Calamity Contingency 
Duty (NCCD), education and secondary and higher education cess, 
additional duty of excise on tobacco and tobacco products etc. This 
multiplicity of duties complicates the tax structure and often obstructs 
the smooth flow of tax credit. 
c) While input tax credit of CENVAT or additional duty of customs paid 
on goods is available to service providers paying Service Tax, they 

 10 
are unable to neutralize the State VAT or other State taxes paid on 
their purchase of goods. 
d) State VAT is payable on the value of goods inclusive of CENVAT 
paid at the manufacturing stage so that the VAT liability of a dealer 
gets inflated by this component without compensatory set-off. 
e) Inter-State sale of goods attracts th e Central Sales Tax (CST) levied 
by the Centre and collected by the States. This is an origin -based tax 
and cannot be set-off against VAT in many situations. 
f)         State VAT and CST do not directly apply to the import of goods on 
which special additional duties of customs are levied at a uniform rate 
of 4% by the Centre. Input tax credit of these duties is available only 
to those manufacturing excisable goods. Other importers have to 
claim refund of this duty as and when they pay VAT on subsequent 
sales. 
g) VAT dealers are unable to set -off any Service Tax that they may 
have paid on their procurement of taxable input services. 
h) State Governments also levy and collect a variety of other indirect 
taxes such as luxury tax, entertainment tax, entry tax etc. for wh ich 
no set-off is available. 
 
 
5. Introduction of GST is a logical culmination of the tax reform process 
involving the switch over to CENVAT; levy of service tax and the transition from 
sales tax to state VAT.  By replacing a large number of taxes levied b oth by the 
Centre and the States, GST would integrate the tax base and allow seamless 
flow of input tax credit across the value chain of goods and services.  This would 
eliminate multiplicity of taxes, cascading of taxes and overall simplification of 
indirect taxation regime.  Seamless input tax credit chain will lead to reduced cost 
of goods and services.  As the credit chain will function only if all the transactions 
are recorded, GST environment would lead to improved disclosure of economic 
transactions which may have a positive impact on direct tax collections also. 

 11 
6. It is in the context of India‘s federal structure that a dual GST, wherein 
both the Centre and the States concurrently levy and collect the tax, has been 
envisaged.  It would be mutually b eneficial to both by allowing an expansion of 
their respective fiscal space; and better tax compliance. 
7. Internationally, comprehensive Goods & Services tax has already been 
introduced in more than 100 countries across the world.  The Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers (EC) has visited and studied the best 
practices of many countries like Australia, Brazil, etc. which has similar political 
structure as that of India.  At the same time, the Indian model would have to be 
unique owing to the quasi-federal nature of its polity. 
8. Under the GST regime, both the Centre and the State would have the 
powers to tax the ―supply‖ of goods and services right from their primary stage to 
final consumption.  Such a regime with IGST on inter -state supplies would result 
in establishing a seamless Input Tax Credit (ITC) chain from the primary to the 
tertiary stage.  Such seamless credit chain and the removal of differential in tax 
rates on inter -state and intra -state transactions are likely to lower costs for the  
consumers and will result in better tax compliance. 
9. In addition since all the dealers will be given PAN based registration 
number under GST regime and will be required to file returns on a common 
portal, more robust information sharing and analysis bet ween the Centre and the 
States as also amongst States would be feasible.  This will definitely help in 
checking evasion and boost revenues of the Centre as well as States since 
currently, there is no systematic sharing of information between Central and 
State tax administrations allowing sufficient scope for wrong reporting by dealers 
and thus the tax evasion.  Under the existing system, Centre and States have 
been granting relief from payment of tax to promote investments.  This leads to a 
lot of inefficiency in the taxation system.  It is expected that in Centre as well as 
States will not grant such tax relief in the GST regime to make taxation system 
more efficient. 
 
 

 12 
10. The benefits of GST can be summarized as under : 
 For business and industry 
o Easy compliance 
o Removal of cascading 
o Improved competitiveness 
 For Central and State Governments 
o Simple and easy to administer 
o Better controls on leakage 
o Consolidation of tax base 
o Higher revenue efficiency 
 For the consumer 
o Single and Transparent tax proportionate to  the value of 
goods and services 
 
o Reduction of prices 
 
11. GST, by its design, encourages the system to be transparent.  There is an 
inbuilt system of Input Tax Credit i.e. the tax paid at earlier stage of the 
production distribution chain will be set off at the final stage of sale of goods and 
services.  Also the rate arbitrage between the inter -state and intra-state supplies 
will get eliminated.  This is because it is proposed to equalize the total rate of tax 
applicable to intra - and inter-state supplies unlike the present regime where the 
CST rate is 2% while the normal VAT rate is either 5% or 12.5%.  Thus it is 
expected that tax evasion would be largely reduced.  The Centre and States 
today fix rate of tax and grant exemptions many times not in sync wi th each 
other.  States also try to compete with each other to attract investment etc. and 
offer reduced rate of tax on select goods, which leads to tax rate war between 
States and ultimately hurts them.  The affected State today has no forum to go to 
get its grievance redressed.  The Bill proposes to set up GST council which after 
discussion will recommend rate of tax etc. to Centre as well as States.  Centre 
and States will be expected to follow the recommendations of the GST Council 
and State and Centre w ill have a forum in the form of GST Dispute Settlement 
Authority for seeking redressal of grievances related to loss of revenue because 

 13 
of such deviating action of the other State which may have affected their 
revenue.  This will bring transparency, accoun tability and efficiency in the tax 
administration and reduce the arbitrage opportunities available to tax avoidance 
and evasion. 

 14 
II. Salient Features of Constitution (Amendment) Bill  
 
12. The Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 March, 2011 and subsequently referred by the 
Hon‘ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Standing Committee on Finance on 29 
March, 2011 for examination and Report thereon. The Salient features of the Bill 
are outlined below: 
(a) The term ‗Goods and Services Tax (GST‘ is proposed to be defined 
in the main body of the Constitution and no new entry is proposed 
to be added in any Union, State or Concurrent list. 
(b) A new Article 246A is proposed to be added, which will confer 
simultaneous power to Union and State legislatures to legislate on 
GST. 
(c) A Goods & Services Tax Council (Article 279A) will be created, 
which will be a joint forum for the Centre and the States to discuss 
important issues relating to GST so that the objective of  having a 
harmonized structure for GST and a harmonized national market 
can be achieved.  This Council would function under the 
Chairmanship of the Union Finance Minister and will have Minister 
in charge of Finance/Taxation or Minister nominated by each of  the 
States & UTs with legislatures, as members.  The Council will make 
recommendations to the Union and the States on important 
parameters like rates, exemption list, threshold limits, etc.  The 
Recommendations made by this Council will act as benchmark o r 
guidance to Union as well as State Governments.  The Parliament 
as well as State Legislatures will be free to exercise their power on 
all issues recommended by the Council.  One -third of the total 
number of Members of the Council will constitute the quor um of 
GST council.  It is further provided that the decisions of the GST 
Council shall be with the consensus of all members present at the 

 15 
meeting.  This is to protect the interests of each State and the 
Centre when the Council takes a decision. 
(d) In exe rcise of their powers, these legislative bodies may deviate 
from the recommendations of the Council and may act in a manner 
which is prejudicial to the harmonious working of GST or which 
adversely impacts the revenue of some other State/Central 
Government.  Such deviations or actions are required to be kept to 
the minimum, if the objective of having a common national market 
and smooth working of GST is to be achieved.  It is accordingly 
proposed to set up Goods & Services Tax Dispute Settlement 
Authority (Article 279B), which may be approached by the affected 
Government (whether the Centre or the States) seeking redressal 
for any loss caused by any action due to a deviation from the 
recommendations made by the Goods & Services Tax Council or 
for adversely af fecting the harmonious structure and 
implementation of the GST. 
(e) Subsuming of various Central and State indirect taxes and levies in 
GST is proposed to be ensured through this set of Constitutional 
amendments. 
(f) Power to levy Integrated GST on inter -State supply of goods & 
services is to be given to Centre. 
(g) Certain goods like Crude Petroleum, Diesel, Petrol, Aviation 
Turbine Fuel, Natural Gas and alcohol for human consumption etc. 
are proposed to be kept out of the ambit of GST. 
 
Background 
 
13. The Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers (EC) was 
requested to prepare a design of the proposed GST.  After several years of effort 
and constant interaction with the Department of Revenue, Government of India, 
the Empowered Committee of State Finan ce Ministers released the ―First 
Discussion Paper on GST in India‖ in November, 2009.  Following several rounds 

 16 
of discussion between the EC and the Central Government, certain important 
design parameters of GST have been agreed as follows: 
(a) There will be a dual GST model for the country, wherein the first 
component, namely, Central GST will be levied and collected by the 
Central Government and the second component, namely, the State 
GST will be levied, collected and appropriated by each of the 
States.  The proceeds of the Central GST would be shared 
between the Centre and the States on the basis of the devolution 
formula recommended by the Finance Commission and accepted 
by the Government. 
(b) The proposed Central and State GST would be levied on all 
transactions involving supply of goods and services except those 
that are exempt or kept out of the purview of the GST. 
(c) Central and State indirect taxes and levies listed below would be 
subsumed under the proposed GST: 
 
Central tax/levies to be subsumed 
(i) Central Excise Duty; 
(ii) Additional Excise Duties; 
(iii) The excise Duty levied under the Medicinal and Toiletries 
Preparation Act; 
(iv) Service Tax; 
(v) Additional Customs Duty, commonly known as 
Countervailing Duty (CVD); 
(vi) Special Additional Duty of Customs – 4% (SAD); 
(vii) Surcharges; and  
(viii) Cesses. 
State taxes and levies to be subsumed 
(i) VAT/Sales tax; 
(ii) Entertainment tax (unless it is levied by the local bodies); 
(iii) Luxury tax; 

 17 
(iv) Taxes on lottery, betting and gambling; 
(v) State Cesses and Surcharges in so far as they relate to 
supply of goods and services; and 
(vi) Entry tax not in lieu of Octroi. 
 
(d) Integrated GST (IGST) would be levied on inter -State transactions 
of Goods and Services.  This IGST would be equivalent to the sum 
of CGST and SGST. The exporting State will transfer to the Centre 
the credit of SGST used in payment of IGST.  The importing dealer 
will claim credit of IGST while discharging his output tax liability in 
his own State.  The Centre will transfer to the importing State the 
credit of IGST used in payment of SGST.  The releva nt information 
will also be submitted to the Central Agency which will be act as a 
clearing house mechanism, verify the claims and inform the 
respective governments to transfer the funds.  The IGST system 
would ensure that intended destination based system  is followed 
under GST regime. 
(e) GST will also be levied on imports.  The incidence of tax will 
generally follow the destination principle and the tax revenue 
corresponding to SGST will accrue to the State where the imported 
goods and services are consum ed.  Input Tax Credit will be 
available of the GST paid on the import of goods and services. 
(f) In terms of coverage of goods, the proposed Goods and Services 
Tax will not apply to five specified petroleum products viz. crude 
petroleum, diesel, aviation t urbine fuel and natural gas.  On these 
items, the Centre would continue to levy Central Excise duty 
(CENVAT) while the States would continue to levy Sales tax. State 
excises on alcohol for human consumption and electricity duty on 
sale and consumption of e lectricity would not be subsumed under 
GST to begin with.  Tobacco and its products would be subject to 

 18 
GST, but, they would continue to bear Central Excise duty over and 
above the GST. 
(g) The proposed GST would thus be leviable on all transactions 
involving supply of goods and services except for exempted 
transactions.  Consequently, the existing levies of CENVAT by the 
Centre and VAT by the States which apply to the ‗manufacture‘ and 
‗sale‘ of goods respectively would be replaced.  The taxable event 
for GST would thus no longer by manufacture or sale of goods but 
the ‗supply of goods and services‘. 
III.  Impact of GST on : 
(a) Economy 
14. A National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) study, 
commissioned by the Thirteenth Finance Commission has s tated that 
Implementation of a comprehensive GST across goods and services is expected, 
ceteris paribus, to provide gains to India‘s GDP somewhere within a range of 0.9 
to 1.7 per cent.  The corresponding change in absolute values of GDP over 
2008-09 is ex pected to be between Rs. 42,789 crore and Rs. 83,899 crore, 
respectively. The comparable dollar value increment is estimated to be between 
$ 18, 550 million, respectively. 
15. The additional gain in GDP, originating from the GST reform, would be 
earned during all years in future over and above the growth in GDP which would 
have been achieved otherwise. The present value of the GST -reform induced 
gains in GDP may be computed as the present value of additional income stream 
based on some discount rate.   Assu ming a discount rate as the long -term real 
rate of interest at about 3 per cent, the present value of total gain in GDP has 
been computed as between Rs.1,469 thousand crores and 2,881 thousand 
crores. The corresponding dollar values are $325 billion and $637 billion.   
16. Gains in exports are expected to vary between 3.2 and 6.3 per cent with 
corresponding absolute value range as Rs. 24,669 crore and Rs. 48,661 crore. 

 19 
The comparable dollar value increment is estimated to be between $5,427 million 
and $10,7 04 million, respectively.  Imports are expected to gain somewhere 
between 2.4 and 4.7 per cent with corresponding absolute values ranging 
between Rs. 31,173 crore and Rs. 61,501 crore. The comparable dollar value 
increment is estimated to be between $6,871  million and $13,556 million, 
respectively. 
17. GST would lead to efficient allocation of factors of production. The overall 
price level would go down. It is expected that the real returns to the factors of 
production would go up. Our results show gains in  real returns to land ranging 
between 0.42 and 0.82 per cent. Wage rate gains vary between 0.68 and 1.33 
per cent. The real returns to capital would gain somewhere between 0.37 and 
0.74 per cent.  
18. Based on certain computations, the revenue neutral GST rate across 
goods and services is expected to be positioned somewhere in the range of 6.2 
per cent and 9.4 per cent, depending on various scenarios of sectoral 
exemptions. 
 
19. In sum, implementation of a comprehensive GST in India is expected to 
lead to e fficient allocation of factors of production thus leading to gains in GDP 
and exports. This would translate into enhanced economic welfare and returns to 
the factors of production, viz. land, labour and capital. 
 
20. When asked as to how GST would help fis cal consolidation, Dr. Vijay L. 
Kelkar, Ex -chairman, Thirteenth Finance Commission in his post -evidence 
replies stated as under : 
 
―The changeover to GST is designed to be revenue neutral at 
existing levels of compliance. Given the design of the ‗flawless‘  GST, 
the producers and distributors will only be pass through for the GST. 
Further, given the single and low rate of tax the benefit from evasion 
will significantly reduce. Therefore, there will be little incentive for the 
producers and distributors to ev ade their turnover. Accordingly, this 
policy initiative should witness a higher compliance and an upsurge 
in revenue collections. This will also have an indirect positive impact 
on direct tax collections. Further, given the fact that GST will trigger 
an increase in the GDP, this in turn would yield higher revenues even 

 20 
at existing levels of compliance. Another important source of gain for 
the Government would be the savings on account of reduction in the 
price levels of a large number of goods and services consumed by 
the Government.  
 
However, to the extent, the Central Government will be required to 
incentivise the States to adopt the GST, there will be an increase in 
the budgetary outgo. Given the smallness of the size of the 
compensation, it is expected that there would be a net gain in the tax 
revenues. This should enable the Central Government to better 
manage its finances.  
 
As regards the State Governments, the design and the road map of 
the GST recommended by us would lead to substantial gain in 
revenues. While the revenue neutral rate for the States is estimated 
to be 6 percent, we have recommended that the states should be 
allowed to impose GST at the rate of 7 percent. An increase in the 
RNR of the States by 1 percent implies a revenue gain of Rs. 31381 
crores per annum in the base year 2007 -08 (i.e. 16.67 percent 
increase in the revenues). This gain will be further augmented by 
better compliance.  
 
Therefore, overall the implementation of GST should enable the 
Government at both levels to better me et the challenges of fiscal 
correction.  
 
GST will positively impact the common man in many ways. Firstly, it 
will add to the overall economic growth by removing economic 
distortions. It will create new employment opportunities (about 20 
million high end j obs over a period of time) thereby increasing the 
levels of income across a large section of the society. Secondly, it 
will reduce inflation if GST is levied at the combined rate of 12 
percent as recommended by the Thirteenth Finance Commission. 
Thirdly, it will decentralize production to areas enjoying comparative 
advantage so more jobs can be expected to be created in rural 
areas. This will in turn slow down the pace of migration to urban 
areas. Fourthly, it will improve governance since the introduction of 
a comprehensive GST will bring about more transparency and an 
end to crony capitalism. Finally, GST can create further opportunities 
for relief under direct taxes over time since it is viewed as a revenue 
generating machine. Alternately, it will facilit ate fiscal consolidation 
thereby reducing the debt burden of citizens in general‖. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 21 
 
21. However, the representatives of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh 
Government disagreed with the assessment of Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar and submitted 
as under : 
(i) Views of Government of Gujarat : 
22. The most critical aspect of the proposed Amendment and introduction of 
GST in the country related to the expected revenue losses to the states.  While 
the loss of revenue is expected due to removal of cascading effect, unacceptab le 
revenue losses would arise mainly on account of the inability to achieve Revenue 
neutral rates, the loss of CST revenues and the sub -optimal collections from 
services sector. 
23. The Task Force on GST of Thirteenth Finance Commission (TFC0 has 
worked out a Revenue -Neutral Rate (RNR) of 12% (5% CGST and 7% SGST) 
assuming there is a single GST rate and stamp duty & electricity duty are also 
subsumed in the GST.  It is not clear whether services and goods will have the 
same rate or be subjected to tax at di fferent rates.  The proposed RNR by the 
NIPFP does not match the rats suggested by thirteenth Finance Commission.  
Our calculations show that RNR will be as high as 19.68%.  Such high rates 
cannot be levied on all goods and services and therefore revenue l osses will 
certainly occur.  The anticipated revenue losses to the State of Gujarat would be 
around Rs. 9,000 crore. 
 
(ii) Views of Government of Madhya Pradesh : 
  
24.   Fiscal health of States is likely to be deteriorate because of the substantial 
tax re venue loss, they will not be able to mobilize additional resources for 
development as they cannot change the rates structure of the most important tax 
instrument available to them and they cannot raise additional resources through 
borrowing as their borrowing limit is determined by the Centre and has been fixed 
at 3% of GSDP. 
25.    Backward States generally have poor fiscal health and are more dependent 
on Central Devolution and Grants.  The share of taxable services in the 

 22 
―consumption basket‖ of the poor  is always smaller as compared to the better off 
sections off the society.  Therefore, the additional revenue accruing to backward 
States from ―final consumption of services‖ in GST will be meager to compensate 
the loss of tax revenue from taxation of prim ary commodities only on the 
―Destination Principle‖. 
 
26.   When asked as to how GST will affect the fiscal health of the states Shri 
Sushil Kumar Modi, Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers in his post-evidence reply has stated as under : 
―With the introduction of GST, the cascading effects of CENVAT 
and service tax would be removed with a continuous chain of set -
off from the producer‘s point to the retailer‘s point, major Central 
and State taxes would be subsumed in GST and CST will als o be 
phased out, the final net burden of tax on goods, under GST would 
in general fall.  Since there would be a transparent and complete 
chain of set -offs, this will help widening the coverage of tax base 
and improve tax compliance.  This may lead to highe r generation of 
revenues which may in turn lead to the possibility of lowering of 
average tax burden on the stakeholders.  Hence, implementation of 
GST will provide a better environment for growth and possibly may 
result in the increase of the GDP.  Theref ore, in long run 
implementation of GST is not likely to affect the fiscal health of the 
States.  On the contrary, it may improve the generation of the 
revenue of the States.  However, in the initial few years of the 
implementation of GST, because of subsum ation of several State 
Taxes, removal of the cascading affect, provision of additional set -
offs may result in some State specific losses and, therefore, there 
may be a need for provision of GST compensation to such States in 
the initial few years‖.  
 
(b) Prices 
 
27.    When asked as to how GST will impact prices, Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Ex -
Chairman, Thirteenth Finance Commission in his post -evidence reply stated as 
under : 
―Prices of agricultural commodities and services are expected to rise. 
Most of the manuf actured goods would be available at relatively low 
prices especially textiles and readymade garments.  
 

 23 
There are two opposing forces which determine the changes in price 
levels. First, increased payments to the primary factors of production, 
viz. land, labour and capital, increase the cost of production and hence 
tend to have upward pull on prices. Second, sectors under imperfect 
competition (manufacturing sectors) get benefits of cost reduction 
through increasing returns to scale which are not reaped by s ectors 
assumed to be in perfect competition. The relative impact of the force 
determines the overall price change. It may also be noted that the 
share of primary inputs (land, labour and capital) in total output is 
relatively high in agricultural and services sectors.  
 
Another factor that impacts the price levels refers to the quantum of 
intermediate input purchases from sectors under perfect competition 
versus imperfect competition. Relatively low proportions of 
intermediate inputs purchased by agricultur e and service sectors (i.e. 
sectors under perfect competition) are sourced from manufacturing 
sectors and hence these sectors do not reap the benefit of relatively 
low cost inputs from manufacturing sectors. Therefore, fall in prices of 
manufactured goods should benefit agriculture and services sectors.  
 
Further, the terms of trade can also be expected to improve in favour 
of agriculture vis -a-vis manufactured goods. The prices of agricultural 
goods would increase between 0.61 percent and 1.18 percent whereas 
the overall prices of all manufacturing sector would decline between 
1.22 percent and 2.53 percent. Consequently, the terms of trade will 
move in favour of agriculture between 1.9 percent and 3.8 percent.  
 
The increase in agricultural prices would ben efit millions of farmers in 
India. Similarly, the urban poor will also benefit from new employment 
opportunities. With regard to the food crops the poor would continue to 
remain secured through the public distribution system. The prices of 
many other consu mer goods are expected to decline. These include 
sugar; beverages; cotton textiles; wool, silk and synthetic fibre textiles; 
and textile products and wearing apparel.  
Further, moving forward, the combined lower rate of Union Excise Duty 
(UED) and State le vel VAT on inputs and goods consumed by 
vulnerable section of the society is already 11 percent which will be 
marginally increased to 12 percent when GST is introduced. Similarly, 
the present rate of Service Tax of 12 percent is already aligned to the 
12 p ercent combined GST rate recommended by the Thirteenth 
Finance Commission. However, the combined standard rate of 25.5 
percent under the UED and State -VAT is substantially higher than the 
12 percent. With the introduction of GST the 25.5 percent will have to 
be reduced to 12 percent which will have a strong downward effect on 
inflation. In addition, the service tax coverage has also been extended 
to all services except a negative list. Therefore, overall inflationary 

 24 
impact of GST will be negative through l ower prices, lower fiscal deficit 
and higher output‖. 
 
(c) Consumer prices – international experiences 
28.  In a note submitted to the Committee, the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh has cited some studies illustrating adverse impact of GST upon 
consumer prices which has been reproduced as below : 
 
(a)   The empirical data relating to the consumer price changes in 
Australia, Canada and New Zealand is given by (Bolton & Dollery, 
2004).  On the issue of the effect of GST on consumer price 
inflation Tom Bolton and  Brian Dollery have drawn the following 
conclusion from the empirical data : 
 
―It seems useful to frame the comparison of the macroeconomic 
inflationary effect in terms of Alston‘s (1996) case study 
methodology.  At the time of New Zealand‘s GST introduction all 
three countries had roughly 4% to 6% annual consumer price 
inflation rates.  In the year following the introduction of the GST 
in Canada, the average of the three countries had dropped to 
between 1% and 2%.  The average was still low in the year 
before the introduction of the GST in Australia. Accordingly, the 
observed spike in price levels that occurred in all three countries 
should not be compared directly inter temporally with regards to 
economic performance since almost all the other factors 
impinging on the rate of inflation were different.  However, while 
all three countries did exhibit a spike in price level, there was 
nonetheless no indication of subsequent wage-price spirals‖. 
 
(b)    Ruggeri and Wart have examined the effects of GST in Canad a.  
They have come to the following conclusion : 
 
―The GST has contributed substantially to higher inflation and 
has seriously weakened the Canadian economy in 1991.  
Statistics Canada has estimated that the GST is responsible for 
most of the first -quarter 1991 increase in the consumer price 
index (CPI) of 1.5 percent and has contributed to a decline of 
1.2 percent in real GDP (which is equivalent to an annual 
compound decline of 4.6 percent).  The CPI jumped by 2.6 
percent from December 1990 to January 199 1, with 1.6 
percentage points of that rise attributed by Statistics Canada to 
the GST. 
 

 25 
The introduction of the GST has added to the inflation rate, first 
because it entails a tax rise of about $1.5 billion over what the 
MST would have yielded in 1991, 7 a nd, second, because not 
all the savings from the elimination of the MST were passed 
forward immediately.  In the medium term, the effect of the initial 
price shock depends upon the degree of competition on affected 
industries, the price sensitivity of dema nds for affected good, 
the state of labour relations, and aggregate demand.  The 
inflationary pressure generated by this rise in consumption 
taxation has restricted the ability of the Bank of Canada to 
soften thee impact of the current recession through lo wer 
interest rates, and as a result it has taken a prolonged and deep 
economic slide to bring interest rates down to the levels 
experienced before 1989‖.   
(c) Tom Bolton and Brian Dollery have drawn the following conclusions 
regarding the effect on GDP of New  Zealand, Canada and 
Australia. 
 
―It is immediately apparent that the economic impacts of the 
GST package were quite varied across countries, suggesting no 
common denominator.  For example, the dramatic jump in GDP 
in 1987 in New Zealand can hardly be attr ibuted to GDP growth 
since both Australia and Canada experienced a simultaneous 
boom period.  For the same reason, the Canadian recession 
could not have been induced by the introduction of the GST 
because it formed part of the (then) global recession‖. 
 
29.   The Ministry of Finance in their post -evidence reply inter -alia stated that 
however, in most of the countries it has been a success though each one of them 
has been carrying out changes post rollout.  In Europe, New Zealand, South 
Africa, Canada, Austr alia etc. the effects of GST/VAT have been encouraging 
and have led to buoyancy in collections and moderation of rates. 
 
(d) Producing States and Consuming States 
30. Some States like Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh in their memoranda have 
stated that public investments in infrastructure are a critical factor in inducing and 
sustaining economic growth.  Infrastructure such as roads, power and water 
supply do not only promote industrial growth, but also agricultural development, 
services sector, and enhanced qual ity of life.  GST is proposed as a destination 

 26 
based tax, with tax revenues moving to the consuming states.  The states which 
consume the most shall be the importing states and the states like Gujarat which 
are having a large manufacturing base, will be on e of the net exporting states.  
This will lead to a situation where the net exporting states which have made 
heavy investments in infrastructure and industrial promotion measures will lose 
their tax revenues to the net consuming states as the tax will be d estination 
based and the CST would be done away with.  There will not be incentive to the 
net exporting states to invest further in industrial infrastructure.  It may be 
appreciated that this is likely to lead to de -acceleration in public investments in 
infrastructure, across the states.  On the other hand, net exporting states that 
have already invested heavily in such infrastructure, would be hard pressed to 
recover the investment from tax revenues.  It is required to be examined, whether 
this is a healthy condition to create.  
   
31.   The Ministry of Finance in their post -evidence reply stated that there is no 
scientific data yet available to gauge the impact of the proposed GST on the 
producing States viz -a-viz consuming States.  However, under GST the states 
which are net importers of goods and services will gain while the states which are 
net exporters (manufacturing states) may lose on account of destination based 
IGST.  However, this is in consonance with the basic philosophy of the GST that 
the burden of taxes should not be imposed on non-residents of a State. 
 
(e) MSMEs and Employment Generation  
 
32.   The Government of Gujarat in their memorandum submitted to the 
Committee has stated that at present threshold under Central Excise is Rs. 1.5 
crore.  The proposed threshold limit of Rs. 10 lakhs under CGST would bring 
many of the Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) under the central tax 
net.  This is likely to adversely affect the employment generating units under 
MSME sector.  Some of the unit s may become financially unviable and lose 
competitiveness due to additional burden of tax, cost of compliance and dual 

 27 
control.  Around 30,000 MSME s will be affected in Gujarat alone and this 
contributes to employment of 2.18 lakh families.   
33.    The importance of the MSME sector in the economic arena cannot be 
under-estimated.  Not only is the direct employment generated per unit of capital 
deployed generally much higher, but the MSME also provide ancillary and 
support services to large industries, in  a cost -efficient manner.  The spirit of 
innovation and enterprise thrives in the MSME sector.  The contribution of 
MSMEs in export competitiveness of the country is considerable.  These aspects 
are likely to be adversely affected, by bringing in the MSME into the central tax 
net. 
34.   When asked to comment upon the impact of GST on MSMEs, Dr. Vijay L. 
Kelkar in his post-evidence reply stated as under : 
―At present small scale industries are entitled to exemption from 
payment of CENVAT in respect of their turnover upto Rs.1.5 crores. 
However, there is no such threshold exemption in respect of state level 
VAT. The main reason for exemption from payment of CENVAT is to 
liberate them from the onerous compliance burden under the CENVAT 
regime particularly in th e context that, in general, the small scale 
industries are managed by one or two entrepreneurs with the support 
of a handful of semi-skilled office staff.  
 
In the context of the GST, it has been recommended that the reporting 
of payment and transaction in formation of both CGST and SGST 
should be allowed through a combined Form. Therefore, in any case 
the small scale industry has to comply with the reporting of payment 
and transaction information of SGST. No additional burden is cast 
upon the small scale in dustry for compliance with the CGST. Hence, 
the case for continuing with the existing exemption upto Rs.1.5 crores 
of turnover is extremely weak. Accordingly, it is recommended that this 
exemption should not be continued under the GST framework.  
 
Further, the small scale industries are generally wary of dealing with 
multiple tax administrations. Therefore, in order to inspire confidence of 
the small scale industry in the new GST framework, it is also 
recommend that the scrutiny/audit of the small scale industry should be 
conducted only by the state tax administration. However, the State tax 
administration may seek the assistance of the central tax 
administration or any other state tax administration if the operations of 
the small scale industry transcend th e state boundaries. Since the 
CGST and the SGST are proposed to be levied on an identical GST 

 28 
tax base, the outcome of any investigation impacting SGST will also 
have a corresponding impact on CGST. Therefore, enforcement by the 
State tax administration wo uld be adequate to even deal with CGST 
evasion.  
 
Further, it must be noted that the combined GST rate of 12 percent 
recommended by the Thirteenth Finance Commission will be less than 
the 13.5 percent liability under State VAT and the burden of embedded 
input tax under Union Excise duty and Service Tax. Therefore, 
withdrawal of exemption will not be onerous for the MSME sector. In 
fact the liability will substantially reduce‖. 

 29 
PART-II 
IV. Issues relating to Amendment Bill 
34.   Certain key issues emanating  from some of the provisions of the 
Amendment Bill were raised by the Committee and discussed with the 
representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) State 
Governments experts, associations, organizations and Empowered Committee of 
the State Finance Ministers.  Written information /replies was also obtained from 
the Ministry. 
 
(a) Power to make laws with respect to Goods and Services Tax 
(Insertion of new Article 246 A) 
35.   Clause 2 of the Amendment Bill reads as : 
After article 246 of the  Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
‗246A. Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 246 and 254, 
Parliament and the Legislature of every State, have power to make laws 
with respect to goods and services tax imposed by th e Union or by that 
State respectively:  
 
Provided that Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect 
to goods and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or 
both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.  
 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this article, ―State‘‘ includes a Union 
territory with Legislature.‘ 
 
36. On the above amendment, the Empowered Committee of the State 
Finance Ministers have expressed their views as under : 
―Most of the States agree to this ame ndment.  Gujarat and Madhya 
Pradesh are, however, of the opinion that this amendment will take 
away the fiscal autonomy of the States given by the Constitution 
since 1950 and also the proposed Article 246A inflicts severe blow on 
provision of distribution of legislative powers by introducing a 
separate category.  States of Himachal Pradesh and Jharkhand feel 
that it should be ensured that the Constitutional Amendments should 
not affect the fiscal autonomy of the States as enshrined in the Indian 

 30 
Constitution.  Jammu & Kashmir basically have no objection to the 
proposed Article 246A except they feel that keeping in view the 
special Constitutional status of Jammu & Kashmir, adequate 
safeguards need to be incorporated in the Constitutional Amendment 
Bill with r espect to Jammu & Kashmir.  Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram 
and Rajasthan feel that proposed Article 246A provides for 
concurrent jurisdiction for both Union and the States and, therefore, 
in case of conflict of interests between them, it should be clarified 
which legislative power shall prevail.  West Bengal is of the opinion 
that the proviso in the proposed Article 246A should refer to ―supply 
or receipt of goods or of services, or both‖. 
  
37. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have clarified their 
position as under : 
―It is true that both Centre and States will have power to 
simultaneously levy GST on supply of goods and services but this 
power is not being given through an entry in the Concurrent List but 
through insertion of an Article in the main  body of the Constitution 
itself.  It is correct that the proposed Article 246A does not limit the 
legislative power of the States as the intention is to allow autonomy 
to the State legislature on the basis of the recommendations of the 
GST Council until it affects the harmonized working of GST‖. 
 
 
38. In this regard during the course of oral evidence Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Ex -
chairman, Finance Commission further elaborated that the existing independent 
power of the State has yielded a distortionary tax syste m.  Autonomy has neither 
served the objective of collection of revenue nor sub -served the attainment of 
any socio -economic objective.  There is widespread tax evasion, poverty, 
malnutrition, and social and economic inequity.  The ability of a State to achi eve 
its socio-economic policies is determined by its expenditure policies.  At present, 
the distortionary tax system in States has limited its ability to raise sufficient 
resources for its residents thereby severely undermining its ability to pursue an 
independent expenditure policy.  Tax policy is only a means to an end.  The 
proposed harmonized tax system will help mobilize larger resources and 
enhance the power of the States to pursue an independent expenditure policy.  
The proposed GST regime will lead to harmonization of tax base, tax rate and tax 
infrastructure.  This will promote economic efficiency, and reduce compliance 
and administrative cost. 

 31 
(b) Integrated Goods and Services tax (IGST) 
Insertion of Article 269A 
39.   Clause 9 reads as under : 
‗269A. (1) Goods and services tax on supplies in the course of inter -State 
trade or commerce shall be levied and collected by the Government of 
India and such tax shall be apportioned between the Union and the States 
in the manner as may be prescribed by Parl iament by law. Explanation I. 
— For the purposes of this clause, supply of goods or of services or both 
in the course of import into the territory of India shall be deemed to be 
supply of goods, or of services, or both in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce. Explanation II. — For the purpose of this article, ―State‘‘ 
includes a Union territory with Legislature. (2) Parliament may, by law, 
formulate the principles for determining when a supply of goods, or of 
services, or both takes place in the cour se of inter -State trade or 
commerce. 
 
40. The Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers has 
submitted to the Committee as under on the above clause : 
―This amendment is generally acceptable to the States except some 
observations made by some  of the States.  Assam, Himachal Pradesh and 
Kerala feel that Article 269A should, in clear terms, provide for levy of GST on 
―Destination Principle‖ on supply of goods and services.  Gujarat and West 
Bengal feel that the word ―apportioned‖ should be repla ced by the word 
―distributed‖ or ―assigned‖.  Several States like Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand 
and Uttar Pradesh feel that the revenue received from IGST should be under the 
divisible pool.  Gujarat opposes inclusion of GST on import of goods within the 
purview of Union Government as it goes against the consensus of delegating the 
powers to the States on VAT on imports on ―Destination Principle‖.  He further 
added that :  
―This amendment can be retained in view of the fact that there should be 
an institutional mechanism to extend the GST credit chain in the course of 
inter state trade and commerce and the proposed Article 269A 
contemplates providing just such a legal framework.  However, the word 
―apportioned‖ used in Article 269A(1) should be replaced by the  word 
―distributed‖.  The word ―distributed‖ has also been used in Article 270‖. 
  

 32 
41.   On the above clause, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in 
their written submission commented as under : 
―It is correct that terms ―distribution‖ and ―as signment‖ have been used in 
the Constitution.  The distribution has been used in terms of one way flow 
from Centre to the States like devolution of funds from Central pool of 
taxes.  The assignment has been used for taxes like Central Sales Tax, 
where tax is collected and kept by the State from where the trade 
originates.  The IGST will follow a system under which money would move 
from Centre to the States or vice -versa, depending upon the fact whether 
the State is net exporter or net importer for the given  period of settlement.  
That is why a different word ―apportioned‖ has been used in the proposed 
amendment to denote a two-way flow of funds, post settlement‖. 
 
42. The Ministry further clarified that IGST proceeds will not follow the 
devolution formula nor would get assigned to the States. 
 43. When asked about the modalities of the IGST model and its revenue 
implications, the Ministry of Finance in a written reply stated as under : 
―IGST model envisages that the Centre will levy tax at a rate 
approximately equal to (CGST+SGST) rate on inter State supply of goods 
and services. IGST will be levied and collected by the Centre. This levy 
will basically meet the objective of providing a continuous credit chain 
across States. The funds under the mechanism will r equired to be 
transferred from one State to another by the Centre depending upon the 
goods supplied to and from the State during the settlement period under 
consideration.  The settlement of accounts will be done by the Centre that 
would function as a clea ring house for this purpose.  The model would 
obviate the need for refunds to exporting dealers (to enable full 
neutralization of input taxes) as well as the need for every State to settle 
accounts with every other State. To the extent, goods or services a re 
supplied from one State to another for further distribution, IGST 
transactions would be revenue neutral (the tax paid in the exporting State 
would be available as credit to the buyer in the importing State). Since 
GST will follow destination principle, the net importing States will be the 
gainers while net exporting States will be the losers after this system is put 
in place. For the Centre, IGST will not have any revenue implication, either 
positive or negative‖. 
 
44.   While submitting his suggestions on this clause, Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar during 
the course of oral evidence deposed as under : 
―There is no reason why the Centre should get involved in the collection of 
inter-sate trade tax.  The proposed IGST is extremely complex and 
therefore place a very h igh level of compliance burden on the taxpayer 
and the clearing house agency.  A simpler Model is the Modified bank 

 33 
Model as recommended by the Task Force on GST set -up by the 
Thirteenth Finance Commission.  It does not require any involvement of 
the Central Government‖. 
 
(c)  GST Council 
(Insertion of new Article 279A) 
45.    Clause 12 of the amendment Bill reads as under : 
―After article 279 of the Constitution, the following articles shall be 
inserted, namely: -  
   
‗279.A(1) The President shall, within sixty days from the date of 
commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth 
Amendment) Act, 2011, by order, constitute a Council to be called the 
Goods and Services Tax Council.   
 
(2)  The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the fo llowing 
members, namely:- 
         
(a) the Union Finance Minister  ……..Chairperson; 
 
(b) the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue  ……Member; 
 
            (c) the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister 
nominated by each State Government  ……………Members 
 
(3)  The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in 
sub-clause(c) of clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose one amongst 
themselves to be the Vice -Chairperson of the Council for such period as 
they may decide.   
 
(4)  The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make recommendations to 
the Union and the States on-    
 
(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Centre, the States and 
the local bodies which may be subsumed in the goods and services tax;  
 
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to or exempted from the 
goods and services tax;  
 
(c) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services tax may 
be exempted; 
   
(d) the rates of goods and services tax; and   

 34 
(e) any other matte r relating to the goods and services tax, as  the Council 
may decide. 
 
(5)  While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the Goods and 
Services Tax Council shall be guided by the need for a harmonised 
structure of goods and services tax and f or the development of a 
harmonised national market for goods and services.   
 
(6) One -third of the total number of members of the Goods and Services 
Tax Council shall constitute the quorum at its meetings. 
 
(7)  The Goods and Services Tax Council shall det ermine the procedure in 
the performance of its functions.   
 
(8)  Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council taken at a 
meeting shall be with the consensus of all the members present at the 
meeting.   
 
(9) No act or proceedings of the Goods and S ervices Tax Council shall be 
invalid merely by reason of – 
 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council; or 
 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the Council; 
or 
 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of 
the case. 
 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this article, ―State‖ includes a Union 
Territory with Legislature. 
 
46.  On the above clause, Shri Sushil Kumar Modi, Chairman, Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Minister s while stating the concerns expressed by 
some State Governments submitted as under : 
 
―Most of the States agree to the setting up of a GST Council.  Gujarat and 
Nagaland, however, feel that there is no need of creation of a new body as 
the Empowered Commi ttee of State Finance Ministers is working for last 
several years on consensus basis and may be converted into GST 
Council.  Following views have also been expressed by different States on 
the various provisions of proposed Article 279A. 
   
(i) Flexibility sho uld be provided to the States in time of economic 
exigencies, disasters and natural calamities. 

 35 
(ii) Special schemes for the North -Eastern States and the Special 
Category States should be provided. 
 
(iii) Harmonization of the GST structure should be in line with the 
‗destination principle‘ and should be clearly defined.   
 
(iv) The quorum of 1/3 rd provided is not adequate and it should be 
somewhere half to 3/4th of the total number of members of the GST 
Council.   
 
(v) The mention of local bodies in sub -clause 4(a) should not be there 
as the revenues of the local bodies are not to be subsumed under 
GST.   
 
(vi) The recommendations under clause 4 to be made by the Council 
should be subject to the provisions of Article 246A.   
 
(vii) Sub-clause 4(d) should be amended so as to provide for a system 
of floor rates and rate band instead of fixing a uniform rate of tax 
and the prescribed floor rate should apply to inter -state 
transactions.   
 
(viii) Issue of GST compensation should also be one of the issues on 
which the Council should be in a position t o make its 
recommendations.   
 
(ix) Keeping in view the special position of the State of Jammu & 
Kashmir, suitable provisions need to be kept in Article 279A and 
279B so that no decision of the Council should be applicable to 
Jammu & Kashmir without expressed consent of the State.   
 
47.   On the issue of achieving consensus (Clause 8) during the meeting of 
the Committee, the Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finances 
elaborated as under : 
―It is a fact that sometimes it may be difficult to achieve consensu s and it 
may lead to stalemate in the functioning of the GST Council.  Therefore, 
the word ―consensus‖ has to be property defined.  One alternative could 
be that ―every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council taken at 
the meeting should be with a ma jority of 2/3 rd or 3/4 th of the members 
present at the meeting.  Every decision regarding Central Goods and 
Services Tax may also require the agreement of the Union Finance 
Minister‖.  
 

 36 
48.   On the flexibility to be given to the States in times of economi c exigencies, 
the Ministry have stated that Article 279A (4)(e) allows Council to make 
recommendations on any matter related to GST in addition to the threshold rate 
of tax etc.  The flexibility is available to the GST Council depending upon the 
need and mentioning in the body of the Bill that flexibility will be available only in 
case of economic exigencies, disasters and natural calamities, will only limit the 
flexibility already intended to be provided to the GST Council. 
49.   On the Special Scheme for North Eastern States and Special Category 
States, the Ministry have commented that t he flexibility to GST Council is 
available in the existing formulation also.  The mention of flexibility only in certain 
situations as proposed will limit the flexibility a vailable to the Council 
unintentionally.  The special schemes for NE and special category States have 
been launched under the concerned tax laws and not through the Constitution, 
and therefore, the same cannot be mentioned in the Constitution itself. 
50.    On the tax incentives available to North Eastern States and Special 
Category States, the Ministry of Finance in their post -evidence reply stated that 
since it is proposed to subsume Central Excise Duty within GST, it would not be 
possible to continue wit h area -based exemptions (from central excise duty) 
operating in Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, North 
East and Kutch in their present form.   Besides, such exemptions are 
incompatible with the concept of GST that presupposes a modera te neutral tax 
across the entire value chain and seamless flow of credit.  As such, it is 
envisaged to convert these schemes into cash subsidy schemes.  This would not 
have any adverse impact on the units currently availing of the area based 
exemption benefits. 
51.   On subsuming of taxes levied by the local bodies, Ministry stated that It 
appears appropriate to empower GST Council to make recommendations with 
respect to subsuming of taxes levied by the local bodies also so that at later point 
of time when it is decided to subsume taxes like Octroi, it could be done with a 
recommendation of the GST Council.  The subsuming of any tax will anyway 

 37 
involve a long drawn process of Constitution amendment during which States will 
have sufficient opportunity to present their views. 
52.   On the harmonized structure of the GST, the Ministry have commented that 
harmonized structure of the GST will mean that there is no serious conflict 
between the systems followed by Centre and the States during GST regime.  
Harmonized national market means that there would not be unnecessary 
preferences available to anyone to set up a business or industry in a particular 
part or a States because of tax related concessions.  These words are clearly 
understood and may be further detailed by the GST Council, depending upon the 
need from time to time. 
53.   On the issue of Quorum and consensus the Ministry clarified that the 
various options in this regard have been discussed.  The Central revenue being 
subsumed in the GST is almost equal to  all the States revenue proposed to be 
subsumed in it.  In the GST Council, however, 2/3 rd of the States will be able to 
take a decision against the interests of the Centre if the given formulation is 
accepted.  It has accordingly been proposed that decisi on in the GST Council be 
taken on the basis of consensus. 
54.   Regarding formula for compensation to the States, the Ministry clarified that 
GST Council would be able to make recommendation on any matter only when 
all the States and Union Finance Minister  agree to the proposal.  If such a 
formulation of compensation formula can be worked out, there appears to be no 
difficulty in Union Government accepting the same even if it is not recommended 
by the Council.  The Council is generally expected to make reco mmendations on 
matters related to GST to both Union and States to ensure harmonization.   
55.   On floor rate the Ministry have stated that GST Council may decide to make 
recommendations about the floor rate or a band within which tax rates may be 
kept depending upon the discussions in its meeting.  The proposed amendment 
will allow such flexibility.  However, in their post evidence reply the Ministry of 
Finance on floor rate/band stated that a high level of harmonization helps in 
minimizing the aberrations  in the implementation of the GST.  Dispersal in rates 
across various States compromises the objectives of a single common market 

 38 
significantly.  The matter becomes even more complex if such variation in rates is 
permitted in the case of services.  Service s, being intangible, are difficult to be 
related to geographical locations and pose significant challenges in deciding the 
precise place where they are liable to be taxed.  If the autonomy is permitted only 
in respect of goods, (and not services), it leads  to different problems of 
distinguishing between goods and services, which is not easy in a modern 
economy where such distinctions are withering away fast.  Moreover, variations 
in rates across States lead to arbitrage opportunities, resulting in evasion a nd 
distortion in production and supply chain.  Thus the benefits of keeping 
harmonized structure far outweigh the desire to provide unrestricted autonomy. 
 
56.   On floor rates, Dr. Parthasarathi Shome, Director & Chief Executive, Indian 
Council & Research  on International Economic Relations in his memorandum 
submitted to the Committee has stated that states should be allowed to have 
floor rates under SGST allowing them to move up the rate if they wished. The 
reason presumably is that some advanced economie s do this.  It is important to 
keep India‘s SGST rate structure as simple as possible. The states have 
performed this task well so far under their VAT structure where they essentially 
have one general rate and one lower rate, with a list of goods of local importance 
from which they can select about a dozen commodities to exempt to suit local 
conditions. There is no reason why they should sacrifice under the SGST the 
uniformity that they have already achieved under the VAT. Otherwise, in practice, 
the SGST w ould become unmanageable; and administration and monitoring of 
interstate trade may become untenable.      
57.   On the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services tax may 
be exempted, the Government of Madhya Pradesh in their post -evidence reply 
have stated that ―low threshold for both CGST and SGST will increase the tax 
incidence on the products of small producers and adversely affect the 
employment in small scale industries.  The threshold for taxation in Central 
Excise regime at present i s Rs. 1.5 crore.  This threshold should continue in 
CGST otherwise the tax burden on small producers will adversely affect them.  A 

 39 
relatively high threshold for CGST will also protect small business from dual tax 
administration‖. 
58.   On the threshold limit, the Government of Gujarat added further that States 
are of the view that the threshold for Central GST should be Rs. 1.5 crore or 
more, but the Union Government wants Rs. 10 lakhs turnover as the threshold 
for Central GST.  This will bring about addit ional 30 lakh dealers approximately, 
under levy of CGST, which in turn, will increase the transaction costs and impact 
competitiveness. 
 
(d) Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority (Article 279 B) 
 
59.  Clause 12, Article 279 B reads as under : 
―279B. (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the establishment of a 
Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority to adjudicate any 
dispute or complaint referred to it by a State Government or the 
Government of India arising out of a deviation fro m any of the 
recommendations of the Goods and Services Tax Council constituted 
under article 279A that results in a loss of revenue to a State Government 
or the Government of India or affects the harmonised structure of the 
Goods and Services Tax.   
 
(2) T he Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority shall 
consist of a Chairperson and two other members. 
 
(3)  The Chairperson of the Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement 
Authority shall be a person who has been a judge of the Supreme Court or 
Chief Justice of a High Court to be appointed by the President on the 
recommendation of the Chief Justice of India.   
 
(4)   The two other members of the Goods and Services Tax Dispute 
Settlement Authority shall be persons of proven capacity and expertise in 
the field of law, economics or public affairs to be appointed by the 
President on the recommendation of the Goods and Services Tax Council. 
 
(5)  The Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority shall pass 
suitable orders including interim orders. 
 
(6)  A law made under clause (1) may specify the powers which may be 
exercised by the Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement Authority 
and provide for the procedure to be followed by it.   
(7)  Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament m ay by law 
provide that no Court other than the Supreme Court shall exercise 

 40 
jurisdiction in respect of any such adjudication or dispute or complaint as 
is referred to in clause (1). 
 
Explanation- For the purposes of this article, ―State‖ includes a Union 
Territory with Legislature‘. 
 
60.   On the GST Dispute Settlement Authority, the Chairman, Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers stated that most of the States have 
expressed the view that the provision pertaining to the GST Dispute Settlement 
Authority should be omitted as this authority shall have powers of overriding the 
supremacy of the Parliament and the State Legislatures.  It shall affect the fiscal 
autonomy of the States.  
61.   The Constitution confers autonomy on the Parliament and the Sta te 
Legislatures to legislate within the respective fields assigned to them and the fact 
that a statute enacted by a competent Legislative body can be called into 
question on grounds of deviations from the recommendations of an essentially 
executive body, a lbeit Constitutional, is being construed as undermining the 
supremacy of the Legislature. Keeping in view the concerns expressed by the 
States, and the fact that the proposed provision of GST Dispute Settlement 
Authority will affect the fiscal autonomy of the Parliament and the State 
Legislatures, the proposed Article 279B providing for GST Dispute Settlement 
Authority may be omitted.  However, any dispensation involving multiple partners 
does require a mechanism to resolve disputes.  A provision can be mad e in 
Article 279A itself empowering the GST Council to decide about the mechanism 
to resolve the disputes arising out of its recommendations. 
 
62.   The Ministry have clarified their position on this issue as under : 
 
―The Law of Natural Justice says that nobody should be Judge in its own 
cause.  Since the GST Council is to make recommendations only with 
consensus, making the Council responsible for adjudicating disputes will 
not be feasible as the State against which a complaint will be expected to 
be filed may block it in the GST Council itself.  Moreover, GST Council is 
not supposed to decide the amount of compensation to be paid by the 
deviating State but to make recommendations about the key GST 
parameters and, therefore, the suggestion cannot be accepted‖. 
 

 41 
Legality of Goods and Services Tax Council (GSTC) and Dispute Settlement 
Authority (DSA) 
 
63.   When asked about the legality of the setting up of Goods and Services Tax 
Council (GSTC) and Dispute Settlement Authority (DSA)  and whether the setting 
up of a DSA would be unconstitutional, the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) sought the opinion of the Attorney General of India on the matter 
through Department of Legal Affairs which is as under : 
―This is an important point which has been raised  and the short answer to 
it is that it is certainly open to Parliament to approve any recommendation.  
However, this does not mean that the GSTC recommendations will have 
no value.  Having regarding to the nature of the Constitution of GSTC, the 
Council would have performed useful role in making recommendations but 
the ultimate authority whether to accept such recommendations can and 
must rest only in the Legislatures, namely, Parliament and the State 
Legislatures. 
 
In this view of the matter, the setting up of the GSTC does not strike at the 
root of the legislative powers over Finance.  The powers of the legislature 
over Finance are sacrosanct and are not affected by the setting up of the 
GSTC‖. 
 
 
64.    On the legality of DSA, the Attorney General of India  further stated which is 
as under : 
―Here again, I wish to state that the question of the Parliament and the 
State Legislatures becoming mute spectators does not arise.  The Dispute 
Settlement Authority is primarily with regard to the aspect of disputes in  
relation to deviation from any recommendation of the GSTC, and it is not 
just any deviation but a deviation which results in loss of revenue to a 
State Government or the Government of India, or affects the harmonized 
structure of the Goods and Service Tax .  Notwithstanding the decision on 
the DSA, the ultimate control over finance will always be that of the 
legislatures. 
 
In the premises, my answer to the two queries are as above.  The 
supremacy of the legislatures over Finance are not affected by the 
proposed amendments‖.  
 

 42 
(e) Declared Goods (Article 286) 
 
65.   Clause 13 Article 286 reads as under : 
―In article 286 of the Constitution - 
 (i) in clause (1),- 
 
(A) for the words ―the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or 
purchase takes place‖, the w ords ―the supply of goods or of services or 
both, where such supply takes place‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(B) in sub -clause (b), for the word ―goods‖, at  both the places where it 
occurs, the words ―goods or services or both‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(ii)  in clause (2), for the words ―sale or purchase of goods takes place‖, 
the words ―supply of goods or of services or both‖ shall be substituted; 
 
(iii) for clause (3), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:-  
 
―(3)  Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes, or authorises the 
imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declared by 
Parliament by law to be of special importance in inter -State trade or 
commerce be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard to the 
system of levy, rates and other incidents of tax as Parliament may by law 
specify.   
 
(4)  Nothing in clause (3) shall apply to a law of a State insofar as it 
imposes or authorises the imposition of goods and services tax‖.   
 
66.    On the above amendment, Shri Sushil Kumar Modi, Chairman, Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers has submitted as under : 
―Most of the States are opposed to the clauses (3) and (4) of this 
amendment. Clauses (3) and (4) allow the Union Government to take a 
unilateral decision of r estricting the rates of petroleum products and 
alcoholic liquor for human consumption which may substantially affect 
the revenues of the States without their consent.  In some cases, the 
Union Government had taken such decisions in past. It bears mention 
at this stage that the first three drafts of the Amendment Bill did not 
contain such a provision which suddenly appeared for the first time in 
the Amendment Bill introduced in the Lok Sabha. In terms of the 
proposed sub-clause (4), such restrictions will apply only to goods kept 
out of the ambit of GST viz. Crude oil, Petrol, Diesel, Aviation Turbine 
Fuel, Natural gas and alcoholic liquor for human consumption. The 
aforesaid items are major revenue earners for the States and any 

 43 
restriction on the authority to tax the same will be inimical to the 
interests of the States.   
 
In view of above, I feel that clauses (3) and (4) should be omitted.  
Alternatively, in clause (3), after the words, ―subject to such restrictions 
and conditions in regard to the system of  levy, rates and other 
incidents of tax as Parliament by law specify‖, the words ―on the 
recommendation of the Goods and Services Tax Council constituted 
under article 279A‖ may be added‖.     
 
67.   The Madhya Pradesh Government in their written submissio n on the above 
amendment have stated as under : 
―The revised draft imposes the restriction on the States with respect to 
imposition of tax on sale or purchase of declared goods (not supply of 
declared goods).  This can‘t be acceptable as inter -state supply  of 
declared goods are zero -rated and any restriction on the State to levy 
of tax on declared goods adversely affects the fiscal autonomy of the 
State in the GST regime‖. 
 
68.  The Ministry on the above amendment have furnished their comments as 
under : 
―The Central Government today has power under the Constitution to 
restrict rate of tax a State can levy on sale of a good.  The proposal 
here is to restrict the Centre‘s existing power to the goods kept outside 
the GST as it is expected that rate of tax on g oods brought within GST 
will be decided on the basis of consensus between the Centre and the 
States and will follow a discipline.  No new power is being sought by 
the Centre through the proposed amendment and in fact, the existing 
power available in the Constitution is proposed to be restricted‖. 
 
(f) Goods and Service Tax (Article 366) 
 
69.   Clause 14 in the amendment Bill reads as under ; 
14.  In article 366 of the Constitution, - 
 
   (i) after clause (12), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
‗(12A) ―goods and services tax‖ means any tax on supply of goods or 
services or both except taxes on the supply of the following goods, 
namely:-          
(i) petroleum crude; 
(ii) high speed diesel; 
(iii) motor spirit (commonly known as petrol); 

 44 
(iv) natural gas; 
(v) aviation turbine fuel; and  
(vi) alcoholic liquor for human consumption.‘; 
 
(ii)  clause (29A) shall be omitted 
 
70. On the definition aspect of Goods and Services Tax, Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, 
Ex-Chairman, Thirteenth Finance Commission, during the course of oral 
evidence submitted before the Committee that the proposed definition of GST in 
Clause 14 of the Constitutional Amendment Bill is incomplete.  It is essential that 
it is defined as a sales tax rather than a VAT-type tax. 
71. On the proposed definition of GST, the Mini stry of Finance in their written 
reply stated that the detailed contours off the GST will be worked out by the GST 
Council who will take a decision on the extent to which input tax credits will be 
allowed.  It does not seem necessary to define the GSTT as a VAT-type tax, as 
that word is capable of being understood in a variety of manners.  The existing 
entries in the Constitution pertaining to Excise and State VAT also define the tax 
in terms of its taxable event even though they are both VAT type of taxes.   
Likewise, GST has been defined in terms of its taxable event namely the supply 
of goods and services. 
72. On the exclusion of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit, 
natural gas, aviation turbine fuel; and alcoholic liquor for human consumption  
from the purview of Goods and Services Tax, Shri Sushil Kumar Modi, the 
Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance Minister‘s in his post 
evidence reply stated as under : 
 
‖The States are in agreement that petroleum products, alcohol liquor 
for human consumption and electricity should not be, for the time 
being, brought within the ambit of GST.  Mainly this decision has been 
taken as petroleum products and alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption are major revenue earner for the States.  Regarding 
electricity, the decision has been taken to keep ‗electricity‘ outside the 
GST for the time being only.  At present ‗Coal‘ is under VAT, and, 
therefore, it has been kept under the purview of the GST. 
 
 

 45 
However, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Indus try 
(FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Petroleum Federation 
of India (PetroFed), International Spirits & Wines Association of India 
(ISWAI) and Confederation of Indian Alcoholic Beverage Companies 
(CIABC) have represented before the Committee  that the petroleum 
products and alcoholic liquor for human consumption should be kept 
under the ambit of GST and specific levies can be imposed by the 
Centre and the States to address their revenue concerns.  In case, it is 
decided not to bring them immediately under GST, then these products 
should not be ―Constitutionally‖ debarred from bringing them under 
GST.  Exclusion of specific goods by way of Constitutional Amendment 
would dilute the flexibility for levy of GST on these products in the 
future, even  if the Centre and the States were to reach a consensus 
later.  It will also remove flexibility to cover these goods in stages as 
their subsequent inclusion would require another Constitutional 
Amendment which could be a long drawn process.   
  
There is co nsiderable ground for concurring with the views 
expressed by the Trade and Industry Associations that the petroleum 
products and alcoholic liquor for human consumption should not be 
Constitutionally debarred from the ambit of GST.  The decision to 
extend G ST to any category of goods should, vest with the GST 
Council.  The said goods may be kept under GST and the revenue 
shortfall (on account of their being taxed at the standard rate, which is 
expected to be lower than the current tax rate on such goods, and  also 
on account of providing input tax credit on these goods) can be made 
good by having recourse to additional non-creditable levies, in line with 
the best practices being followed internationally vis a vis such goods.  
Excluding goods from the Constitut ional definition of ―goods and 
service tax‖ would call for another Constitutional amendment, if, at 
some time in the future, a consensus emerges to bring these goods in 
the GST fold, and we are all aware that a Constitutional amendment 
may be a difficult p roposition.  Therefore, the clause (12A) may be re -
worked as ― ‗Goods and Services Tax‘ means any tax on supply of 
goods and services or both‖ and the remaining portion of the clause 
(12A) may be omitted and the word ―supply‖ should be clearly defined 
in article 366.‖ 
 
73. On the issue of coal to be kept outside the purview of GST, the 
representatives of Odisha Government during the oral evidence submitted that 
Coal should be kept out of GST along with natural gas.  According to them, 
Excise duty was not le vied on coal and it was subjected to only VAT at 4%. 
Bringing coal into the purview of excise duty may escalate the prices of coal. If 
coal is brought under GST, the tax rate of coal will be 12 to 16%, which will 

 46 
further escalate the price of coal. Coal is  an important input for generation of 
electricity.  As Electricity Duty is not going to be subsumed under GST, there will 
be no set off available for generation of power. So if coal is brought into GST 
purview, the cost of electricity generated by the coal  based thermal power 
stations will go up which will adversely affect the industries as well as general 
consumer.  
 
74.    When asked as to what will be the impact on economy if petroleum and 
electricity are kept out of GST.  Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Ex -chairman, Thirteenth 
Finance Commission in his post-evidence reply has stated as under : 
―To the extent, petroleum and electricity are kept out of GST, the 
cascading effect of commodity taxation will increase. This will add to 
the economic distortions and hence i mpact economic growth. A lower 
economic growth will lead to lower growth in GST collections‖. 
 
 
75. On this question, the Ministry have submitted their comments as under : 
 
‖Centre wanted all the items to be subsumed in the GST but States 
have insisted tha t certain goods be kept out of GST and an explicit 
provision to this effect be made in the Constitution itself.  Article 
366(12A) has been drafted accordingly.  If these exclusions are not 
enumerated, States would enjoy the power to levy GST on these 
goods in addition to  the powers to levy Sales tax, State excise etc. 
which are being separately retained.  This would neither be desirable 
nor is it the intention‖. 
 
76. On the question of exclusion of certain items from the purview of GST, Dr. 
Asim Kumar Dasgu pta, Ex-Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Minister‘s deposed as under before the Committee : 
―Clause 14 basically invokes article 366.  It basically gives the 
definitions and categories.  In doing so, it says, ―except taxes on 
petroleum, high speed diesel, alcohol, liquor‖.  If we want just say, ―as 
may be recommended by the GST Council‖.  That is because today we 
may keep these things out of the GST.  After some time we may like to 
have a formulation.  So, for each thing you have to come back for 
constitutional amendment.  So, if we have just this clause because 
normally the names of the commodities do not find place in the 
constitutional amendment.  It normally should not.  It should be in the 
CST laws‖. 
   

 47 
(g) Amendment of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution 
 
77. Clause 16 of the Amendment Bill reads as under : 
 
In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, in paragraph 8, in sub-paragraph (3), -  
      (i)  in clause (c), the word ―and‖ occurring at the end shall be omitted;  
    (ii)  in clause (d), the word ―and‖ shall be inserted at the end; 
   (iii)  after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-  
 
        ―(e) taxes on entertainment and amusements‖. 
 
78.   On the above clause Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and the Film and 
Television Producers Guild of India Limited furnished the following views : 
 
―Clause 16 of the Bill proposes to insert a new clause (e) in Paragraph 8, 
sub paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution to empower 
District Councils and Regi onal Councils to levy tax on entertainment and 
amusement. Further, Clause 17 of the Bill proposes to amend the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution and substitute a new entry 62 for the current 
entry 62, to retain the States‘ power to levy taxes on enterta inments and 
amusements to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or a 
Municipality or a Regional Council or a District Council. 
 
One of the basic objectives of the GST is to replace the current multiplicity 
of taxes with a single, comprehensive tax . Continuation of levies such as 
the entertainment tax levied by the local bodies would defeat this 
objective. Such specific taxes balkanize the common market and give rise 
to significant controversies about the scope of taxes. 
 
The current entertainment t ax structure is a patchwork of many taxes and 
the entertainment tax rates are abnormally high. The impact of cascading 
taxes on the industry is significant. Exclusion of entertainment tax from 
GST would lead to cascading in many instances and impose a seri ous 
burden on the industry. 
 
Supplementary levies in addition to the GST are warranted only for 
products that are harmful to health (e.g. alcohol) or give rise to negative 
externalities (e.g. petroleum products). However, there are no negative 
externalities associated with entertainment and it deserves to be treated at 
par with other goods and services. 
 
Imposing a separate tax on entertainment outside GST would pose 
serious practical difficulties. Entertainment is not well defined and includes 

 48 
a large vari ety of activities.  With the advent of modern technology, 
entertainment has assumed many diverse forms and has become highly 
mobile. Already many disputes have arisen about the scope of 
entertainment tax. 
 
A recent example is that of the entertainment tax levied by the State of 
Madhya Pradesh that covers a wide range of telecom and other activities. 
The provisions of the MP Entertainment tax Act could be interpreted to 
include even the non -entertainment value added services offered by 
telecom operators such  as news updates, messenger/ email services, 
money transfers and bill payment services to name a few. Moreover, the 
entire telecom business is structured based on the telecom circle 
jurisdictions and not for individual State within the circle. Thus, the 
jurisdiction of levy (only the State of Madhya Pradesh) does not coincide 
with the telecom jurisdiction (both Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh) 
thus raising serious compliance issues. 
 
A separate tax at the national or State level is bad enough, it would be 
worse at the local or municipal level, as evident from the above example. 
Businesses do not maintain records / books of accounts that identify 
transactions at the local level. 
 
Moreover, the quantum of revenues earned by States from entertainment 
tax is not  significant and constitutes less than one percent of their total 
revenue from the indirect taxes. The revenue apportioned to / collected by 
the local bodies is an even smaller proportion. It is expected that the 
States‘ revenue would witness an overall increase. The States would have 
enough scope to provide funds to the local/municipal bodies.‖ 
 
 
(h) Amendment of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution  
 
79.   Clause 17 (b) reads as under : 
  
(b) in List II – State List, - 
     (i)  for entry 52, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- 
          
―52. Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or 
sale therein to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or a 
Municipality.‖; 
 
(ii)  for entry 54, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- 
 
―54. Taxes on the sale, other than sale in the course of inter -State trade or 
commerce or sale in the course of international trade and commerce of, 
petroleum crude, high speed diesel, natural gas, motor spirit (commonly 

 49 
known as p etrol), aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption.‖; 
     
(iii)  entry 55 shall be omitted;  
 
 (iv)  for entry 62, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- 
         
―62. Taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and 
collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a 
District Council.‖ 
 
80.   The Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers in his 
written memorandum submitted his views on the above amendments in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as follows : 
“Entry 52 :  Most of the States are strongly opposed to this amendment.  
The Empowered Committee had unanimously decided that the Entry Tax 
will be subsumed under GST except Entry Tax levied in lieu of Octroi.  
However, as per new proposed Entry 52, the levy of Entry Tax by local 
bodies would create barriers to trade and commerce and would induce 
complexities in the business environment by distorting the tax structure 
and raising compliance burdens.  In fact, at presen t States have 
introduced Entry Tax in lieu of Octroi for obviating certain fundamental 
problems with the levy and collection of Octroi by the local bodies and 
proceeds are distributed to the local bodies.  It will not, therefore, be 
desirable to go back to  the earlier system of levy and collection of Octroi 
by local bodies, as it will bring back the old issues and hinder free 
movement of goods as well as free flow of trade.  The revised draft seeks 
to take away the Legislative powers of the States to levy and collect ―Entry 
Tax in lieu of Octroi.  Therefore, the proposed formulation of Entry 52 of 
the State list is not acceptable to most of the States‖.   
 
81.   In view of this, he has suggested that the following formulation may be 
considered :  
―The Entry 52 may read as ―Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area 
for consumption, use or sale therein, in lieu of octroi‖.  In case, in the 
Constitution, the word ―octroi‖ has not been used, then the same could be 
suitably defined.   Alternatively, following formulation can be considered:              
52. Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or 
sale therein when such taxes are collected by or for the Panchayats or 
Municipalities or District Councils / Regional Councils constituted  under 
the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution and are assigned to them‖. 
 
 
 

 50 
82.   He further explained on this point as follows : 
 
―Several States like Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu feel that since Central 
Government has retained the power to tax ‗tobacco and tobacco 
products‘, therefore, suitable provision should also be made under 
Entry 54 for States to levy tax on tobacco and tobacco products in 
addition to GST.  In the original Entry 54, after the taxes on sal e the 
word ―or purchase‖ was used and, therefore, several States are of 
the view that ―or purchase‖ word should be added after ‗sale‘.  States 
like Odisha, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand and Meghalaya feel that ‗coal‘ 
should be included in the list while a few Sta tes like West Bengal 
want that ‗light diesel oil‘ should be included.  Some States like 
Karnataka want that ‗Natural Gas‘ should be out of the list.   
 
I feel that Entry 54, as suggested, can be agreed after adding the 
words ―or purchase‖ after the word ―sale‖.  
 
―Several States namely Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Karnataka, 
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal are 
objecting to omitting Entry 55.  Under Entry 55, tax is levied by the 
local bodies on the advertisements through hoardings etc.  If Entry 55 
is omitted, the source of revenue for the local bodies will diminish 
which will create difficulty for them in discharging their 
responsibilities.  Hence, it is not appropriate to omit Entry 55.   
 
I feel that this entry should not be either omitte d or alternatively 
modified as indicated below:- 
―55. Taxes on advertisements, other than advertisements published 
in the newspapers and advertisements broadcast by radio or 
television, to the extent levied and collected by the Panchayats or 
Municipalities or other local bodies or by the District Councils or 
Regional Councils constituted under the Sixth Schedule of the 
Constitution.‖ 
 
―States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Kerala and West Bengal wanted 
that ―taxes on Betting and Gambling‖ should be kept outside GST, 
while the States namely Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Rajasthan and Uttarakhand feel that local bodies do not have 
capability to levy entertainment and amusement tax and, therefore, 
power should be given to the States to levy these taxes and distribute 
them to the local bodies.   
 
In the First Discussion Paper, it was decided by the Empowered 
Committee that Entertainment Tax (unless it is levied by the local 

 51 
bodies) and taxes on Lottery, Betting and Gambling should be 
subsumed under GST.  The refore, I feel that the Entry 62, as 
proposed, can be retained‖.    
 
83.   On this issue of entry tax the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) have 
furnished their views as follows : 
―Clause 17 of the Bill proposes to amend the Seventh Schedule to 
the Co nstitution and substitute a new entry 52 for the current entry 
52, to retain the States‘ power to levy taxes on the entry of goods into 
a local area for consumption, use or sale therein to the extent levied 
and collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality. 
 
Entry tax imposes a major cost burden on the industry and is a 
deterrent for their operations and expansion plans. The problems get 
compounded when entry taxes levied on the industrial inputs and on 
transit sales. Such taxes go against the concept of the c ommon 
market. Further, Entry tax has been a subject of protracted litigation 
at all levels. Article 301 of the Constitution provides for freedom of 
trade and commerce throughout the territory of India and precludes 
the States from taxing inter -state transa ctions to prevent/minimize 
barriers to inter -state trade. On the other hand, Article 304 of the 
Constitution allows the legislature of the State to impose tax on 
goods imported from other States or the Union territories, in line with 
the tax imposed on similar goods produced in that State, to avoid any 
discrimination between imported goods and locally manufactured 
goods. 
 
Continuation of entry tax outside the GST would perpetuate such 
complexities and litigation and impose barriers to trade. It is therefore  
suggested that entry tax should be fully subsumed in the GST‖.  
 
(i) Transitional Provision 
84.   Clause 18 of the Bill reads as under : 
―Notwithstanding anything in this Act, any provision of any law 
relating to tax on goods or services or on both in for ce in any State 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, which is 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution as amended by 
this Act shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a 
competent Legislature or other competent auth ority or until 
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is 
earlier‖. 
 

 52 
85.   On the above clause, Dr. Asim Kumar Dasgupta, Ex -chairman, Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Minister‘s expressed his following views before the 
Committee : 
―On Clause 18, I would say that the commencement period has 
been kept at one year.  Suppose a State election is declared, then 
that State would not be able to implement the GST.  So, we need to 
be a little more tolerant.  Instead of ‗one year‘ if it is ‗two ye ars‘, 
then it would be better‖. 
 
 
V. Administration and IT Mechanism 
 
86.   In their memorandum submitted to the Committee, the Government of 
Gujarat has stated that to implement flawless GST design, the basic 
prerequisites are seamless IT infrastructure, uniform administrative paradigms 
(threshold, common list of exemptions) unified tax credit clearing mechanism and 
provision of compensation for revenue losses. 
87. Establishment of a seamless value chain and tax credit mechanism on 
such a chain, would presuppose a common IT platform where all the e-returns, e-
payments and e-registration are received and processed.  With the threshold limit 
being proposed at Rs. 10 lakh, the total number of dealers would be at least 30 -
35 lakhs.  The quantum of data exchange  that would be required for adjusting 
credits available under SGST and CGST against IGST, would be enormous.  At 
present, the states which are getting 100 percent e -returns, e-payments and e -
registrations are Kerala and Maharashtra.  Gujarat has achieved 9 0% e -
compliance in payments, returns and 100% e -registrations.  Gujarat has been 
making steady progress in use of IT in tax administration and has done process 
re-engineering to facilitate quick and efficient service delivery and at the same 
time use of IT as a tool to plug leakages. 
  
88.     On IT infrastructure, the Ministry of Finance clarified as under : 
 
―An Empowered Group on IT Infrastructure (EG) headed by Shri 
Nandan Nilekani has been constituted to put in place a strong IT 
infrastructure for GST. The group is working to achieve this objective 
in a time bound manner. Further, in order to IT enable commercial 

 53 
tax administrations of States/UTs, a Mission Mode Project has been 
launched to provide financial support to the States and UTs‖.    
 
 
VI. Compensation Mechanism 
 
89.  Shri Sushil Modi, Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers in his post-evidence reply has stated that there is a trust deficit between 
the Centre and States on account of non -payment of CST compensation to the 
States.  The States feel that they have to go with a begging bowl for the CST 
compensation to the Centre asking for compensation.  So the States want that in 
Article 279A for GST Council itself, there should be a provision for the GST 
compensation mechanism so that GST compensation can be recommended by 
the GST Council.     
90.   The Gujarat Government in their written memorandum has stated that given 
that service tax alone would not be able to compensate loss of revenue in many 
states, and that Revenue Neutral Rate (RNR) will not be achieved, the issue of 
GST compensation becomes paramount to maintain fiscal balances in these 
states.  There is no clarity about the GST compensation package for loss to the 
States.  The experience of CST compensation has been very painful.  Any 
compensation-based system is a blow to the fiscal self -reliance of the states and 
is open to disputes on eligibility, calculation and amount of outstanding claims.  
Statutory devolution of compensation is not provided for under the proposed GST 
model.  Total losses to all the States are estimated by the National Institute of 
Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP) at a level of Rs. 32,000 crore based on 
calculations taking 2007 -08 as the base year.  On the other hand, Task force 
under 13 th Finance Commission has suggested a provision of Rs. 50,000 crore 
as compensation for 5 years.  Thus, adequate amount of compensation needs to 
be planned for. 
91.   Thirteenth Finance Commission in their Report (Volume 1) on GST have 
stated that states had requested  that an objective compensation mechanism to 
support possible revenue losses after implementing GST be put in place.  In this 
regard, they recommended the following : 
 

 54 
i.  The present Empowered Committee be transformed into a statutory 
Council of Finance M inisters with representation from the Centre and 
states. A GST Compensation Fund should be created under the 
administrative control of this Council. 
 
ii.  The Central Government shall transfer to the GST Compensation  
 
iii.  The amounts in the Fund should be used for compensating states for any 
revenue loss on account of adoption of the model GST. 
 
iv. The amount will be disbursed in quarterly instalments on the basis of the 
recommendations made by a three -member Compensation Committee 
comprising of the Sec retary, Department of Revenue, Government of 
India; Secretary to the EC and chaired by an eminent person with 
experience in public finance. This person would be appointed by the Union 
Government. 
 
 
92. To a specific query as to whether compensation to the States should be 
made a part of the Constitution Amendment, the Ministry of Finance in their post -
evidence reply stated that the proposed model of the GST, in particular the RNR 
that will be finally decided, is expected to ensure that there is no loss beca use of 
the CST or any other aspect of the GST.  States are expected to gain substantial 
revenue on account of the power to tax services and to obtain the share of taxes 
by the levy of GST on importation of goods.  Nevertheless, the Centre has 
assured compe nsation for a specified period if there is a loss.  The detailed 
understanding on the same would be worked out in the run up to the GST.  There 
is no need to build the same in the Constitution Amendment Bill.  In any case, the 
Constitution provides for the setting up of a Finance Commission every five years 
or earlier if required, to examine the issue of fiscal transfers from the Centre to 
the States and their distribution among the States. 
 
VII. GST Monitoring Cell (GMC) 
 
93.  Dr. Parthasarathi Shome, Dire ctor & Chief Executive, Indian Council for 
research on International Economic Relations in his memorandum stated that the 
GST introduction must be accompanied by a strong GST Monitoring Cell (GMC).  
This was not done adequately for the VAT in terms of requ isite post-introduction 
monitoring and analysis.  At least for the GST, the GMC, with an adequate 

 55 
allocation of qualified staff, should follow closely the immediate impact of the 
GST, for example, on inflation and any possible hoarding, as well as the 
unfolding ramifications for tax administrative ease, lowering of compliance costs 
for taxpayers, elimination of moral hazard for both taxpayer and tax 
administrator, and the success of the ICT mechanism put in place for interstate 
trade to assess whether India becomes a truly common market. 
 
VIII. Alternative to GST Model  
 
94.  The State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat have offered 
alternatives to GST model which is enunciated as under : 
 
Gujarat Model 
 
 The GST model as proposed by the Central Gover nment and being 
introduced through the Constitution (115 th Amendment) Bill, 2011 suffers 
from imbalance in the division of resources and functions between the 
union and States, absence of reliable and accurate State -wise data on 
services, different, contra dictory reports / estimates, adverse impact on 
prices and employment generation, etc. pending transition / operational 
issues.  An alternative model to achieve the major objectives of reforms in 
indirect taxes was therefore, proposed by Gujarat in January,  2010, as 
follows : 
 
 States retain the subject of CGST in Centre‘s list and SGST in State list 
under Constitution as is the case of VAT now. 
 
 Collection by States of CGST and SGST as is being done now for CST.  
Transfer of CGST amount collected by the resp ective State tax authorities 
to Central Government.  States collect and retain SGST and CGST.  
Subsequently CGST to be transferred to the Centre. 
 
 Revenue Neutral Rate (RNR) to be finalized jointly by the Centre and 
States in the Empowered Committee. 
 
 The principle of protection of revenue of the States, in the base year and 
subsequent projection as per CGAR, would be followed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 56 
Views of Madhya Pradesh Government on GST  
 
 
95. It is understood that need for GST is driven by the need to have common 
national market and to reduce the number of indirect taxes.  However, this 
cannot be done at the cost of reducing revenues of the States and rendering 
them bereft of financial autonomy.  The better way to achieve this end would be 
to help States integrate most of the State taxes and bring them on an IT platform, 
which would reduce the problems for tax payers.  The payment of VAT should 
also be on IT platform and national and inter -State transactions should be freely 
shared.  This would not only reduce malpracti ce but also help in seamless 
movements of goods.  States have already made substantial progress in this 
direction. 
96. Regarding services, Centre should consider the transfer of the 
administration of tax on services as provided in Article 268A.  States can  
integrate administration of tax on services with State VAT just as has been done 
with CST through the mechanism of ITR.  Centre can retain administration of 
certain services like financial services, railways and air services which can pose 
difficulties at  the State level.  It can progressively reduce excise duties and 
custom duties so as to keep industries more competitive as is the case in US.  
This scheme can be implemented with minor amendments in CST Act and the 
Service Tax legislation.   
97. The Minis try of Finance has submitted their following comments on the 
above alternative models of GST : 
 
―This model is unacceptable to the Centre for the following reasons: 
 
 Domestic taxes still account for a very high proportion of total tax 
revenues of the Centr e for the collection of which it cannot be dependent 
on 32 States/UT Governments. 
 In the proposed arrangement, the ―assignment‖ to the Union is envisaged 
on the basis of the devolution formula stipulated by the Finance 
Commission.  But the final share of t he State may not correspond to the 
amount it retains in this manner.  This implies that each State would be 
required to settle accounts with every other State for final settlement. 

 57 
 For inter-state supply of goods and services, centralized agency would still 
be required for levy and collection. 
The alternative model of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh have not been 
accepted by the Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers itself‖. 
 
IX. Latest position of the Empowered Committee of State Finance 
Ministers on the provisions of the Bill 
 
 
98. When asked to indicate the latest position of the Empowered Committee 
on the provision of the Bill, the Chairman, Empowered Committee vide his 
communication has stated that the views of the States and his own observations 
on the Bill furnished to the Standing Committee on Finance in the year 2012 may 
be treated as valid and taken into consideration.  However, the Chairman, 
Empowered Committee furnished the following supplementary observations on 
the Bill :- 
SUPPLEMENTARY OBSERVATIONS 
 
Option to the States to join GST 
States may be given option to join GST from the date of implementation 
or even at a later date by making suitable amendments in the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011. 
States may be provided incentives/compensation by the Ce ntral 
Government to encourage them to join GST regime. 
Obligations and flexibilities of the Central Government and States may 
be properly defined and a common forum for discussion on GST between 
the States and the Central Government should be establishe d (The Bill 
already provides for setting up of a GST Council). 
Appropriate legislation to determine precise place of supply rules and the 
taxability of inter-state transactions would also need to be prepared by the 
Central Government in consultation with the States. 
 

 58 
Fiscal Autonomy of the States 
Fiscal autonomy of the States is required to be ensured. This can be 
achieved by giving some flexibility to the States in deciding GST rates, 
exempted items and thresholds, keeping in view the local needs of  each 
State. 
A State may be allowed to exempt few additional items subject to the 
condition that the total revenue implication of the same is limited to certain 
percentage of its GST revenue. 
Floor rates in fairly narrow band are workable and that sh ould be 
allowed. [As suggested in earlier observation for Clause 12 of the Bill]. 
 
Consultation with and Education of the Stakeholders 
The general public and the stakeholders have to be properly educated 
and made aware of the benefits of the GST to ensu re their acceptability. 
Support of the key associations of trade and industry is also necessary. 
The rules and procedures should be simple and unambiguous so that 
confusion and litigations could be avoided. Significant stakeholder  
consultation is requir ed in finalising the rules and procedures. Practical  
guidelines should be provided by the Central and the State Governments  
to the stakeholders and there should be a mechanism with the law makers  
and administrators to solve matters as they arise on the new  rules and  
procedures. 
 
Adequate lead time is required to be provided to the trade and industry  
so that they are able to change their accounting systems and other  
procedures well in time. 
Tax officials and personnel have to imparted adequate training to 
manage the transition smoothly. 
Precise rules of transition need to be evolved and publicised much in  
advance. 
These are legislative and administrative matters and are required to be  
undertaken at the time of implementation of GST. 

 59 
Rates and Special Provisions 
Efforts should be made to have standard rate as low as possible to 
reduce the burden on the consumers. To ensure this, possibilities of tax -
evasion are required to be minimized and the Central Government may 
have to adequately compensate the States, in case, the y suffer losses on 
account of implementation of GST during the initial years. 
To ensure that small scale industries/traders are not affected adversely  
due to the implementation of GST, special provisions are required to be  
made for them. This may also include income tax incentives to be given  by 
the Central Government in this regard. 
Keeping in view the psychology of the consumers, possibility of making  
the GST as ‗invisible tax‘ and merging it with MRP may have to be  
considered. 
 
Avoidance of Dual Control 
One of the lessons learned from the visit is that it is always prefera ble 
that only one agency collects the tax. In case, it is not feasible then at  least 
new areas of dual control should be avoided. It has, therefore, been  
suggested by the Empowered Committee that the Government of India  
should retain their existing thresho ld of Rs.1.5 crores for goods in GST  
regime also so that those small dealers and manufacturers who are not  
subjected to CENVAT at present, are also not subjected to the dual  control 
in the GST regime. 
The GSTN portal should be made to go live as soon as possible so that  
common front end solutions like registration, returns and payments can  roll 
out in order to lessen the impact of dual control in core functions. 
 
Taxation of Tobacco & Tobacco Products 
As per the existing provisions of ‗The Constitution (One Hundred and  
Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘, States can only impose GST on  
Tobacco and Tobacco Products while the Centre can impose both GST  
and Excise Duty. Keeping in view the requests receive d from several  
States and the fact that the States are already levying VAT at very high  
rate on Tobacco and Tobacco Products, therefore, the States may also be  
allowed to levy State Excise Duty or any other tax in addition to GST on  
Tobacco and Tobacco Pro ducts. This could be achieved by making  

 60 
amendment in Entry 51 in the State List of Seventh Schedule of the  
Constitution by incorporating ―(c) tobacco and tobacco products.‖ 
 
X. Consensus between Centre and States on GST Design and CST 
Compensation 
 
99. In a written communication, the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
revenue) informed the Committee that the Hon‘ble Finance Minister held a 
meeting with the State Finance Ministers on 8 th November, 2012 whe re issues 
relating to GST were discussed.  In accorda nce with the decision taken in the 
meeting with the Sate Finance Ministers, two Committees have been constituted 
to finalise the GST design and to consider the issue of CST compensation to the 
States for the revenue loss on account of reduction of CST rate  from 4% to 2%.  
These two Committees are likely to submit their Reports by 31st December, 2012.  
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) intends to finalise its views after the 
Reports of these two Committees are received.   
100. In the meantime the t wo Committees constituted by the Ministry ha ve 
submitted their reports to the Ministry on 21 st January, 2013.  These two reports 
were considered by the Empowered Committee (EC) of State Finance Ministers 
in its meetings held in Bhubaneswar on 28th - 29th January, 2013.   
101.   Subsequently, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) through a 
written communication  have informed the Committee that the recommendation 
of Empowered Committee as contained in the minutes of the meetings held on 
28th – 29th January, 2013 (as reproduced below) on the reports of the 
Committees on GST Design and CST Compensation are being examined in the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and a Committee has been 
constituted to look  into the changes required in the Co nstitution (One Hundred 
and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011.  Also an amount of Rs. 9,000 crore has 
been allocated in the Budget for the year 2013 -14 payment of the first installment 
of balance amount of CST compensation for the State: 
 
 
 

 61 
Suggestions made during meetings of Empowered Committee (EC) 
held at Bhubaneswar on 28-29 January, 2013 
 
―(i) A change of drafting nature in Article 249 -  The Amendment 
proposed in Article 249 reads as follows:  In article 249 of 
the Constitution, in clause (1), after the  words „with 
respect to‟, the words „goods and services tax or‟ shall 
be inserted.  As, ‗with respect to‘ appears twice in clause (1) 
of Article 249, it therefore needs to be clarified whether the 
words ‗goods and services tax or‘ should be inserted after 
the first or second or both places where ‗with respect to‘ 
appears in the Article. 
(ii) Amendment to sub -clause (d) of clause (4) of Article 279 to 
provide for floor rates with bands.  The present formulation 
envisages a single rate of GST. 
(iii) Insertion of a new sub -clause in clause (4) Article 279A to 
provide States and Centre flexibility to raise additional 
resources during the time of natural calamities and disasters. 
(iv)    The need for amendment to clause (4) of Article 279A to 
provide for special schemes, for North-Eastern State and the 
State of J&K. 
(v)     Amendment to clause (6) of Article 279A, for increasing the 
proposed quorum to half from the present proposed one -
third. 
(vi) Changes to clause (8) of Article 279A to provide for voting 
instead of ‗consensus‘ for decisions of the GST council with 
Central representatives present in the Council meeting  
having one-third weightage and State representatives having 
two-thirds weightage, with the decision being taken with 
more than three -fourths weight age votes of the 
representatives present in the meeting. 
(vii) Deletion of Article 279B to omit the GST Dispute 
Settlement Authority.  Simultaneously, a reference to 
Article 279B in the proposed amendment to Article 368, will 
need to be deleted. 
(viii) Amendment in Art icle 286 for doing away with the concept 
of declared goods  in case it is proposed to include 
petroleum products under the GST. 
(ix) Amendment to clause (12A) of Article 366 to delete 
petroleum products from the list of goods on which GST will 
not apply. 
(x) Including a definition of ‗Service‘ in the Constitution itself. 
(xi) Modifying the proposed amendment to entry 52 in the State 
List to allow only ‗entry tax in lieu of octroi‘.‖ 
 

 62 
PART- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
 
Background 
1. The Constitution (115 th Amendment) Bill, 2011 relating to GST was 
referred to the Standing Committee on Finance of Parliament on 29 March, 
2011 for detailed examination and Report thereon.  A Press Com muniqué 
was issued in May, 2011 inviting comments / suggestions.  More than 
hundred memoranda comprising of several suggestions were received in 
response to the Press Communiqué.   Since then, the Committee, while 
apportioning their limited time between various other Bills referred to them, 
including the ones the Government wanted returned  urgently held regular 
meetings conducting several oral hearings on this Bill on a regular basis 
involving the Ministry of Finance and various stakeholders like Federation 
of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Confederation of 
Indian Industry  (CII), Petroleum Federation of India (PETROFED), 
International Spirits & Wines Association of India (ISWAI), Indian 
Merchants‟ Association (IMA), Film and Television Producers Guild of 
India, All India Federation of Tax Practitioner (AIFTP), Bhartiya Udyo g 
Vyapar Mandal (BUVM), etc.  The Committee also heard experts like  Dr. 
Asim Kumar Dasgupta, Dr. Vijay Kelkar and Dr. Parthasarathy Shome.  The 
Committee also took special permission of the Hon‟ble Speaker to call 
representatives of various State Governmen ts like Odisha, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat in order to have a cross -section 
of opinion on the Bill.  The Committee thus made it a point to hear 

 63 
divergent views on certain complex issues related to the Bill.  During this 
period, the Committee also had extensive interaction with the Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers and heard the views of their 
Chairman, Shri Sushil Kumar Modi.  The Committee also gathered  useful 
inputs from the overseas tours undertaken by the Empowered Committee.   
 
2. The various points raised by the Members during their sitting held in 
June, 2012, were sent to the Ministry for their reply.  The Committee were 
keen to submit their report in the monsoon session of Parliament , 2012.  
However the Ministry  submitted their interim replies only in August, 2012.  
Subsequently, the Committee requested the Ministry of Finance to submit 
their final views on the Bill and sought clarification as to whether any 
review was being conducted with regard to any of the pr ovisions of the Bill 
with a view to arriving at a consensus  since there were reports to that 
effect in the media .  The Ministry informed the Committee that the position 
of the Ministry would be communicated by the end of January, 2013 on 
submission of the reports of the Committees on GST design and CST 
compensation issues.  Further, during the month of March, 2013, the 
Ministry informed the Committee that the recommendations of the 
Empowered Committee made in their meetings held on 28 th-29th January, 
2013 o n the reports on GST Design and CST Compensation were being 
examined in the Ministry and a Committee had  been constituted to look 
into the changes required in the Bill.  They also informed that in the 
meantime, an amount of Rs. 9,000 crore ha d been allocated in the Budget 

 64 
for 2013 -14 for payment of first instalment of balance amount of CST 
Compensation for the States.  The Committee were also given to 
understand that a conclusive view on the changes to be made in the Bill 
would, however be taken only after taking into account the observations 
and recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance.  The 
Committee are surprised however, to note that the re was no finality in the 
thinking of the Ministry during the whole period the Committee were 
engaged in th e examination of the Bill with the result that it remained    
work in progress simultaneously at both ends.  The matter continues to be 
in a state of flux.  However, the Committee have decided to pronounce their 
views on the Bill and fulfill their mandate,  so that they are not blamed for 
stalling the Bill.  The Committee have thus sought to finalise and present 
their Report on the far -reaching Constitution (Amendment) Bill after 
thorough deliberations involving as many stakeholders as possible so that 
a fair consensus can be achieved on the provisions of the Bill and issues 
connected therewith.   
 
GST Design 
3. The Committee note that the proposed Bill envisaged harmonization 
of the indirect tax regime by subsuming a variety of taxes levied  by the 
Centre and the States.  The implementation of GST would allow the Centre 
and State Governments to avoid multiple layers of taxation that currently 
exists in India leading to the creation of a single market.  The most 
important aspect of the Bill is the consensus req uired with all the States in 

 65 
the design of the GST structure and all the other contours.   The Committee 
note that there has been divergence in views amongst States, who have 
serious apprehensions on erosion of state autonomy.  A fine balance is 
therefore required to be maintained between the imperatives of a common 
market with unified tax structure vis-à-vis the fiscal requirements of States.   
The Centre needs to play a pro-active role in this regard. 
 The Committee are of the view that any tax reform shoul d have an 
objective of improving economic efficiency, encouraging economic activity 
and benefiting the common man and should be put in place giving due 
regard to the Constitutional Scheme of distribution of powers and fiscal 
autonomy of the States.  In a f ederal set up, implementation of a 
comprehensive tax reform like GST hinges on mutual trust and cooperation 
between Centre and State Governments.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that before proceeding to enact „The Constitution (One Hundred and 
Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011, broad consensus on key issues 
concerning the implementation of GST should be arrived at between the 
Centre and the State Governments.  While designing the desired tax 
reforms, the Government should also learn from the experience in other 
countries, while taking into account the political, social and economic 
variations obtaining in our country.  A dequate groundwork would thus be 
essential before setting upon to operationalise the proposed GST regime.  
Keeping in view the apprehension s expressed by States, a credible study 
would also be required to evaluate the impact of the GST regime on the 

 66 
revenues of States.  If the success of VAT in States has to be replicated, it 
may be necessary to leave enough flexibility and fiscal space for t he 
States.  It may also be made optional for States as was done in the case of 
VAT.  In the succeeding paras, the Committee have commented upon 
specific issues arising out of some of the clauses in the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill and have suggested changes, wherever required. 
 
Compensation Mechanism 
4. The Committee note that differences had emerged between the 
Centre and States on account of CST compensation to the States  arising 
out of phasing out of CST.  Further, during their interactions with State 
Governments, the Committee observed that one of the major concerns over 
implementation of GST is Revenue Neutrality Rate (RNR).  Some States 
generating high tax revenue have expressed apprehensions on the 
possibility of suffering revenue losses after the im plementation of GST.   
The Committee note with concern that no structured mechanism has been 
formulated so far  to attend to this problem.  The Committee would , 
therefore, recommend that a well -defined automatic compensation  
mechanism may thus be built in, w hich would ensure that trajectories of 
revenues being contemplated are maintained at least in the short turn.  
Suitable amendments may accordingly be made in the Bill providing for a 
built-in permanent compensation mechanism with a view to addressing the 
legitimate revenue concerns of States.  For this purpose, a GST 

 67 
Compensation Fund may be created under the administrative control of the 
GST Council. 
Administration and Information Technology ( IT) Mechanism 
 
5. The Committee concur with the view that for flawless implementation 
of GST, the basic prerequisites are seamless IT infrastructure, uniform 
administrative paradigms, unified tax credit clearing mechanism etc.  The 
Committee note that in this regard an Empowered Group on IT 
Infrastructure headed by Sh ri Nandan Nilekani has been constituted to put 
in place a strong IT infrastructure on GST in a time bound manner.  For 
smooth and effective implementation of GST, the Committee would urge 
the Central Government to provide technical assistance and capacity 
building at State level, which would help in developing robust IT practices, 
ranging from overall procedure of e -filing of tax return to audit of tax and 
result in enhanced GST collections at the State level.  Without well -
designed IT infrastructure across  the country, the benefits of GST may 
remain elusive.  It is also imperative that although a dual GST regime has 
been proposed, a situation of trade / business dealing with a dual 
administration and multiplicity of authorities should be avoided, as it may  
create more hassles rather than ease them.   Though not part of the 
Constitutional Amendment Bill, this issue needs clarity, so that dual GST 
regime becomes acceptable to trade and commerce at large and fosters tax 
compliance. 
 

 68 
Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) 
6. The IGST model envisages that the Centre will levy tax at a rate 
approximately equal to (CGST + SG ST) rate on inter -State supply of goods 
and services.  It will be collected by the Centre and transferred to States 
depending upon whether the  State is net exporter or net importer for the 
given period of settlement.  The Committee note that the settlement of 
accounts will be done by the Centre that would function as a clearing 
house for this purpose.  The proceeds of the IGST arising out of int er-state 
trade or commerce shall thus be used for the settlement of accounts 
among the States for the flow of input tax credit in the course of Inter -State 
transactions b ased on „destination principle‟ thereby providing a 
continuous credit chain across Sta tes.  The Committee further note that  to 
the extent, goods or services are supplied from one State to another for 
further distribution, IGST transactions would be revenue neutral.  However, 
in practice, there may be a possibility of a positive balance in t he proceeds 
of IGST at the end of a fiscal year.   The Committee, therefore, desire that a 
suitable proviso in the Article 269A in both Clause 9 and Clause 10 of 
amendment Bill may be made for distribution of remaining proceeds of 
IGST when the accounts of the fiscal year have been settled. 
  
 It has also been submitted to the Committee by some experts  that 
the IGST model could be onerous in terms of compliance and 
administrative burden and that since it is meant for effectively tax inter -
state trade on dest ination principle, the Central Government need not get 

 69 
involved in this process.  A simpler model (Modified Bank Model) as 
recommended by the Task Force on GST set up by Thirteenth Finance 
Commission has been suggested for settlement of proceeds arising ou t of 
inter-state trade.   The Committee note that the Central Government will 
only act as a clearing agent with regard to IGST, which remains in effect a 
clearing mechanism between States for inter -State transaction s.  The 
Committee would thus suggest that the alternate model, suggested by the 
Task Force on GST  constituted by the 13 th Finance Commission could be 
considered with a view to simplifying and easing compliance and 
administrative burden  and ensuring a  smooth clearing house mechanism 
between States for facilitating the process of IGST after consideration by 
the GST Council. 
 Further, as the destination -based IGST model favours predominantly 
consumer States more than producer States, the revenue concerns of 
these States also needs to be factored in an d duly addressed.  The 
proposed model should not thus act as a dampener or dis -incentive for 
States with a strong manufacturing base. 
 
GST Dispute Settlement Authority 
7. In concurrence with the views expressed by State Governments and 
the Chairman, Empowe red Committee, the Committee believe that the 
proposed provision of GST Dispute Settlement Authority would affect the 
fiscal powers of Parliament and the State Legislatures.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the proposed Article 279B providing for GST  Dispute 

 70 
Settlement Authority should be omitted, as this body would have the effect 
of overriding the supremacy of Parliament and the State Legislatures.   
However, since any dispensation involving several entities / interests 
requires a mechanism to resolve disputes / differences, it may be expedient 
to make a provision in Article 279A itself empowering the GST Council to 
decide about the modalities to resolve disputes arising out of its 
recommendations. 
 
 
Harmonized Tax Structure 
8. The Committee note that  Clause 5 of the proposed Article 279A 
require the GST Council to be guided by the need for a harmonized 
structure of goods and service tax and for the development of a 
harmonized market for goods and services.   However, since the words 
have not been defin ed in the proposed Bill , the Committee are of the view 
that such ambiguity should not remain in the Bill .  They would therefore 
recommend that the word „harmonized structure‟ may be clearly amplified 
or defined.  It should also be clarified that the provis ions contained in 
Clause 5 are in the nature of guiding principles for the Council and not 
mandatory or obligatory in nature.  
 
Consensus 
9. The Committee note that the decisions in the GST Council, would be 
taken, based on consensus which implies that all  the members present 
would have to agree to a proposal; even if one State differs, the decision 

 71 
cannot be passed.  The Committee feel that keeping in view the diversity in 
socio-economic interests of the States, achieving such a consensus is 
likely to be v ery difficult.   As it would be critical in ensuring that all the 
valid interests are properly reflected in the recommendations of the GST 
Council, the Committee would therefore recommend amendments to 
Clause (8) of Article 279 A so as to provide for voting  instead of consensus 
for decisions of the GST Council.   Accordingly, as agreed upon by the 
Empowered Committee, one -third weightage for central representatives 
and two -thirds weightage for state representatives may be provided with 
the decision taken by t he Council being passed with more than three -
fourths votes of the representatives present in the meeting.  Similarly, 
amendment to Clause (6) of Article 279A may also be made for increasing 
the quorum to half from the proposed one -third.  In this context, the 
Committee would recommend that in tune with the spirit of cooperative 
federalism, it would be in order if the proposed GST Council functions like 
the present Empowered Committee , which has had a good track record of 
not only reforming the tax system bu t also resolving differences amicably 
in an institutional mode. 
 
Declared Goods 
10. In order to ensure that there is no unilateral decision by the Centre 
regarding taxation of „declared goods‟ kept outside the purview of GST 
(clauses 3 and 4 of amendment proposed in Article 286)  and also to uphold 
the spirit of cooperative federalism, which is crucial for the structure of 

 72 
dual GST, the Committee recommend that Clause 3 may be amended so 
that in place of “subject to such restrictions and conditions in regar d to the 
system of levy, rates and other incidents of tax as Parliament may by law 
specify”, the phrase “subject to such restrictions and conditions of tax as 
Parliament may by law specify on the recommendations of the GST Council 
constituted under 279A” m ay be substituted.  This change is expected to 
allay the fears of States to some extent on loss of fiscal autonomy. 
 
 In this context, it would also be expedient to insert a new sub -clause 
in Clause (4) of Article 279A to provide both States and Centre the  requisite 
flexibility to raise additional resources during period of natural calamities 
and disasters.  The proposed Clause 4 of Article 279A may also be suitably 
amended to provide for special schemes for North-Eastern States, the State 
of J & K and othe r special category States.  Similarly, the Central 
Government should also have the flexibility to levy surcharge or cess 
whenever required or during extra-ordinary circumstances. 
 
Entry Tax 
11. The Committee note that entry 52 of Seventh Schedule is worded in 
the Bill as “ taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, 
use or sale therein to the extent levied and collected by a Panchayat or 
Municipality”.  As most of the States seem to be opposed to this proposed 
amendment, the Committee do n ot agree with this formulation .  It will not 
be desirable to go back to the earlier system of levy and collection of octroi 
by local bodies and this will be a retrograde step, which would hinder free 

 73 
flow of trade  and increase compliance burden.  The Commi ttee therefore 
desire that entry tax in general should be subsumed in GST .  The relevant 
Clause / sub -clause in the Bill may be modified accordingly so as to 
empower the States to collect entry tax for distribution to local bodies 
instead of leaving it to be collected by different local bodies.   
 
Floor Rate 
12. Tax on sale of goods is the biggest and most buoyant source of 
revenue for States.  The Committee are of the opinion that the States 
should have some limited leverage to vary the rate of tax dependi ng on 
exigencies.  The Committee , therefore, desire that a system of band with 
floor rate should be adopted while introducing GST, so that States have 
some elbow -room within stipulated limit to calibrate the rate of tax 
depending on needs of the situation and the dynamics of circumstances.  
The Committee are of the view that based on the European model, there 
could be a floor rate and a ceiling rate within which the States will have the 
freedom to have a high or a low rate.   Taking into account the need for  
State autonomy, the States may thus be allowed to increase their GST rate 
within a narrow band.  There could however be provision to levy higher 
rates on demerit goods, whenever necessary.  The proposed Article 279 (A) 
may accordingly be modified providing for such a flexibility in rate. 
  

 74 
Threshold of limits of turnover etc. for exempting certain class of 
taxpayers like small traders / manufacturers / service -providers may also 
be left to the wisdom of the GST Council.   Although it is ideally desirable 
that the GST regime is made comprehensive and all encompassing for the 
present, the existing exemption for small business may continue in line 
with the Government policy to encourage and promote small enterprises 
including self-employed sector.  
 
 
Exclusions 
13. Article 366 of the Constitution is proposed to be amended vide 
Clause 14 in the Bill, wherein taxes on the supply of specified goods is 
proposed to be excluded from the purview of GST.  The Committee believe 
that such specific exclusions need not be provided in a Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, as this will needlessly make the GST regime very rigid.  
Since the ultimate goal is to have an integrated, comprehensive and 
seamless GST regime subsuming various Central and State indirect taxes 
and levies, the Committee recommend that the above -mentioned exclusion 
provision may be omitted from the Constitution (Amendment) Bill.   In any 
case, the proposed provision inserting Article 279A in the Constitution 
empowers the GST Council vide Clause 4(a) and (b) to ma ke 
recommendations on subsuming or exempting or excluding certain goods / 
services from the purview of GST.  The Committee thus believe that the 
constitutional mandate being provided to the GST Council is resilient 
enough to address emerging situations. 

 75 
GST Monitoring 
14. Considering the fluidity and uncertainties involved in ushering in 
radical changes in the tax system, the Committee believe that there is a 
need to set up a GST Monitoring / Evaluation Cell, which should closely 
follow on a continuous basi s the immediate impact of GST on key aspects 
such as growth in GDP, inflation, hoarding, compliance costs for 
taxpayers, administrative bottlenecks and, last but not the least, the retail 
prices paid by the ultimate consumer.  The efficacy of the proposed GST 
model in lieu of the existing CST dispensation with regard to inter -state 
trade / transactions and the requirement for a robust, error -free IT platform 
also needs to be monitored with a view to assessing and ensuring that 
India becomes a truly common m arket.  Certain pro -consumer measures 
should be initiated as well, such as, passing on tax credit benefit to retail 
consumers for cushioning them against possible increase in prices post -
GST and ensuring that cascading effect on consumer prices is well and  
truly avoided as envisaged.  The GST Monitoring / Evaluation Cell may 
function under the aegis of the proposed GST Council.  This may be 
incorporated as a clause / sub -clause in the proposed Article 279A of the 
Bill so as to put monitoring of GST on a firmer footing. 

 76 
Conclusion 
15. In conclusion, the Committee are of the considered view that fears 
expressed in some quarters about the proposed GST Council being made a 
constitutional body and infringing upon or even overri ding the supremacy 
of Parliament or  State Legislature is not correct as it is envisaged as a 
recommendatory body .  The fruitful experience with the Empowered 
Committee of State Finance Ministers so far does not seem to give any 
credence to such apprehensions.  This body has provided a usefu l 
platform for consensus -building between Centre and States and has 
evolved democratic practices over time to discuss and resolve issues.  The 
Committee would thus expect the proposed GST Council to follow the 
principles of cooperative federalism and democ ratic governance.  A s this 
will be a political and a recommendatory body, it would be in a position to 
play a constructive and enabling role vis -à-vis the Legislature, which 
needless to emphasise, would remain supreme in matters of legislation 
including taxation.  In the Committee‟s view the mandate entrusted to the 
GST Council under the proposed Article 279A of the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill does not in any way alter the existing constitutional 
scheme in so far as the Legislature, both Union and State, is concerned. 
 On the whole, the Committee are of the view that the Constitutional 
(Amendment) Bill should not ideally include specific aspects relating to 
rates, exemptions, exclusions, thresholds, administrative arrangements 
etc.  What should be included in the laws and rules should not f orm part of 

 77 
the Constitution of India.  The present Bill relating to GST, in the 
Committee‟s view, has not been well -drafted from this perspective and , 
therefore, requires amendments as suggested above.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       YASHWANT SINHA 
25 July, 2013                      Chairman 
Shravana 03, 1935 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Finance 

 78 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
 
Naresh Agrawal, MP (RS) 
01/07/2013 
 
 The Standing Committee on Finance is sending its  report on GST  to 
Government.  Whereas the Prime Minister and Finance Minister are continuously 
giving statements that Union Government are reconsidering over this issue.  I 
have objected but you were adamant on sending your report. 
 Sir, I am sending my o bjections as well as of Uttar Pradesh Government.  
Please attach the annexure to the report to be sent to the Union Government so 
that our objects are also registered. 
Objections: 
 The way by which taxes collected by Union Government through GST will 
be allocated to the States and what will be its time limit? 
 Initially huge resources are needed for GST collection and for this 
purpose, how Union Government is going to provide assistance to the 
States? 
 How Union Government is going to compensate the States in the next five 
years of the financial loss suffered by the States due to implementation of 
GST? 
 Municipal Corporation, Municipality, Town Area, Zila Prishad etc. impose 
taxes at local level, so what is the provision in GST regarding this. 
 Uttar Pradesh Gove rnment is totally against GST because due to this 
Union Government will have direct interference in State Governments 
head, which will be direct interference in sovereignty of States. 
 There are 11 States in total having special status.  Whether those State s 
will retain the reliefs which they were receiving even after implementation 
of GST? If so, the manner in which this will be done. 
Sd/ 
(NARESH AGRAWAL) 

 79 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th June, 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1600 hrs. 
 
 
   PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
3.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. 
6.  
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.  
7. Shri Prem Das Rai 
8. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.  
 
Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda   
10.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
11.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.K. Jain    - Director 
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Under Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1345 hrs.) 
 WITNESSES  
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
 
1.       Shri R.S. Gujral, Finance Secretary & Secretary (Revenue) 
1. Shri S.K. Goel, Chairman, CBEC 
2. Shri Laxman Das, Chairman, CBDT 
3. Shri Shashi Shekhar, Addl. Secretary (Rev) 
4. Smt. Sreela Ghosh, Member (CX) 
5. Shri M.S. Badhan, Member (Customs) 
6. Ms. Praveen Mahajan, Member (P&V), CBEC 
7. Ms. Sheila Sangwan, Member (Service Tax) 
8. Ms. J.M. Shanti Sundharam, Member (L&J, Budget) 
9. Shri M.L. Meena, Joint Secretary (Rev) 

 80 
10. Shri V.K. Garg, Joint Secretary (TRU-II) 
11. Shri Vivek Johri, Joint Secretary (TRU-I) 
12. Shri Arun Sahu, Director General (Systems) 
 
2. The Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) briefed the 
Committee on the provisions of ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ (GST).  Members sought clarifications from the 
witnesses on the issues pertaining to the Bill, which inte r-alia included objectives 
behind the Bill, rationale of dual GST model for the country, Integrated GST 
(IGST) to be levied on  Inter -State Transaction of Goods and Services, 
exemption of specified petroleum products, electricity and alcohol for human 
consumption from the purview of GST, Constitution of proposed Goods and 
Services Tax  Council and Goods and Services Tax Dispute Settlement 
Authority.   Other issues discussed included impact of GST on the fiscal 
autonomy of the States, provision of compensati on to States for loss related to 
introduction of GST.  The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written replies 
in response to the queries posed by the Members at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
Part II 
(1415 to 1600 hrs.) 
WITNESS 
Dr. Asim Kumar Dasgupta, Former Finance Minister, West Bengal and Former 
Chairman, Empowered Committee of the State Finance Ministers. 
 
1. The Committee then heard Dr. Asim Kumar Dasgupta on ‗The Constitution 
(One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘.  The major iss ues discussed 
broadly related to empowerment of the States and Centre to levy tax on Goods 
and Services and tax on inter -state transactions, the setting up of GST council 
with representation of the Centre and the States, for recommending the GST 
rates and other matters of GST with a view to uphold the need for a harmonized 
tax structure and the development of a harmonized national market for goods 
and services.  The other issues discussed included the setting up of a GST 
Dispute Settlement Authority for nec essary adjudication and to uphold the 

 81 
proposed dual GST structure.  Dr. Asim Kumar Dasgupta replied to the queries 
raised by the Members during the sitting. 
 A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
The witness then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 82 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 15th June, 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1630 hrs. 
 
 
       PRESENT   
         
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman   
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.K. Jain    - Director 
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Under Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
 
The Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers 
 
1.  Shri Sushil Kumar Modi, Chairman & Deputy CM, Bihar 
2.  Shri Satish Chandra, Member Secretary 
 
2. The Chairman, Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers briefed the 
Committee on the p rovisions of the ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ (GST).   Members sought clarification on issues like article 
2.       Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
3.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5. 
6.  
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
Shri Prem Das Rai  
7. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.  
 
Shri Naresh Agrawal   
10.  Shri Piyush Goyal  
11.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
12. Shri P. Rajeeve 

 83 
269 (A), CGST and on GST Dispute Settlement Authority.  Members also deliberated 
upon the quality of collection ag ency and how a particular transaction of goods and 
services would be taxed simultaneously under CGST and SGST.  Members also 
deliberated upon taxes (Central and State) to be subsumed under GST, cascading 
effect i.e. tax on tax and how to remove it.  Some t opics like positive balance proceed 
at the year end with the IGST, positive impact because of the integration of markets, 
reduction in prices and treatment of North Eastern States and special category States 
were also raised.  Clarification on the definiti on of ‗harmonized structure‘ was also 
sought.  Concern were also raised on Central GST and State GST being separate and 
complication thereon and securing the fiscal autonomy of the State Governments.  
The Chairman, Empowered Committee also informed the Mem bers about increase in 
growth of revenue post VAT implementation.  The Chairman directed the witness to 
send written replies in response to the queries posed by the Members at the earliest. 
 
                The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part II 
(1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs.) 
 
   WITNESSES 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) 
 
1. Dr. Rajiv Kumar, Secretary General 
2. Shri S. Madhavan, Co-Chairman, GST Task Force 
3. Shri Sachin Menon, Co-Chairman, GST Task Force 
4. Shri J.K. Batra, Advisor-Taxation 
 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
 
1. Shri Sunil K. Munjal, Past President CII, Chairman, CII Economic Policy 
and Jt. Managing Director, Hero Autocorp. Ltd. 
2. Shri D.D. Goyal CGM-Finance, Maruti Udyog 
3. Shri Rajiv Khandelwal, Head-Taxation, ICICI Bank  
 
3. The Committee then heard the representatives of Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII) on the provisions of the ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth 

 84 
Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ (GST).  The maj or issues discussed broadly related to 
the GST Council, the Dispute Settlement Authority (DSA), exclusion of certain 
sectors like petroleum, alcohol, real estate from the purview of GST, issues 
regarding the positive effect on growth, taking onboard the No rth Eastern States, 
special category States and public policy of getting rid of regional imbalances 
under this particular regime were also discussed.  Questions were also raised on 
the impact of introduction of GST on the creation of jobs and livelihoods i n the 
country and on social sector.  Members also enquired about GST and effect of 
exclusion or inclusion of particular products on Indian economy.  Members also 
took into account the plight of special category States especially the North 
Eastern States and the issue of integration of market, effect on social sector, tax 
structure and frivolous disputes. The Chairman directed the witnesses to send 
written replies in response to the queries posed by the Members at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
Part III 
(1600  hrs. to 1615  hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Petroleum Federation of India (PETROFED) 
1.   Shri B.C. Tripathi, Chairman & Managing Director, GAIL (India) Ltd.  
2. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Chairman & Managing Director, Oil India Ltd.  
3. Shri A.K. Hazarika, Director (Onshore), ONGC 
 
3. The Committee then heard the representatives of Petroleum Federation of India 
(PETROFED) on ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘.  
The major issues discussed related to cascading effect of non -inclusion of p etroleum 
products under the proposed amendment Bill.  Moreover, they were also advised by 
the Committee to look into strengthening of awareness campaign regarding 
conservation of petroleum products for which they promised to look into.  The 
Chairman direct ed the witnesses to send written replies in response to the queries 
posed by the Members at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 

 85 
  
Part IV 
(1620  hrs. to 1630  hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
International Spirits & Wines Association of India (ISWAI) 
 
1.  Shri I.P. Suresh Menon, Executive Director, UB Group 
2.  Shri S. Madhvan, Executive Director, PriceWaterhouse Coopers 
3.  Shri Ajit Jha, Director, SAB Miller, India  
 
4. The Committee then heard the representatives of International Spirits & Wines 
Association of India (IS WAI).  They submitted that the ISWAI has been pursuing with 
the States and presenting the GST for alcoholic beverages as a win -win situation for 
the States too.  When asked by the Committee, the representatives of ISWAI 
promised to send in hard copies of r elevant information and international experience 
regarding implementation of GST on this sector.  The Committee advised the 
representatives of ISWAI that at this stage only the issues pertaining to Constitution 
Amendment Bill might be raised and other matt ers could be taken after the GST 
Council had been constituted.   
  A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 86 
 
 MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th June, 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1430 hrs. 
 
 
       PRESENT   
  
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3. Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M. 
6. Shri Prem Das Rai 
7. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
8.       Shri Rayapati S. Rao 
9.       Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Shri G.M. Siddeswara 
11. Shri Yashvir Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14. Shri Piyush Goyal 
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
16. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
17. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri R.K. Jain    - Director 
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Under Secretary 
 
      
 
 
 
 

 87 
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
Indian Merchants‟ Association (IMA) 
 
Shri Arvind Pradhan, DG, IMA 
  
 
2.    DG, Indian Merchants‘ Association (IMA) briefed the Committee on the 
provisions o f ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ 
(GST).  Members sought clarifications from the witness on the issues pertaining the 
Bill, which inter -alia included subjects and issues like Articles 279(A), 279(5), 
279(a)(8) which gives th e functions of the GST Council, its composition, coverage 
of taxes on items  like electricity, renewable energy sector, stamp duty on shares / 
contracts, toll taxes, entertainment tax etc.   Other issues discussed included effect 
on income of local bodies,  effect of GST on industrial development, economic 
growth, harmonisation and increase in tax and its effect on the economic scenario 
of the country.  The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written replies in 
response to the queries posed by the Members at the earliest. 
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
 
     Part II 
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
      WITNESSES 
 
Film & Television Producers Guild of India  
 
1. Shri Ramesh Sippy, President 
2. Shri Mukesh Bhatt, Vice President 
3. Shri Uday Singh, Member 
4. Shri Shibasish Sarkar, Member  
5. Shri Srinivas Shenoy, Member 
6. Shri Kulmeet Makkar, CEO 
 

 88 
3. The Committee then heard the views of Film & Television Producers Guild 
of India (FTPGI) on ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 
2011‘ (GST).  The major issues discus sed broadly related to remaining taxation 
power of the States after GST (like entertainment tax) and its effect on the growth 
of the film industry.  There were also discussion of films being taxed at a punitive 
rate similar to alcohol and tobacco.  The oth er issues discussed included topic of 
investment of black money in film industry, the effect of inclusion of entertainment 
tax in GST on local bodies and how taxes will be transferred to the local bodies.  
The representatives of the Film & Television Produ cers Guild of India replied to 
the queries raised by the Members during the sitting. 
     
The witnesses then withdrew. 
  
 
     Part III 
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
 
All India Federation of Tax Practitioners (AIFTP) 
1. Shri J.D. Nankani, Deputy National President 
2. Shri Mukul Gupta, Chairman, central GST Committee, AIFTP 
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Arora, Chairman, North Zone 
4. Shri P.S. Sarin, Past Chairman, North Zone 
5. Shri Sandeep Goel, Member National Executive 
 
3. The Committee then heard the views of All India Federation of Tax 
Practitioners (AIFTP) on ‗The Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) 
Bill, 2011‘ (GST).  The came up with suggestions that under Article 279 -B, in 
addition to dispute referred or complaints referred to Dispute Settlement Authority  
by State Government or Government of India, the dispute or complaint referred by 
any Industrial/Trade Association or Professional Association or Institutions or 
Organisations of national repute must also be added.  They further suggested for 
appropriate definition of Goods and Services, inclusion of Petroleum and electricity 

 89 
sectors under the proposed GST regime, prevention of artificial credit restrictions, 
no restriction over moratorium for large infrastructure projects etc.  However, under 
due guidance and brainstorming, the representatives of AIFTP withdrew certain 
submissions made before the Committee.  Moreover, they were directed by the 
Chairman to send a comprehensive written replies to the questions asked by the 
Chairman and Members.  The represent atives of AIFTP promised to comply and 
send the same at the earliest.   
    The witnesses then withdrew. 
            
Part IV 
(1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
        WITNESSES 
  
Bhartiya Udyog Vyapar Mandal (BUVM) 
 
1.    Shri Babu Lal Gupta, Senior Vice President 
2.    Shri Vijay Prakash Jain, Secretary General 
3.    Shri Kishor C Mehta, General Secretary 
4.    Shri Hemant Gupta, Organising Secretary 
 
4. The Committee then heard the representatives of Bhartiya Udyog Vyapar 
Mandal (BUVM) who came for advocating the cause of sma ll and medium level 
traders.  Primarily, they requested for a single and unified GST model.  However, 
upon seeing their misinterpretation of certain clauses in the proposed amendment 
Bill and divergent views of the representatives over the implementation of GST, the 
Committee directed the concerned representative to send a comprehensive and 
unified text with proper suggestions, observations and answers to the questions 
raised by the Members of the Committee. The representatives of Bhartiya Udyog 
Vyapar Mandal (BUVM) promised to comply and send the same at the earliest.   
 
  A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 90 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 6th July, 2012 from 1130 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
 
       PRESENT   
  
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri R.K. Jain    - Director 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
  
1. Shri Raghavji, Finance Minister, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
2. Shri A.P. Shrivastava, Principal Secretary, Commercial Tax Department 
3. Shri Amit Rathore, Commissioner, Commercial Tax 
 
 
2.        Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan  
3.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
5.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire  
7.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
8.  Shri Prem Das Rai  
9.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao  
10.  Shri Rayapati S. Rao  
11.  Shri Yashvir Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury   
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
16.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
17.  Shri Yogendra P. Trivedi    

 91 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Hon‘ble Finance Minister, 
Government of Madhya Pradesh and his colleagues to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Chairman then asked them to present their views on the 
Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth A mendment) Bill, 2011 to the Committee.  
The representatives of Government of Madhya Pradesh in their presentation 
before the Committee strongly opposed the proposed GST model and advocated 
for an  alternate model which is similar to present VAT regime but with more 
seamlessness.  They put forth their argument in light of the fact that though VAT 
system being quite novel, their State is doing well with the system and generating 
adequate resources.  Moreover, they raised certain apprehensions regarding 
Dispute Settlement Authority that it might turn into a super -legislature thereby 
eroding the basic structure of our Constitution, cooperative federalism and 
especially the fiscal autonomy of the States.  However, the Committee 
enlightened them that the instituti ons similar to or even with lesser Constitutional 
mandate than Dispute Settlement Authority viz. Finance Commission, Planning 
Commission etc.  are effectively functioning in our political set up.  And if GST 
mechanism is not in the interest of the Country,  the States have full opportunity 
to pull down the proposed Constitution Amendment Bill in their respective 
Assemblies.  The representatives of the State of Madhya Pradesh further 
submitted that the proposed GST is nothing but VAT plus service tax and a better 
Information Technology platform holds the key for better and seamless tax 
structure.  The Committee directed them to send their written replies at the 
earliest, which they promised to comply with. 
 
         A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 92 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 13th July, 2012 from 1100 hrs to 1600 hrs. 
 
 
       PRESENT   
  
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain    - Director 
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.        Shri Shivkumar Udasi  
3.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
9.  Shri Rayapati S. Rao 
10.  Shri Manicka Tagore  
11.  Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
12.     Dr. M. Thambiduarai 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra   
15.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
16.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
17.  Shri P. Rajeeve  
18.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao    

 93 
     Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs.) 
     WITNESSES 
 
    Indian Council For Research On International Economic Relations (ICRIER) 
 
     Dr. Parthasarathi Shome   - Director & Chief Executive, ICRIER  
 
 
 
2. Dr. Parthasarthi Shome, Director & Chief Executive, Indian Council For Research 
On International Economic Relations (ICRIER) briefed the Committee on the provisions 
of the ‗Constitution (One Hundred Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘  (GST).   Members 
heard the views and sought clarifications from the witness on the is sues pertaining the 
Bill, which inter-alia included issues like States relation with Centre, problems in raising 
sufficient funds for States, direct relationship of GST with GDP growth, effect on trade, 
relevance of appellate body, Revenue Neutral Rates (R NR), effects on common man 
and on federal system of the constitution.  Other issues discussed included distinction 
between zero rating and exemption, effect on revenue base, the need for dual GST, 
time period for its (GST) implementation and taxation of in ter-state transactions of 
Goods and services. The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written replies in 
response to the queries posed by the Members at the earliest. 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
Part II 
(1230 hrs. to 1400  hrs.) 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri Vijay L. Kelkar, Chairman, National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE)   
2. Shri Arbind Modi, Consultant, Planning Commission and  
Ex-Chairman of the Task Force on GST (Set up by the 13th Finance Commission) 
 
3. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Chairman, National 
Stock Exchange (NSE) on ‗the Constitution (One hundred fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 
2011‘ (GST).  Major issues discussed broadly related to bypassing of the State 
legislatures, mechanism in place to solve problems between two State s on issues like 

 94 
taxation, surcharge and collecting benefit for the common man, dual tax system, illegal 
transaction and tax evasion.  Other issues discussed included concern of States on 
exclusion of petrol and diesel, co -operative federalism, role of GST  in fiscal 
consolidation, impact of GST on GDP and inflation.  Also, GST‘s effect on rural economy 
(especially agriculture) in a State was also raised.  Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar replied to the 
queries raised by the Members during the sitting.  The Chairman dire cted the witnesses 
to send written replies to the queries raised by the Members at the earliest.  The 
Committee desired to hear the views of Shri Kelkar once agin after they have received 
and read the written replies from him to which Shri Kelkar agreed. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part III 
(1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Government of Odisha 
 
1. Shri Prafulla Chandra Ghadai, Minister, Finance, Excise & Public Enterprises 
2. Shri J.K. Mohapatra, Principal Secretary, Finance Department 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
 
Shri Sunil Paliwal, Secretary, Commercial Taxes Department  
  
Government of Maharashtra 
 
Shri Sudhir Srivastava, Principal Secretary (Finance), Finance Department 
 
 
4. Welcoming the Hon‘ble Minister from the Government of Odisha and other 
officials, Hon‘ble Chairman then opened the floor for their submissions.  The 
representatives of the Government of Odisha focused their deliberations on 
impact on the autonomy of States due to Dispute Settlement Authority, non 
subsumption of entry tax  and exclusion of Coal from the proposed GST regime 

 95 
and a range or band within which the States will have power to levy tax in case of 
any exigency. 
5. Moreover, the representative of Government of Maharashtra advocated 
for more clarity in jurisdiction of Dispute Settlem ent Authority, calculation of 
revenue neutral rates, well defined automatic compensation mechanism., 
avoidance of dual administration for GST and requirement of massive 
computerization. 
6. Furthermore, the representative of Government of Tamil Nadu appende d 
the issues of exclusion of petroleum products and alcoholic beverages out of the 
proposed Bill, cascading effect of taxes, encroachment on the mandates of the 
State Governments by the GST Council, assigning power to levy tax on tobacco 
to the State Gover nments or excluding it as petroleum and alcoholic beverages, 
and impact assessment of GST on the revenue of State Government and the 
Central Government.   
7. Further the Committee also enquired and discussed about the 
apprehensions of the representatives r egarding the GST Council becoming the 
super-legislature body, plight of states having low tax base, the smaller and 
poorer States, inconsistency in stand of States over GST Council vis -à-vis 
Dispute Settlement Authority, trust deficit between the States an d the Centre etc.  
The Committee directed them to send their written replies at the earliest which 
they promised to comply with. 
  
         A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 96 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 20th July, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1715 hrs. 
  
 
       PRESENT   
  
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.       Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2.       Shri R.K. Jain      - Director 
3.       Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
4.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora    - Under Secretary  
     
WITNESSES 
 
Government of Gujarat   
1. Shri Saurabh Patel, Minister of State for Finance, Government of Gujarat   
2. Shri M.M. Srivastava, Additional Chief Secretary 
3. Ms. S. Aparna, Secretary (Economic Affairs)    
 
2.        Shri Shivkumar Udasi  
3.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
4.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
7.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
8.  Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.  
9.  Shri Prem Das Rai  
10.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
11.  Shri Rayapati S. Rao 
12.     Shri G.M. Siddeswara 
13.     Shri Yashvir Singh 
14.     Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
16.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury  
17.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
18.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
19.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
20.  Shri P. Rajeeve  
21. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao    

 97 
2. At the outset, the  Hon‘ble Chairman, welcomed the Hon‘ble Minister of 
State for Finance, Government of Gujarat and his colleagues to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Chairman then requested them to present their views on the 
Constitution (One hundred fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ (GST).  Thereafter,  
Shri Saurabh Patel, MOS Finance, Government of Gujarat, briefed the 
Committee on the provisions of the ‗Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth 
Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ (GST).  The representatives of Government of Gujarat 
opposed the proposed GST model and advocated for an alternate to GST model 
to achieve the major objectives of reforms in indirect taxes in the Country.  
Members heard the views and sought clarifications from the witnesses on issues 
pertaining to the Bill, whi ch included issues like effect of GST on GDP especially 
on agriculture, farming community, employment generation and balance of 
payment.  Questions of Cooperative Fiscal federalism, increase in threshold limit 
for MSME, effect on consumers especially farmers and people below poverty line 
(BPL), meaning of the word ―consensus‖ with respect to the GST Council, 
administrative difficulties regarding CGST and SGST operationality were also 
discussed.   The Chairman directed the witnesses to send written replies i n 
response to the queries posed by the Members at the earliest. 
 
         A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 98 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th July, 2012 from 1100 hrs to 1620 hrs. 
 
       PRESENT   
  
         Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.       Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary 
2.       Shri R.K. Jain      - Director 
3.       Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary  
4.       Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Deputy Secretary 
5.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   - Under Secretary 
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri Vijay L. Kelkar, Chairman, National Stock Exchange of India Limited (NSE) 
 
2. Shri Arbind Modi, Consultant, Planning Commission and   
Ex-Chairman of the Task Force on GST (Set up by the 13th Finance Commission) 
2.        Shri Shivkumar Udasi  
3.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
4.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das  
5.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
7.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
8.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao.  
9.  Shri Rayapati S. Rao 
10.  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
11.  Shri Yashvir Singh 
12.     Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury  
15.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao    
19.  Shri Y.P. Trivedi    

 99 
 
 
2. The Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed and t hanked Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar and Shri Arbind 
Modi for once again presenting themselves before the Committee.  Giving cue to the 
representatives, the Committee streamlined certain crucial topics for their deliberations, 
viz. Centre -State fiscal relationship, fiscal autonomy of States, fiscal federalism, voting 
rights in the GST Council and flexibility in taxation etc.  The Committee also invited views 
from them on alternative model of GST as suggested by the Government of Gujarat and 
Madhya Pradesh. 
3.    Apar t from the above -mentioned issues the Committee was briefed and discussed 
issues regarding harmonizing impact of GST over Indian economy and coming up of a 
common market, impact of GST Council on legislative process, impact of proposed GST 
regime on role o f Finance Commission, international experiences with respect to GST, 
role and need of sufficient Information Technology mechanism for effective 
implementation of GST, inclusion of various sectors such as, petroleum, real estate, 
electricity, railways and t elecommunication etc. under proposed GST regime, abolition of 
octroi, rural exemptions in GST, crony capitalism etc. 
4. Moreover, issues such as impact of GST on prices, agriculture, common man, 
international trade, MSMEs and fiscal consolidation were also discussed elaborately.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
        Part II 
(1230 hrs. to 1620 hrs.) 
 
 
 
5  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
          A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
     The Committee then adjourned. 

 100 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21th January, 2013 from 1130 hrs to 1230 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey  
4.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
5.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri P.C. Tripathy     –  Director  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, he briefed the Members on the work done so far on ‗The 
Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill, 2011‘ (GST) and the 
latest communication received from the Ministry of Finance in this regard, wherein 
they have stated that they will report back to the Committee about the findings of the 
two Committees set up  by them and the views of the Ministry thereon.  Members 
expressed the view that draft Report may be attempted on the Bill based on the 
deliberations made thus far.  In the meantime, the Ministry may be asked to furnish 

 101 
the latest position at their end at the earliest so that the Report of the Committee is 
not held up on this count. 
     The Committee then adjourned. 

 102 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th June, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
12.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
15.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
19.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.    Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Additional Director  
2.    Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary  
 
2. The Committee took up draft report on ‗ the Constitution (One Hundred and 
Fifteenth) Amendment Bill, 2011‘ relating to GST for consideration and adoption.    
After long deliberations, the Members suggested some changes in the draft report.  
The Chairman then directed that the changes as suggeste d by the Members may be 
incorporated in the body of the draft report and the same may be circulated to the 
Members.  The Committee then decided to consider and adopt the draft Report at 
their next sitting scheduled to be held on   19 July, 2013. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 103 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th July, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1330 hrs. 
 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Nishikant Dubey 
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta  
4.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
5.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
13.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
14.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the members that the changes suggested 
by them in the draft report o n ‗the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth) 
Amendment Bill, 2011‘ relating to GST at the sitting of the Committee held on 28 
June, 2013 had been suitably incorporated.  The Committee then considered the 

 104 
draft report and adopted the same without any cha nges.  The Committee authorised 
the Chairman to present the same to Hon‘ble Speaker/Parliament. 
 
 
3. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
   
 
WITNESS 
 
     Shri Vinod Dhall, Consultant & Former Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witness then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 