22
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE COINAGE BILL, 2009
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/ Bhadra, 1932 ( Saka)


TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
THE COINAGE BILL, 2009
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 August, 2010
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 31 August, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Bhadra, 1932 (Saka)


COF No. 22
Price : Rs. 60.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
 1. Background .................................................................................. 1
 2. Clause 2(a): Definition of Coin ............................................. 9
 3. Clause 2(e) and Clause 4 : Definition of issue
and denominations, dimensions, designs and
composition of coins ................................................................ 12
 4. Clause 3 : Power to establish and abolish Mints ........... 14
 5. Clause 6 : Coin when a legal tender ................................. 15
 6. Clause 9: Power to certain persons to cut, diminished
or defaced coins ........................................................................ 18
 7. Clause 11 : Power of Mint to delegate its Functions .... 19
 8. Clauses 12 and 14: Pr ohibition and Penalty ..................... 20
 9. Clause 23: Power to r emove difficulties ............................. 22
10. Clause 24: Power to make rules .......................................... 23
11. Clause 28: Continuance of the existing coins ................... 24
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
15 April, 2010 and 26 August, 2010 .................................... 26
II. The Coinage Bill, 2009 ............................................................. 30
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2009-2010)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y. S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara*
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 9.3.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP .

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Raashid Alvi
23. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
24. Vacant**
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan
28. Vacant***
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Shri Y. P . Trivedi
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T. Mathivanan — Senior Executive Assistant
(iv)
 **Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, MP retired on 4 July , 2010.
***Shri S. Anbalagan, MP retired on 29 June, 2010.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Second Report
on “The Coinage Bill, 2009”.
2. The Coinage Bill, 2009 introduced in Lok Sabha on 17 December,
2009, was referred to the Committee on 29 December, 2009 for
examination and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under
Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background note and written
information on various provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the State Bank
of India and Banking Codes and Standards Board of India.
5. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 15 April,
2010.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 26 August, 2010.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the
material and information which were desired in connection with the
examination of the Bill. The Committee also wish to express their
thanks to the State Bank of India and Banking Codes and Standards
Board of India for furnishing memoranda.
8. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the
Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August, 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

REPORT
I. Background
(i) The Coinage Act, 1906
1. The Act defines the area of its applicability , denominations,
dimensions, designs and composition of coins, standard weight of
coins as well as the limit up to which the coins will be a legal tender.
The Act includes provisions for establishing and abolishing Mints and
empowers the Central Government to call in coins and authorise
persons to cut diminished or counterfeit or defaced coins. It prescribes
the procedure in regard to cut coins or coins liable to be cut. The Act
also includes a saving provision for making of coins for issue as
money by the Governments of territories beyond the limits of India.
(ii) The Metal Tokens Act, 1889
2. The Act aims at protection of coinage as it was felt expedient
to prohibit the making or the possession for issue or the issue by
private person(s) of pieces of metal for use as money. It also prohibits
the Railway administration and the local authorities to receive or
introduce any piece of metal token as money. The Act also prescribes
the penalty for unlawful making, issue or possession of metal tokens
used as money. Further, the Act also empowers the Central
Government to place a restriction, whenever, it feels fit, on import of
such pieces of metals as may be used as money.
(iii) The Bronze Coin (Legal Tender) Act, 1918
3. The Act provides that where bronze coins of any of the
denominations specified in terms of the Coinage Act, 1906 are coined
in the specified States at the request of the Central Government and
if it is satisfied that such coins are in accordance with the requirements
of the Coinage Act, 1906 and of any notification for the time being in
force under the said Act, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
direct the issue of any such coins, and thereafter any such coins shall
be legal tender in payment or on account in the same way and to the
same extent as if they were coins referred to in the Coinage Act, 1906
and the provisions shall apply accordingly.

2
(iv) The Small Coins (Offences) Act, 1971
4. The Act was enacted to take steps to avoid acute shortage of
small coins in the interest of the general public in the country. The
Act provides for prevention of melting or destruction of small coins
or hoarding of small coins for the purpose of melting and destruction.
Offences under the Act are cognizable, bailable and non-compoundable.
It also provides for a summary trial of the offences.
(v) Proposed Amalgamation of all the above four Acts relating to
Coinage
5. As per the information furnished to the Committee by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), since all the
said four Acts basically deal with coins or usage of metal tokens as
money and protection of coins and prevention of other unlawful
actions in respect of coins, it was considered expedient by the expert
committee formed by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) in 1997 to simplify, rationalise, strengthen and consolidate the
relevant provisions of the Coinage Act, 1906, the Metal Tokens Act,
1889, Bronze Coin (Legal Tender) Act, 1918 and the Small Coins
(Offences) Act, 1971 into one comprehensive Act. The Law
Commission, in its 159th Report submitted in 1998 had also
recommended for amalgamation of all Acts relating to coinage. The
management of all the India Government Mints was transferred to a
Corporation, namely, the Security Printing and Minting Corporation
of India Limited (SPMCIL) formed in 2006 to reorganise Mints as per
their operational requirements.
(vi) Coinage Bill, 2009
6. The Coinage Bill, 2009 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
17 December, 2009 and referred to the Standing Committee on Finance
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29 December, 2009 for examination and
report thereon. The Bill inter-alia provides for:—
(i) amalgamation of four Acts, namely , the Metal Tokens Act,
1889, the Coinage Act, 1906, the Bronze Coin (Legal Tender)
Act, 1918 and the Small Coins (Offences) Act, 1971 into one
Act;
(ii) punishment with imprisonment which may extend to seven
years and with fine if a person is found to be making or
melting or destructing the coins and for deletion of the
provisions of above mentioned four Acts which have since
become redundant; and

3
(iii) repeal of the four aforesaid Acts which have since become
obsolete.
7. The Committee received memoranda/suggestions regarding the
Coinage Bill, 2009 from the State Bank of India, Banking Codes and
Standards Board of India and Reserve Bank of India. The Committee
also took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) in connection with the examination
of the Bill.
8. By way of highlighting the nature of simplification,
rationalisation and strengthening of the existing provisions that has
been brought about in the Coinage Bill, 2009, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) in a written note inter-alia submitted
as under:
“By amalgamating the four Acts into one, all the redundant
provisions as well as duplications have been removed. The
provision for punishment for offences for melting or destruction
of coins below Rupee one denomination has been extended to
cover coins of all denominations to remove the anomalous
situation. Further, the existing provision of maximum punishment
has been increased from five years to seven years and with fine.
Further, the offences have been made cognizable but bailable and
also subject to summary trial”.
9. The Committee took note of the fact that while the Expert
Committee constituted by the Ministry had, way back in 1997
recommended amalgamating the four Acts on Coins and Coinage, the
Coinage Bill was introduced in Parliament only in late 2009. Asked to
cite the reasons for taking a very long time in acting on the
recommendations of the Expert Committee, the Finance Secretary
agreed that an unduly long time was taken in introducing the Bill.
(vii) Shortage of coins
10. Questioned on instances when shortage of coins was faced in
the country, and measures taken for addressing the problem, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), in a written
reply, informed:
“In 1997-98 when the order for import of coins was given, the
mints could supply only 1540 million pieces of coins against the
indent of 6639 million pieces placed by RBI. In contrast during
2009-10, the mints supplied 6285 million pieces of coins against

4
the indent of 6100 million pieces. Presently the coins are available
in the market in most of the regions of the country. However,
there may be some occasional shortage at certain places. To
eliminate shortage from all the regions, since the last two years,
mints are producing at their optimum capacity and will continue
to do so for the next five years, for which firm indent has already
been placed by the RBI.”
11. In response to a related query on instances when coins were
imported, the Ministry, in a written reply informed:—
“… the last time coins were imported was in the year 1997-98.
After that, for the last ten to twelve years, there has been no
import of coins from outside. They have all been minted within
the country.”
(viii) Melting and counterfeiting of coins
12. The Committee, in the course of their deliberations, pointed
out that there have been serious instances of misuse of coins by way
of melting etc. for conversion into artificial jewellery. In this regard,
the Finance Secretary stated as under:—
“…the shortage of coins, whenever it has occurred in the past, is
essentially and mainly due to the fact that the intrinsic value of
the metal is higher than the face value. So, those coins are
melted…and therefore, there is a shortage of coins. That is why,
this situation has arisen in the past. Therefore, the effort that we
tried to have is that if the value of the metal is roughly and this
being a rule of the thumb, sixty to seventy per cent of the face
value of the coin, then there will be no commercial interest or no
great desire to counterfeit because in any case, similar kind of
metal will cost him sixty to seventy per cent of the face value. If
it goes beyond that or beyond 100 per cent, there will be a tendency
to melt”.
13. Questioned also on the mechanism for detecting counterfeit
coins, the Ministry, in a written reply stated as under:—
 “Counterfeit coin is not likely to have sharp relief features as the
genuine coin and therefore can be recognized. In case the similarity
is of high degree then counterfeit coin can be detected through
chemical analysis. Presently there is no detecting machine available
for segregating counterfeit coins”.

5
(ix) Penal provisions
14. Asked to highlight the differences in the penal provisions
proposed in the Coinage Bill, 2009 for melting or destruction of coins
vis-à-vis the provisions applicable for offences relating to counterfeiting
of currency notes, the Ministry, in a written reply stated as under:—
“The maximum punishment of seven years proposed in the Bill is
less than the maximum ten years punishment for counterfeiting of
bank notes prescribed under sections 489A to 489E of the Indian
Penal Code (IPC), 1860. It may also be mentioned that maximum
punishment for counterfeiting of coins under section 232 of the
IPC is also ten years”.
15. Section 232 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 relating to
counterfeiting coins reads as under:—
“Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the
process of counterfeiting Indian coin, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable
to fine”.
16. Asked whether the punishment for melting or destruction of
coins proposed in the Bill could be made on par with the punishment
applicable for counterfeiting currency notes, the Ministry , in reply,
stated:
“The melting or destruction of coins creates shortage of coins in
the market but there is no motive to defraud anyone or to
destabilise the economy as in the case of counterfeiting and hence
there is a case for maintaining a distinction in the punishment for
melting or destruction of coins to seven years”.
(x) Design of coins
17. Questioned on the criteria followed for selecting the design of
coins, the Ministry informed the Committee, inter-alia:—
“The designs of the coins are not changed very often. Usually the
coin designs are taken for review when the intrinsic metal value
is more than the face value of the coin and sometimes on the
representations regarding difficulty in distinguishing the coins of
different denominations. However, the Government decided in the
year 2005 to introduce some thematic designs in the coins in

6
addition to the lion capital (Asoka Pillar). These thematic designs
were got prepared from the National Institute of Design,
Ahmedabad.”
18. In the course of taking evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry, the Committee pointed out that there have been contentious
or debatable issues on the shape and design of coins particularly in
the recent years. Asked about the measures taken, or proposed to
address such issues, the Ministry in their post-evidence reply stated
as under:—
“The Government had constituted a Committee for rationalizing
of shapes, size, design and weight of coins in June, 2009 under
the chairmanship of the Deputy Governor, RBI. The
recommendations of the Committee are under examination in the
Ministry….”
 19. A summarised account of the observations/recommendations
made by the above mentioned Committee constituted by the
Government is given below:—
(i) The Committee emphasised the need for making the
currency, both notes and coins, visually impaired friendly.
The size and colour in case of notes and shape/serrations
in case of coins were considered as important distinguishing
features by the visually impaired.
(ii) Material for Coins:  Considering prices, volatility in prices,
indigenous availability of metal used/to be used in minting
of coins, ease/speed of coinage and appearance of coins
minted using different metals, the mints may continue to
use Ferritic Stainless Steel (FSS) for lower denomination coins
(50 paise, Re. 1 and Rs. 2). For Rs. 5 coin Nickel Brass and
for Rs. 10 coin Aluminium Bronze (outer ring) and Cupro
Nickel (CN) (centrepiece) may be used.
(iii) Shapes of Coins: Considering trend world over, time and
cost implication in importing tools and dies, and speed of
coinage, the Committee recommended to continue with
circular coins presently/in medium term.
(iv) Sizes of coins: In view of increase in prices of FSS and
Nickel Brass (NB), used in production of coins of various
denominations, no demand for 25 paise coin, the Committee
recommended that 50 paise coin should be stamped on
25 paise blank size, Re. 1 should be stamped on 50 paise
blank size and Rs. 2 FSS should be stamped on Re. 1 blank
size. Clearly distinguishable, appropriate serrations on the

7
edges of the coin blank should be provided to differentiate
them from earlier coin blanks of same sizes, due to change
in denomination. The possibility of developing plating
technology (single/multiply) may be looked into by the
mints themselves or in collaboration with industry
indigenously as coated coins were getting fashionable world
over.
(v) Motifs/relief design: Considering difficulty in creating good
relief designs/motifs over a small area on a hard surface in
case of FSS coins, the Committee recommended reverting
to earlier designs. As regards Rs. 10 coins, size of Lion
Capitol be increased to balance coining pressure and number
of petals be made as 10 Nos. on the obverse side as well
as lines be deleted.
(vi) Demand for coins: The RBI may work out demand for the
coins by linking it to either population growth or an
economic indicator directly influencing the same like total
no. of passengers ferried by BEST/Railways. The total
demand for coins be broken down into two components
one representing core/threshold demand and another
variable demand. RBI should give assurance to lift the coins
up to core/threshold limit each year so as to enable SPMCIL
build capacity on long term basis. Variable demand could
be met by SPMCIL by working in extended hours/two-
three shifts.
(vii) Denomination-wise production/demand/supply:
— Minting of 50 paise may be continued for next few
years as it still commands value/fetches goods in rural
areas/certain parts of the country.
— In respect of printing/minting of Rs. 5 denomination
notes and coins, the two i.e. notes and coin may be
continued to co-exist in the short run, considering
capacity constraints with SPMCIL for Rs. 5 coins.
However, considering long-term cost considerations
either indigenous capacity for Rs. 5 coins is built up
or elongation of the life of Rs. 5 notes is actively
considered like use of varnish coating.
— Also in view of logistics involved and to economise
on transportation of notes and coins throughout the
length and breadth of the country, it could be

8
considered to saturate one area with coin and another
area with notes.
— Considering proportion of notes of Rs. 10 (25%) in total
bank notes in circulation, there is a need to
progressively coinize Rs. 10. Though people always
prefer notes over coins for ease of carrying/storage,
there is a strong case for its (Rs. 10 coin) pushing, in
view of costs involved in production, distribution,
processing and disposal of Rs. 10 bank note. With use
of coin vending machines being egged by large utilities
like Metro, the demand for coins in general and Rs. 10
in particular may get further boost.
— GOI may consider formally recalling/withdrawal of
25 paise coin.
— GOI may also consider giving an incentive to the
public to surrender small coins below 25 paise for
certain minimum amount per entity through bank
branches/chests, or even directly to RBI/Mints so as
to remove non-current and unused coins from the
system.
20. The Coinage Bill, 2009 amalgamates the existing four Acts
namely the Metal Tokens Act, 1889, the Coinage Act, 1906, the Bronze
Coin (Legal Tender) Act, 1918 and the Small Coins (Offences) Act,
1971 into one comprehensive act and repeals the said four Acts.
The Committee observe in this regard that it has taken an unduly
long time for introducing the proposed Bill since the making of the
recommendations to this effect by the Expert Group of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) way back in 1997.
Moreover, serious infirmities have remained in the provisions of
the Bill as introduced, that came to light in the course of the
Committee’s deliberations. These have been dealt with in detail in
the later sections of this report.
21. An issue of serious concern that was deliberated upon by
the Committee relates to unauthorised melting of coins for purposes
such as making artificial jewellery, etc., which could result in
shortage of coins. As pointed out by the Finance Secretary, the
intrinsic value of the metal is to be comparatively lesser than the
face value of the coin. The Committee expect that this thumb rule
is scrupulously maintained so as to serve as a deterrent against
melting and destructing coins for unlawful gains. The Committee

9
would also emphasise on ensuring strict enforcement of the relevant
penal provisions in cases of unauthorised making, melting or
destructing coins so as to severely punish the offenders.
22. In view of the fact that coins do not have serial numbers
unlike currency notes, and with the present advanced metallurgical
technology, it may not be difficult to analyse the coining material
and mint counterfeit coins. The Committee, therefore, feel it to be
appropriate on the part of the Government to develop an effective
mechanism for taking care of such eventualities inter-alia by putting
in place a proper mechanism, including by way of usage of
appropriate identification features for ascertaining and verifying the
genuineness of coins and segregating counterfeit coins.
23. As regards punishment for making or melting or destructing
coins, the maximum punishment of imprisonment of seven years as
proposed in the Bill is less than the maximum punishment of
imprisonment of ten years under the relevant provisions of the
Indian Penal Code (IPC), 1860, which is also the punishment
applicable for offences relating to counterfeiting currency notes. In
view of the seriousness of the offences, the Committee feel that the
punishment for melting or making or destructing coins should also
be increased to ten years as applicable under the IPC.
24. There have also been contentious and debatable issues in
regard to shapes and designs of coins particularly in the recent
years. In this regard, the Committee would expect the Ministry of
Finance to expedite the examination of the recommendations of the
Committee constituted for rationalizing of shapes, size, design and
weight of coins under the chairmanship of the Deputy Governor,
RBI, for early and effective implementation, which would be in the
larger public interest.
25. Specific issues relating to certain provisions that emerged in
the course of the Committee’s examination of the Coinage Bill, 2009
are dealt with in the subsequent sections of this report. The
Committee recommend consideration of the Bill subject to the
observations made/modifications suggested in this report.
II. Clause 2(a): Definition of Coin
26. Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definitions of the terms used
in the Bill.
27. Clause 2(a) of the Bill which defines the term “coin” reads as
under:—
“ ‘coin’ means any coin which is made of any metal stamped by
the Government or any other authority empowered by the

10
Government in this behalf and which is a legal tender including
commemorative coin but does not include various types of credit
card or e-money issued by any bank or financial institution from
time to time.”
28. On the definition of ‘coin’ as proposed under clause 2(a), the
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India, in their memorandum
submitted to the Committee suggested as under:—
“The definition of clause 2(a) needs to be amended to include the
GOI One Rupee Note as it is not to be treated as a bank note but
as a ‘rupee coin’ for all the purposes of the RBI Act, 1934, as per
the Currency Ordinance, 1940. It will be useful and appropriate to
seize this opportunity to also repeal. ‘The Currency Ordinance, 1940’
which provides for the issue and putting into circulation of GOI
One Rupee Notes and which provides that the GOI One Rupee
Note shall be deemed to be included in the expression “rupee
coin” for all the purposes of the RBI Act, 1934.”
The Currency Ordinance, 1940
29. The Ordinance provides for the issue and putting into
circulation of Government of India One Rupee Notes and also provides
that the GOI One Rupee Note shall be deemed to be included in the
expression “rupee coin” for all the purposes of the RBI Act, 1934 and
shall not be treated as currency note.
30. Questioned whether the Currency Ordinance promulgated in
1940 was subsequently enacted as law, the Ministry, in a written reply
informed as under:—
 “No, the Currency Ordinance, 1940 was promulgated after passing
of the India and Burma (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1940 which
provided that Ordinances made during the period of the emergency
beginning 27.6.1940 would not lapse within six months. This made
the Currency Ordinance, 1940 of permanent nature like an Act of
competent Legislature and continued to be in force. The Ordinance
was continued and adopted by a Presidential promulgation,
“Adoption of Laws Order, 1950” issued under powers conferred
by clause (2) of Article 372 of the Constitution.”
31. As per the information furnished to the Committee, the said
Expert Group constituted in 1997 by the Ministry of Finance as well
as the Law Commission had inter-alia recommended repealing the
Currency Ordinance, 1940.

11
32. Asked as to why the Ministry had not acted upon the
recommendation for repealing the Ordinance by including a provision
to this effect in the Coinage Bill, 2009, the Ministry stated as under:—
“The Expert Group and the Law Commission had recommended
repeal of the Currency Ordinance, 1940 on the ground that printing
of one rupee denomination notes has been discontinued. The
Ministry, however, felt that this Ordinance may not be repealed as
one rupee notes continue to be in circulation though not being
printed any more.”
 33. On the suggestion made by Banking Codes and Standards
Board of India for including ‘one rupee note’ in the definition of coin
proposed under clause 2(a) and repealing the Currency Ordinance,
1940, the Ministry stated as under:—
“The one rupee note is issued under Currency Ordinance, 1940
and is not to be treated as a bank note but as a rupee coin as per
the Ordinance. Therefore, the suggestion may be agreed to.”
34. Clause 27 of the Bill provides for repeal of the Metal Tokens
Act, 1889 (1 of 1889), the Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 2006), the Bronze
Coin (Legal Tender) Act, 1918 (22 of 1918) and the Small Coins
(Offences) Act, 1971 (52 of 1971) and also provides that repeal of
these enactments is not to affect the validity, invalidity, effect or
consequences of anything done or suffered, any right acquired, accrued
or liability incurred, etc., from the enactments repealed.
35. Questioned whether the repealment of Currency Ordinance,
1940 as proposed by the Ministry, needs to be included as (e) under
clause 27 of the Bill, the Ministry, in their reply expressed agreement
with the same.
36. Further, the State Bank of India, in their Memorandum
emphasised on clearly stipulating the forms of legal tender that would
not be covered under the definition of ‘coin’ as proposed. The
suggestion received from the Bank reads inter alia :—
“Debit card may also be added with credit card i.e. ‘credit card or
debit card or e-money’ issued by any bank .......”
37. The term ‘currency’ as defined under the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 reads as under:—
 “Currency includes all currency notes, postal notes, postal orders,
money orders, cheques, drafts, travellers cheques, letters of credit,
bills of exchange and promissory notes, credit cards or such other
similar instruments, as may be notified by the Reserve Bank.”

12
38. Questioned whether the intention of the Government was to
stipulate that forms of legal tender including credit/debit cards, postal
orders etc. would not be covered under the definition of ‘coin’ and
if so, this aspect could be stipulated in cleared terms in the definition
of ‘coin’, the Ministry in reply, stated inter-alia:—
 “The definition of ‘coin’ as stipulated in the Coinage Bill is not
intended to cover other legal tender.”
39. The Committee note that the definition of coin in
clause 2(a) of the Bill does not include the Government of India
One Rupee Note, which, as per the Currency Ordinance, 1940 is not
to be treated as a bank note but as a rupee coin. The One Rupee
currency note continuing to be in circulation, as agreed to by the
Ministry, the Committee expect that the proposed definition of ‘Coin’
is suitably modified for including and enabling the currency note
to be a legal tender, once the Currency Ordinance, 1940 is repealed.
The Committee note in this regard that the Expert Group of the
Ministry (1997) as well as the Law Commission, in their 159th Report
(1998) recommended repealing the Currency Ordinance of 1940.
40. As pointed out by the State Bank of India, there appears to
be a need to bring in clarity in stipulating that forms of legal
tender other than coins would be outside the purview of the
definition of the term ‘coin’. Instead of including this aspect in the
definition, as proposed, the Committee feel it to be preferable to
add  an explanation or a clarificatory proviso under clause 2(a)
specifying that forms of legal tender such as credit and debit cards,
postal orders, etc. would be outside the purview of the definition.
The Committee expect that the definition of the term coin, as
proposed is, accordingly, re-looked into.
III. Clause 2(e) and Clause 4: Definition of issue and
denominations, dimensions, designs and
composition of coins
41. Clause 2(e) of the Bill regarding definition of issue reads as
under:
“ ‘Issue’ means to put a piece of metal into circulation for use as
money.”
42. Clause 4 of the Bill relating to denominations, dimensions,
designs and composition of coins provides as under:—
“Coins may be minted at the Mints or at any other place authorised
under the proviso to section 3 of such denominations not higher

13
than one thousand rupees and of such dimensions and designs
and containing such metals or mixed metals of such compositions
as may be prescribed by the Government.”
43. The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India and the
State Bank of India have made the following suggestions in regard to
the proposed amendments in Clause 2(e) and Clause 4:—
“(i) Keeping in view the scarcity of metal resources, the
manufacturing cost thereof and the historical record of
repeated debasements of small denominations and coin
shortages, it would be necessary to have a futuristic vision.
It may be therefore appropriate not to limit the Government
of India’s powers to use of only metal for the purposes of
coinage. Instead, it may be useful to enable the GoI to use
metal or any other material as may be determined by the
GoI, in public interest. Accordingly, Section 2(e) and
Section 4 may be suitably amended to indicate that a coin
means any coin which is made of any metal or any other
material determined by the Government, in public interest.
(ii) the word ‘mixed metals’ used may be replaced with
‘alloys’.”
44. Asked to furnish the Government’s views on the suggestions
made, the Ministry informed as under: —
“(i) The suggestion to use metal or any other material as may
be determined by the GoI, in public interest, for minting of
coins may be accepted.
(ii) The words ‘mixed metals’ and ‘alloys’ have different
connotations. While the alloy refers to mixture of two or
more metals in a fixed percentage and have definite name,
such as, brass and bronze, the mixed metals can contain
two or more metals in any proportion and do not have a
definite name like alloys. Therefore, it would not be
appropriate to replace the words ‘mixed metals’ with
‘alloys’.”
45. Clause 2(e) which defines the term “issue” and clause 4,
relating to dimensions and designs of coins provide for usage of
only metal for minting coins. In view of scarcity of metal resources,
manufacturing cost thereof and coin shortages, the Banking Codes
and Standards Board of India has felt it to be not desirable for the
Government to depend on the use of only metal for the purpose of
coinage and instead have a futuristic vision by enabling use of any

14
other material as well, as may be determined by the Government
in public interest for coinage. This has been agreed to by the
Government. The Committee, therefore, expect that the relevant
provisions of the Bill are suitably amended to indicate that a coin
means any coin which is made of any metal or any other material
determined by the Government in public interest.
IV . Clause 3: Power to establish and abolish Mints
46. Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Government to establish
and abolish Mints and also provides that the Mints may be managed
by other persons authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.
It further provides that the Mints established before the commencement
of this Act shall be deemed to have been established by the
Government.
47. Clause 3(a) reads as under:—
“The Government may, by notification, establish a Mint at any
place, which may be managed by the Government of India in the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs or by any
other person, which may be authorized for this purpose”.
48. The State Bank of India pointed out the following issue in
regard to the proposed provisions of Clause 3(a) of the Bill:—
“The words ‘Government of India in the Ministry of Finance’ may
be substituted by ‘Government, Ministry of Finance’ and the words
‘of India’ and ‘in the’ may be deleted as the term ‘Government’ is
already defined under Clause 2(d). Further, the word ‘entity’ may
be added after ‘person’ i.e. ‘by any other person or entity’.”
49. Questioned in this regard, the Ministry in response informed
as under:—
“The spirit of the suggestion for substituting the words
‘Government of India in the Ministry of Finance’ by ‘Government,
Ministry of Finance’ and deletion of the words ‘of India’ and ‘in
the’ as the term ‘Government’ is already defined under
Clause 2(d) is well taken. To further simplify the matters, the words,
‘the Government of India in the Ministry of Finance, Department
of Economic Affairs’ may be replaced by a single word ‘it’.
Regarding the other suggestion of adding the words, ‘or entity’ it
is submitted that the Ministry of Law had opined that the word

15
‘person’ as defined under the General Clauses Act also covers an
organisation/corporation/entity . Therefore, the addition of the
words ‘or entity’ is not required.”
50. The General Clauses Act, 1897 defines the term ‘person’ as
under:—
“ ‘Person’ shall include any company or association or body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not.”
51. As agreed to by the Government, the Committee desire that
for simplifying the text of Clause 3(a), the words “Government of
India in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs”
as occurring in the said clause may be substituted by a single word
“it” and Clause 3(a) of the Bill may be accordingly modified.
V. Clause 6: Coin when a legal tender
52. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the sum for which certain
specified coins will be a legal tender and the silver coins issued under
the Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 1906), after the 10th day of March, 1940
and all nickel, copper and bronze coins which may have been issued
before the 24th day of January, 1942 shall continue as before to be a
legal tender.
53. Clause 6(1) provides as under:—
“The coins issued under the authority of Section 4 shall be a legal
tender in payment or on account, in case of:—
(a) a coin of any denomination not lower than one rupee, for
any sum;
(b) a half rupee coin, for any sum not exceeding ten rupees;
(c) any other coin, for any sum not exceeding one rupee”.
54. Asked to explain the provisions of Clause 6(1)(a) with reference
to the word ‘for any sum’, the Ministry stated as under:—
“This clause implies that if a person has to make a payment of
any sum of rupees even in thousands of rupees or more, he/she
can do so by tendering coins of Re. 1 or higher denominations.
For example, for a payment of Rs. 1500, he/she can tender
80 coins of Rs. 10 denomination, 70 coins of Rs. 5 denomination,
125 coins of Rs. 2 denomination and 100 coins of Re. 1
denomination i.e. total of 375 coins of different denominations or

16
150 coins of Rs. 10 denomination or 300 coins of Rs. 5 denomination
or 750 coins of Rs. 2 denomination or 1500 coins of Re. 1
denomination or in a different combination of coins of different
denominations.”
55. Pointing out that coins of the face value of Rupee 2, 5 and 10
are currently in circulation and the Coinage Bill provides for the issue
of coins upto the denomination of 1000 rupees, the Banking Codes
and Standards Board of India suggested that Clause 6(1) (a) and the
subsequent sub-sections could be amended as follows:—
“(a) a coin of any denomination higher than one rupee for any
sum;
(b) a one rupee coin, for any sum not exceeding 100 rupees;
(c) a half-rupee coin for any sum not exceeding ten rupees;
and
(d) any other coin, for any sum not exceeding one rupee”.
56. Questioned on the suggestion made, the Ministry in reply,
informed as under:—
“The Department agrees to the suggestion. However, the Reserve
Bank of India is of the view that ‘a coin of any denomination
higher than one rupee may be made legal tender for any sum not
exceeding 1000 rupees for the reason that accepting such coins for
any sum may entail practical difficulties in terms of counting and
authenticating for both tenderer and accepter. Some countries, such
as New Zealand, Republic of Ireland and Switzerland have such
restrictions.”
 57. Clause 6(2) which provides for continuation of silver coins
issued under the Coinage Act, 1906 after the 10th day of March, 1940
as legal tender reads as under:—
“All silver coins issued under the Coinage Act, 1906 after the
10th day of March, 1940 shall continue as before to be a legal
tender in payment or on account, in case of—
(a) a rupee coin, for any sum;
(b) a half-rupee coin, for any sum not exceeding ten rupees;
(c) a quarter-rupee, for any sum not exceeding one rupee:

17
Provided that the coin has not been defaced and has not lost
weight so as to be less than—
(i) 176.4 grains Troy in the case of a rupee coin, or
(ii) 88.2 grains Troy in the case of a half-rupee coin, or
(iii) such weight as may be prescribed in the case of a quarter-
rupee coin.”
58. Further, Clause 6 (3) regarding nickel, copper and bronze coins,
which may have been issued under the Coinage Act, 1906 before the
24th day of January, 1942 provides as under:—
“All nickel, copper and bronze coins which may have been issued
under the Coinage Act, 1906 before the 24th day of January, 1942
shall continue as before to be a legal tender in payment or on
account for any sum not exceeding one rupee.”
59. On the amendment proposals of Clause 6(2) and 6(3), the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), in a written
note informed the Committee inter-alia as under:—
“As the silver, nickel, copper and bronze coins have been recalled
long back by the RBI, this Ministry had recommended deletion of
this provision in the Bill and Ministry of Law had agreed in
principle.
However, due to oversight, it has not been removed in the final
draft. This may be done now.”
60. Asked to clarify as to when the Reserve Bank recalled the
silver coins issued after 10th March, 1940 and nickel, copper and
bronze coins which may have been issued prior to 24th January, 1942
and also whether the Government proposes to move official
amendments for dropping Clause 6(2) and Clause 6(3) of the Bill, the
Ministry in reply, stated as under:—
“Despite all out efforts, the relevant records could not be found
either in the Department of Economic Affairs or in the Reserve
Bank of India as this might have been done long ago. Since the
intrinsic metal value of such coins is much more than the face
value, it is also not in the interest of those possessing such coins
to exchange those at face value as legal tender. As regards moving
official amendments for dropping these two sub-clauses, the
Government would abide by the advice of the Committee.”
61. The Committee find credence in the view expressed by the
Reserve Bank on stipulating an upper limit of the amount or sum

18
upto which a coin of any denomination higher than one rupee may
be made legal tender so as to avoid practical difficulties in counting
and authenticating. However, while the Reserve Bank has proposed
that a coin of any denomination higher than one rupee may be
made legal tender for any sum not exceeding Rs. 1000, the
Committee are of the view that the outer limit of the sums upto
which coins of different denominational value can be construed as
legal tender in payment etc. needs to be stipulated by considering
the fact that the Bill enables for minting and circulating coins upto
the value of Rs. 1000. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
sub-sections of clause 6(1), which specify the sums upto which coins
of different denominations can be a legal tender for payment etc.
be reviewed by taking this aspect into consideration.
62. Although silver, nickel, copper and bronze coins have been
recalled long back by the Reserve Bank, provisions have been
inadvertently incorporated under Clause 6(2) and Clause 6(3) for
enabling their continuance as legal tender. What the Committee find
to be even more surprising to note in this regard is the fact that
records relating to recalling these coins are not traceable either in
the Department of Economic Affairs or in the Reserve Bank of India.
The Committee expect that efforts would be made to ensure that
such oversights in formulating legislative provisions and tardiness
in maintenance of records are avoided. The Government, having
proposed to delete these provisions which are of no relevance now,
the Committee expect that appropriate action would be taken for
moving amendments to this effect.
VI. Clause 9: Power to certain persons to cut,
diminished or defaced coins
63. Clause 9 of the Bill empowers certain persons to cut, diminish
or deface coins which have been diminished in weight by such per
cent below the provided standard weight. It also provides for payment
of face value of the coin when there is reason to believe that the coin
has not been defaced fraudulently. The person cutting or breaking the
coin has to observe the procedure as specified.
64. Explanation given under Clause 9 (3) states as under:—
“For the purpose of this section, a coin which, there is reason to
believe, has been defaced by sweating shall be deemed to have
been fraudulently defaced.”

19
 65. The State Bank of India has made the following suggestion
in this regard:—
“India being a tropical country, most part of the country is hot
and humid and sweat is a common experience. The possibility of
coins getting defaced due to excessive sweat is not uncommon
and such instances cannot be deemed to have been a fraudulent
defacement under the Act. Hence, removal/modification of the
explanation may be considered”.
 66. Asked to furnish comments on the above suggestion, the
Ministry stated as follows:—
“The Department agrees with the view”.
67. In terms of the explanation given under clause 9(3), a coin,
which is believed to have been defaced by sweating shall be deemed
to have been fraudulently defaced. As pointed out by the State
Bank, India being a tropical country, most parts of the country are
hot and humid due to which the possibility of coins getting defaced
due to excessive sweat is common and it may not be appropriate to
treat such cases as fraudulent defacement under the Act. As agreed
to by the Government, the Committee desire that the explanation
given under Clause 9(3) may be omitted from the Bill.
VII. Clause 11: Power of Mint to delegate its Functions
68. Clause 11 reads: “Any officer of the Mint duly empowered by
the Government may in writing authorize any other organization of
the Government to melt withdrawn coins or take any help of such
organization for the said purpose”.
69. In their written memorandum, the Banking Codes and
Standards Board of India made the following suggestion:—
“Since the Mints are owned by SPMCIL, Clause 11 may be
amended to read as follows:
Government may empower SPMCIL to authorize any other
organization of the Government, in writing, to melt withdrawn
coins or take any help of such organization for the said purpose”.
70. In this regard, the Ministry submitted as follows:—
“In accordance with the present provision of Clause 11, the
Government have retained its authority to empower any officer of

20
the Mint in the matter of melting of withdrawn coins whereas, in
accordance with the suggestion of the Committee, the
empowerment should be conferred on SPMCIL rather than the
Mint officer. In view of the rationale given by the Committee, the
Department may have no objection.”
71. Since the management of Mints has been transferred to the
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Limited
(SPMCIL), the Committee find merit in the suggestion made by the
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India for empowering
SPMCIL to authorise any other organisation of the Government, in
writing, to melt withdrawn coins or take help of such organisation
for the said purpose, instead of empowering any officer of the Mint
in the matter as proposed under Clause 11. The Government having
agreed with this suggestion, the Committee expect that Clause 11 of
the Bill will be accordingly amended.
VIII. Clauses 12 and 14: Prohibition and Penalty
72. Clause 12 of the Bill inter-alia provides for prohibition of
making or melting or destruction of coins or having possession,
custody or control of melted coins or coins in mutilated or destroyed
state.
73. Clause 12(1)(i) and Clause 12(3)(i) of the Bill read as follows:—
Clause 12(1)(i): “No person shall use any metal piece as coin
whether stamped or unstamped, intended to be used as money
except by the authority of the Government”.
74. Clause 12(3)(i) states that:—
 “Nothing in this section shall apply to any person who is found
in possession of any metal or scraps or scissel, etc. of non-recyclable
coinage metal, which he may so possess as a result of valid disposal
by auctions by a Mint.”
75. Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the prohibition of unlawful
making, issue or possession, custody or control of pieces of any metal
to be used as money and also punishment for contravention of this
provision with imprisonment upto one year or fine or with both.
76. Clause 14(1)(a) of the Bill reads as under:—
“No person shall make or issue or attempt to issue any metal
piece except as provided under section 4 for the purpose of coins.”

21
77. The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India in their
written memorandum, have suggested as under:—
“(i) It is common knowledge that use of paper token etc. is
rampant when there is shortage of coins and nobody really
uses metal for this purpose. Therefore, Section 12(1)(i) as
also Section 14(1)(a) should be suitably amended to reflect
the ground reality as follows:—
Section 12(1)(i): “use any material or metal as coins whether
stamped or unstamped, intended to be used as money
except by the authority of the Government, or”
Section 14(1)(a): “make or issue or attempt to issue any
metal or any other material as a token for money or as
purporting that the holder is entitled to demand any value
denoted on it”.
(ii) As r egards Clause 12(3)(i), the Banking Codes and Standards
Board of India have suggested as under:—
“This section is restrictive as it empowers disposal only by
auctions and does not reflect a futuristic vision of porous
borders and transaction modes via internet or other
telecommunications. Removing the word “by auctions”
would obviate the constraint and yet serve the purpose”.
78. Asked about their views on the above suggestions, the Ministry
stated as under:—
“(i) The suggestion regarding amendment of Clause 12(1)(i) may
be accepted. The suggested formulation for section 14(1)(a)
is going beyond the ambit of the Coinage Act as such an
omnibus clause will make it difficult to use and/or issue
negotiable instruments such as cheques, promissory notes
etc. Therefore, accepting the suggestion of the Committee
in principle, the clause 14(1)(a) may be redrafted as under:
14(1)(a) ‘make or issue or attempt to issue any metal piece
or any other material except as provided under section 4
for the purpose of coins’.
(ii) The word ‘auction’ includes “e-auction” which is done
through the use of internet and, therefore, no change in the
relevant clause is required”.
 79. The Government has accepted the suggestion made by the
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India for enabling use of

22
“any other material” as well for minting coins by proposing
appropriate changes to this effect in the provisions under Clause 2
(issue) and Clause 4 (denominations and dimensions of coins) which
has been dealt with in the earlier section of the report. As pointed
out by the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India, the words
“or any other material” also need to be included in Clause 12(1)(i)
and Clause 14(1)(a), which inter-alia prohibit unauthorised making
or issue or attempt to issue coins. As agreed to by the Government,
the Committee expect that the relevant provisions of the Clause 12
(1)(i) and Clause 14(1)(a) would be suitably amended.
IX. Clause 23: Power to remove difficulties
80. Clause 23 empowers the Government to remove difficulties
that may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.
81. The proviso to Clause 23(1) limits the power of the Government
which reads: “Provided that no such order shall be made under this
section after the expiry of two years from the commencement of this
Act”.
82. The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India have made
the following suggestion on the above provision:—
 “Since Clause 23(1) is expressly for the purpose of removing
difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act there should
be no time restriction for issue of orders to remove the difficulties
if it is considered necessary or expedient in public interest,
especially as Clause 23(2) provides for such orders being laid as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
In fact, the UK Coinage Act expressly empowers the Government
to regulate any matter relating to coinage, which is not provided
for under the Act. The Proviso, therefore, needs to be removed”.
83. Asked to give their comments on the above suggestion, the
Ministry in reply, stated as under:—
“The Government considered the period of two years sufficient
for removal of difficulties. However, in view of the comparison
drawn by the Committee with the U.K. Coinage Act, the suggestion
to delete the proviso may be accepted”.
84. Regarding the proviso to Clause 23(1) of the Bill, the
Committee feel that there should be no time restriction for issue of
orders to remove difficulties, which may arise while giving effect

23
to the provisions of the Bill, particularly in public interest. The
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India have also pointed out
that the UK Coinage Act expressly empowers the Government to
regulate any matter relating to coinage which is not provided for
under the Act. As agreed to by the Government, the Committee
recommend that the proviso to Clause 23(1) should be deleted in
the Bill.
X. Clause 24: Power to make rules
85. Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules
to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
86. Clause 24(2)(f) reads as follows:—
“In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(f) “the coin of any denomination which has not been defaced and
has not lost weight as to be less than such weight issued under
Section 6”.
87. Asked to clarify the purport of Clause 24(2)(f), the Ministry of
Finance, in reply stated as under:—
“This sub-clause refers to the proviso to sub-clause 2 of clause 6
relating to Silver Coins. Since that sub-clause is proposed for
deletion, sub-clause 24(2)(f) may also be deleted”.
88. Proviso to Clause 6(2) relating to silver coins issued under
the Coinage Act, 1906 after the 10th day of March, 1940 reads as
under:—
“Provided that the coin has not been defaced and has not lost
weight so as to be less than—
(i) 176.4 grains Troy in the case of a rupee coin, or
(ii) 88.2 grains Troy in the case of a half-rupee coin, or
(iii) such weight as may be prescribed in the case of a quarter-
rupee coin”.
89. As clarified by the Ministry, Clause 24(2)(f) seeks to empower
the Government to frame rules relating to silver coins referred to
in Clause 6(2) of the Bill, which has been proposed for deletion as

24
the coins have been recalled long back. As proposed by the Ministry,
the Committee expect that Clause 24(2)(f), which is redundant’ is
also deleted.
XI. Clause 28: Continuance of the existing coins
90. Clause 28 of the Bill which provides for continuance of existing
coins as legal tender in payment or on account reads as under:
“Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments specified in
Section 27, all coins which were issued as legal tender under the
said enactments immediately preceding the date on which the
Coinage Act, 2009 receives the assent of the President shall continue
to be legal tender in payment or on account.”
91. In this regard, it has been suggested by the State Bank of
India that:
“As per Clause 1(3), the Coinage Act, 2009 shall come into force
on such date as the Central Government, may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint. The repeal of the Acts mentioned in
Clause 27(1) will also come into force from the date appointed as
per the notification made under Clause 1(3). Hence, the protection,
i.e. the continuance of the existing coins, mentioned in Clause 28
may be extended upto the date of commencement of this Act. It
is suggested to replace the words “the date on which the Coinage
Act, 2009 received the assent of the President” with the words
“the date of commencement of this Act”. Alternatively, the coming
into force of the Act should be made effective from the date of
assent of the President is received, to achieve the object.”
92. In their comments on the above-mentioned suggestion, the
Ministry stated as under:
“The suggestion is a valid one and is agreed to. The continuance
of the existing coins may continue till the commencement of this
Act rather than till when the bill receives assent of the President.
Article 28 can be amended accordingly.”
93. Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the existing coins issued
immediately preceding the date on which the Coinage Act, 2009
receives the assent of the President shall continue to be a legal
tender in payment or on account. The Committee, however, note
that as per Clause 1(3), the Coinage Act, 2009 shall come into force
on such date as the Central Government, may, by notification in

25
the Official Gazette, appoint. The repeal of the Acts mentioned in
Clause 27(1) will also come into force from the date appointed as
per the notification made under Clause 1(3). Hence, as also suggested
by the State Bank of India, the Committee feel that it would be
appropriate to extend the continuance of existing coins mentioned
in the said clause issued upto the date of commencement of the
Coinage Act, 2009. As agreed to by the Government, the Committee
expect that Clause 28 of the Bill would be suitably modified so as
to provide that the existing coins issued till the commencement of
the Coinage Act, 2009 instead of the date on which the Coinage
Act, 2009 receives the assent of the President, shall continue to be
legal tender in payment or on account.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August, 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

26
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th April, 2010 from
1530 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harischandra Chavan
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
7. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
9. Shri Mahendra Mohan
10. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
11. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
PART I
** ** ** **
** ** ** **

27
PART II
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla, Finance Secretary
2. Smt. L.M. Vas, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Govind Mohan, Joint Secretary
4. Shri M.S. Rana, CMD, Security Printing and Minting Corp. of
India Ltd. (SPMCIL)
5. Shri R. Gandhi, CGM, Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) in connection with the examination
of the Coinage Bill, 2009. The issues discussed related to the major
provisions of the Coinage Bill, 2009, inordinate delay in formulating
the Bill for introduction in Parliament, provisions pertaining to
enabling issue of coins of higher denomination for circulation and
commemorative use, infirmities contained in the Bill in regard to silver,
nickel, bronze and copper coins, which have been called back by the
Reserve Bank, requirement and production of coins, quality and design
of coins, measures for preventing counterfeiting and blackmarketing
of coins etc. The Chairman directed the representatives to furnish
written replies to the queries raised by Members at an early date.
The Committee adjourned at 1700 hours.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

28
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th August, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri Y .S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
10. Shri N. Dharam Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
12. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on the Companies Bill, 2009;
(ii) Draft Report on the Coinage Bill, 2009;

29
(iii) Draft Report on the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill,
2010;
(iv) Draft Report on the Chartered Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010; and
(v) Draft Report on the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i) with the
modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure* and (ii) and
(iv) above with minor modifications. The Committee adopted the
remaining draft reports without any change.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of the modifications suggested and present all the reports
to Parliament in the current session.
 The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours.
*Does not pertain to this Report.

30
APPENDIX II
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 129 of 2009
THE COINAGE BILL, 2009
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
l. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF M INTS
3. Power to establish and abolish Mints.
CHAPTER III
COINAGE
4. Denominations, dimensions, designs and composition of
coins.
5. Standard weight and remedy.
6. Coin when a legal tender.
7. Decimal system of coinage.
8. Power to call in coin.
CHAPTER IV
D
IMINISHED, D EFACED A ND C OUNTERFEIT C OINS
9. Power to certain persons to cut diminished or defaced coins.
10. Power to certain persons to cut counterfeit coins.

31
11. Power of Mint to delegate its functions.
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND P ENALTIES
12. Prohibition of making or melting or destruction of coins.
13. Penalty for contravention of section 12.
14. Prohibition and penalty for unlawful making, issue or
possession of pieces of metal to be used as money.
15. Prohibition and penalty for bringing metal piece for use as
coin.
16. Offences by companies.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS C LAUSES
17. Forfeiture.
18. Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 not to apply to offences
under this Act.
19. Offences to be cognizable, bailable and non-compoundable.
20. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.
21. Offences may be tried summarily .
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.
23. Power to remove difficulties.
24. Power to make rules.
25. Rules to be laid before Parliament.
26. Saving of making other coins at Mints.
27. Repeal and savings.
28. Continuance of existing coins.

32
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 129 of 2009
THE COINAGE BILL, 2009
A
BILL
to consolidate the laws relating to coinage and the Mints, the protection of
coinage and to provide for the prohibition of melting or destruction of
coins and prohibit the making or the possession thereof for issue and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coinage
Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) ‘‘coin” means any coin which is
made of any metal stamped by the
Government or any other authority
empowered by the Government in this
behalf and which is a legal tender
including commemorative coin but does
not include various types of credit card or
e-money issued by any bank or financial
institution from time to time;
(b) “commemorative coin” means any
coin stamped by the Government or any
other authority empowered by the
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.

33
Government in this behalf to commemorate
any specific occasion or event and
expressed in Indian currency;
(c) “deface” means any type of
clipping, filing, stamping, or such other
alteration of the surface or shape of a coin
as is readily distinguishable from the effects
of reasonable wear;
(d) “Government” means the Central
Government;
(e) “issue” means to put a piece of
metal into circulation for use as money;
(f) “metal” means any metal, base
metal, alloy, gold, silver or any other metal
which may be prescribed by the
Government for the purpose of any coin;
(g) “Mint” means any organisation
established by or under the authority of
the Government to make a coin by
stamping metal;
(h) “notification” means notification
published in the Official Gazette;
(i) “per cent.” means the percentage of
metals prescribed for any coin;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(k) “remedy” means variation from the
standard weight and fineness;
(l) “standard weight” means the weight
prescribed for any coin.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF M INTS
3. The Government may, by notification,—
(a) establish a Mint at any place which
may be managed by the Government of
India in the Ministry of Finance,
Power to
establish
and abolish
Mints.

34
Department of Economic Affairs or by any
other person, which may be authorised for
this purpose:
Provided that the Mints established
before the commencement of this Act shall
be deemed to have been established by the
Government under this section:
Provided further that where the
Government is of the opinion that it is
necessary or expedient in the public
interest to do so, it may authorise the
minting of coins by any organisation or
Government of any foreign country, within
or beyond the limits of India and acquire
such coins either by way of import or
otherwise for issue under its authority;
(b) abolish any Mint.
CHAPTER III
C
OINAGE
4. Coins may be minted at the Mints or at
any other place authorised under the proviso
to section 3 of such denominations not higher
than one thousand rupees and of such
dimensions and designs and containing such
metals or mixed metals of such compositions
as may be prescribed by the Government.
5. The standard weight of the coin of any
denomination, minted under the provisions of
section 4, and the remedy allowed in making
of such coins, shall be such as may be
prescribed in this behalf by the Government
from time to time.
6. (1) The coins issued under the authority
of section 4 shall be a legal tender in payment
or on account, in case of—
(a) a coin of any denomination not
lower than one rupee, for any sum;
(b) a half-rupee coin, for any sum not
exceeding ten rupees;
(c) any other coin, for any sum not
exceeding one rupee:
Denominat-
ions,
Dimensions,
designs
and
composition
of coins.
Standard
weight and
remedy.
Coin when
a legal
tender.

35
Provided that the coin has not been
defaced and has not lost weight so as to be
less than such weight as may be prescribed in
its case.
(2) All silver coins issued under the
Coinage Act, 1906 after the 10th day of March,
1940 shall continue as before to be a legal
tender in payment or on account, in case of—
(a) a rupee coin, for any sum;
(b) a half-rupee coin, for any sum not
exceeding ten rupees;
(c) a quarter-rupee, for any sum not
exceeding one rupee:
Provided that the coin has not been
defaced and has not lost weight so as to be
less than—
(i) 176.4 grains Troy in the case of a
rupee coin, or
(ii) 88.2 grains Troy in the case of a
half-rupee coin, or
(iii) such weight as may be prescribed
in the case of a quarter-rupee coin.
(3) All nickel, copper and bronze coins
which may have been issued under the
Coinage Act, 1906 before the 24th day of
January, 1942 shall continue as before to be a
legal tender in payment or on account for any
sum not exceeding one rupee.
(4) All new coins in the naya paisa series,
designated as such under the notification of
the Government of India in the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Economic Affairs,
Number S.R.O. 1120, dated the 11th May, 1956
issued prior to the commencement of the
Indian Coinage (Amendment) Act, 1964, shall
continue to be a legal tender in payment or
on account, in case of,—
3 of 1906.
3 of 1906.
17 of 1964.

36
(a) a half-rupee or fifty naye paise coin,
for any sum not exceeding ten rupees;
(b) any other coin, for any sum not
exceeding one rupee.
7. (1) The rupee shall be divided into one
hundred units and any such unit may be
designated by the Government, by notification,
under such name as it thinks fit.
(2) All references in any enactment or in
any notification, rule or order made under any
enactment or in any contract, deed or other
instrument to any value expressed in annas,
paisa and pies shall be construed as references
to that value expressed in units referred to in
sub-section (1) converted thereto at the rate of
sixteen anna, sixty-four paise or one hundred
and ninety-two pies to one hundred units
referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) All references in any enactment or in
any notification, rule or order under any
enactment or in any contract, deed or other
instrument to any value in naya paisa or naye
paise shall be contrued as references to that
value expressed respectively in units referred
to in sub-section (1).
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 6, the Government may, by notification,
call in with effect from such date as may be
specified in the notification, any coin, of
whatever date or denomination and on and
from the date so specified, such coin shall cease
to be a legal tender, save to such extent as
may be specified in the notification.
CHAPTER IV
D
IMINISHED, D EFACED AND C OUNTERFEIT C OINS
9. (1) Where any coin which has been
minted and issued by or under the authority
of the Government is tendered to any person
authorised by it to act under this section, and
Decimal
system of
coinage.
Power to
call in
coin.
Power to
certain
persons to
cut,
diminished
or defaced
coins.

37
such person has reason to believe that the
coin—
(a) has been diminished in weight so
as to be more than such per cent. below
standard weight as provided in section 5;
or
(b) has been defaced,
he shall, by himself or through another
person, cut or break the coin.
(2) A person cutting or breaking coin under
the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (1)
shall receive and pay for the coin at its face
value.
(3) A person cutting or breaking coin under
the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1)
shall observe the following procedure,
namely:—
(a) if such person has reason to believe
that the coin has been fraudulently defaced,
he shall return the pieces to the person
tendering the coin, who shall bear the loss
caused by such cutting or breaking;
(b) if such person has reason to believe,
that the coin has not been fraudulently
defaced, he shall receive and pay for the
coin at its face value.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section a coin which, there is reason to believe,
has been defaced by sweating shall be deemed
to have been fraudulently defaced.
10. Where any coin minted or issued by
or under the authority of the Government is
tendered to any person authorised by the
Government under section 9 and such person
has reason to believe that the coin is
counterfeit, he shall by himself or through
another person cut or break the coin, and the
tenderer shall bear the loss caused by such
cutting or breaking.
Power to
certain
persons to
cut
counterfeit
coins.

38
11. Any officer of the Mint duly
empowered by the Government may in writing
authorise any other organisation of the
Government to melt withdrawn coins or take
any help of such organisation for the said
purpose.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section “organisation” means any Government
industrial unit or public sector undertaking
possessing melting facilities.
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND P ENALTIES
12. (1) No person shall—
(i) use any metal piece as coin whether
stamped or unstamped, intended to be used
as money except by the authority of the
Government, or
(ii) melt or destroy any coin, or
(iii) use coin other than as a medium of
exchange, or
(iv) have in his possession, custody or
control,—
(a) any melted coin, whether in the
molten state or in a solid state, or
(b) any coin in a destroyed or
mutilated state, or
(c) coins substantially in excess of his
reasonable requirements for the purpose of
selling such coins for value other than their
face value or for melting or for destroying
or for disposing these coins other than as
a medium of exchange.
Explanation .—For the purposes of
determining the reasonable requirements of
coins of a person, due regard shall be had to—
(i) his total daily requirements of coins;
(ii) the nature of his business,
occupation or profession;
Power of
Mint to
delegate its
functions.
Prohibition
of making
or melting
or
destruction
of coins.

39
(iii) the mode of his acquisition of
coins; and
(iv) the manner in which, and the place
at which, such coins are being possessed,
held or controlled by him.
(2) Whoever is found to be in possession
of any metal or material which contain alloys
in the same proportions in which they have
been used in the manufacture of any coin shall
be presumed, until the contrary is proved,
to have contravened the provisions of
sub-section (1).
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply—
(i) to any person who is found in
possession of any metal or scraps or scissel,
etc., of non-recyclable coinage metal, which
he may so possess as a result of valid
disposal by auctions by a Mint;
(ii) to the Mint, Reserve Bank of India
and its authorised agents, and suppliers of
coins or coin blanks to the extent of orders
placed by or under the authority of the
Government until their supply or
completion of orders placed by the
Government;
(iii) to any prospective supplier who
intends to supply coin or coin blanks as
samples against a valid tender documents
purchased by him provided that quantity
is in reasonable agreement with quantity
of samples to be supplied.
13. Whoever contravenes any provisions of
section 12 shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to seven
years and with fine.
14. (1) No person shall—
(a) make or issue or attempt to issue
any metal piece except as provided under
section 4 for the purpose of coin;
(b) possess, custody or control of any
metal piece with the intent to issue the
piece for use as money for a medium of
exchange.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 12.
Prohibition
and
penalty for
unlawful
making,
issue or
possession
of pieces
of metal to
be used as
money.

40
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to one year
or with fine or with both:
Provided that if any person convicted
under this section is again convicted, he shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to three years or with fine or with both.
15. (1) No person shall bring by sea or by
land or by air into India of any piece of metal
to be used as coin except with the authority
or permission of the Government.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall be punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to seven
years and with fine.
16. (1) Where an offence under this Act
has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct
of its business, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall render any person liable to
any punishment, if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding, anything contained in
sub-section (1), where any offence under this
Act has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or is
Prohibition
and
penalty for
bringing
metal piece
for use as
coin.
Offences by
companies.

41
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any
director, manager, secretary or other officer,
such director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company shall be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly .
Explanation .—For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate
and includes a firm, society or other association
of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to—
(i) a firm, means a partner or
proprietor of the firm;
(ii) a society or other association of
individuals, means the person who is
entrusted, under the rules of the society
or other association, with the management
of the affairs of the society or other
association of the individuals, as the case
may be.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
17. Any coin or metal in relation to which
any offence under this Act has been committed
shall be forfeited to the Government.
18. Nothing in the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958 shall apply to offences under this
Act.
19. Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, offences
under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable,
but shall not be compoundable.
Forfeiture.
Probation
of
Offenders
Act, 1958
not to
apply to
offences
under this
Act.
Offences to
be
cognizable,
bailable
and non-
compound-
able.
20 of 1958.
2 of 1974.

42
20. In the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934,—
(i) in section 2, in clause (d), for the
words and figures “the Indian Coinage Act,
1906”, the words and figures “the Coinage
Act, 2009” shall be substituted;
(ii) in section 39, for the words and
figures “the Indian Coinage Act, 1906”, at
both the places where they occur, the
words and figures “the Coinage Act, 2009”
shall be substituted.
21. Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, offences under this Act may be tried
summarily by a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class or a Metropolitan Magistrate.
22. No suit or other legal proceedings shaIl
lie against any person in respect of anything
which is in good faith done, or intended to be
done, under or in pursuance of the provisions
of this Act.
23. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
may appear it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
24. (1) The Government may, by
notification, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
Amendment
of Act 2 of
1934.
Offences
may be
tried
summarily.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power to
make rules.
3 of 1906.
2 of 1974.
3 of 1906.

43
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the use of metal for the purpose
of making any coin under clause (f) of
section 2;
(b) the per cent. of metals for any coin
under clause (i) of section 2;
(c) the standard weight for any coin
under clause (l) of section 2;
(d) the dimensions, designs, metals,
mixed metals or their composition, for
coins under section 4;
(e) the standard weight of coins and
the remedy allowed in making such coins
under section 5;
(f) the coin of any denomination which
has not been defaced and has not lost
weight as to be less than such weight
issued under section 6.
25. Every rule made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect as the case may be so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
26. Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to
prohibit or restrict the making at any Mint in
India of coins intended for issue as money by
the foreign Government of any territories
beyond the limits of India.
Rules to be
laid before
Parliament.
Saving of
making
other coins
at Mints.

44
 27. (1) The following enactments are
hereby repealed:—
(a) the Metal Tokens Act, 1889;
(b) the Coinage Act, 1906;
(c) the Bronze Coin (Legal Tender)
Act, 1918;
(d) the Small Coins (Offences)Act, 1971.
(2) The repeal by this Act of the enactments
specified in sub-section (1) shall not—
(a) affect any other enactment in which
the repealed enactment has been applied,
incorporated or referred to;
(b) affect the validity, invalidity, effect
or consequences of anything already done
or suffered, or any right, title, obligation
or liability already acquired, accrued or
incurred or any remedy or proceeding in
respect thereof, or any release or discharge
of or from any debt, penalty, obligation,
liability, claim or demand, or any
indemnity already granted, or the proof of
any past act or thing;
(c) affect any principle or rule of law,
or established jurisdiction, form or course
of pleading, practice or procedure, or
existing usage, custom, privilege,
restriction, exemption, office or
appointment, notwithstanding that the
same respectively may have been in any
manner affirmed or recognised or derived
by, in or from any enactment hereby
repealed;
(d) revive or restore any jurisdiction,
office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege,
restriction, exemption, usage, practice,
procedure or other matter or thing not now
existing or in force.
Repeal and
savings.
1 of 1889.
3 of 1906.
22 of 1918.
52 of 1971.

45
(3) The mention of particular matters in
sub-section (1) shal1 not be held to prejudice
or affect the general application of section 6 of
the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to
the effect of repeals.
28. Notwithstanding the repeal of the
enactments specified in section 27, all coins
which were issued as legal tender under the
said enactments immediately preceding the
date on which the Coinage Act, 2009 receives
the assent of the President shal1 continue to
be legal tender in payment or on account.
Continuance
of existing
coins.
10 of 1897.

46
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Coinage Act, 1906 provides for applicability, denomination,
dimension, design and composition of coins, standard weight of coins
and the limit up to which the coin is a legal tender. It empowers the
Central Government to establish and abolish Mints and to call in
coins and also power to certain persons to cut, diminished or
counterfeit or defaced coins and also provides for the procedure in
regard to cut coins or coins liable to be cut. The Act also includes
saving provision for making of other coins for issue as money by the
Government of other territory beyond the limits of India. It also
includes a temporary provision with respect to certain Hyderabad
coins which should be continued as a legal tender in that State as it
used to be before the commencement of this Act.
In order to take care of acute shortage of small coins in the
country, the Small Coins (Offences) Act, 1971 was enacted to take
steps to avoid such shortages in the interest of the general public. It
provides for prevention of melting or destruction of small coins or
hoarding of small coins for the purpose of melting and destruction
and provides punishment for melting and destruction of coins.
In order to prohibit the making or the possession for issue or the
issue by private person of pieces of metal for use as money, the
Metal Tokens Act, 1889 was enacted to prohibit the Railways
administration and the local authorities to receive or introduce any
piece of metal token as money. It provides for penalty for unlawful
making, issue or possession of such metal token. It empowers the
Central Government to restrict the import of such piece of metals as
may be used as money. Further, the Bronze Coin (Legal Tender) Act,
1918 was enacted to provide that where bronze coins of any of the
denominations specified in section 8 of the Coinage Act, 1906 are
coined outside Part A and Part B States at the request of the Central
Government and if it is satisfied that such coins are in accordance
with the requirements of section 9 and of any notification for the
time being in force under section 10, it may , by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct the issue of any such coins, and thereafter any
such coins shall be legal tender in payment or on account in the
same way and to the same extent as if they were coins referred to in
section 10, and the provisions shall apply accordingly .

47
2. The then Minister of Finance, in the Budget Speech of 1993,
announced setting up of a special review group in every Ministry or
Department to review the existing laws and procedures and identify
changes needed in the light of the new policies. The Group constituted
in the Department of Economic Affairs and subsequently another
Expert Group constituted by the Cabinet Secretariat in 1997, and,
thereafter, a Commission constituted to review administrative laws in
1998 recommended the amalgamation of the Coinage Act, 1906, the
Metal Tokens Act, 1889 and the Small Coins (Offences) Act, 1971 in
one comprehensive Act. The Law Commission in its 159th Report on
Repeal and Amendments of Laws had also recommended for
consolidation of the above Acts. Later on, it was felt that the Bronze
Coin (Legal Tender) Act, 1918 may also be repealed, having become
obsolete as bronze coins have been removed from circulation many
years back.
3. In the meantime, the management of all the India Government
Mints was transferred to a Corporation, namely , the Security Printing
and Minting Corporation of India Limited which was formed in 2006
after consideration and approval of the Cabinet in its meeting held
on 23-08-2005 to reorganise Mints as per their operational requirements
and this development has been factored in while preparing the Coinage
Bill, 2009.
4. The salient features of the Bill, inter alia , are as follows:—
(i) it provides for amalgamation of four Acts, namely, the Metal
Tokens Act, 1889, the Coinage Act, 1906, the Bronze Coin
(Legal Tender) Act, 1918 and the Small Coins (Offences)
Act, 1971 into one Act;
(ii) it provides for punishment with imprisonment which may
extend to seven years and with fine if a person is found to
be making or melting or destructing the coins and for
deletion of the provisions of above mentioned four Acts
which have since become redundant;
(iii) it repeals the four aforesaid Acts which have since become
obsolete.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE
N
EW D ELHI;
The 17th September, 2009.

48
Notes on clauses
Clause  1 of the Bill provides for short title, extent and
commencement.
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definitions of the terms used in
the Bill.
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Government to establish and
abolish Mints and also provides that the Mints may be managed by
other persons authorised in this behalf by the Central Government. It
further provides that the Mints established before the commencement
of this Act shall be deemed to have been established by the
Government.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for denominations, dimensions,
designs and composition of the coins as may be prescribed by the
Government. However, such denomination shall not be higher than
one thousand rupees.
Clause 5 provides for standard weight of any coin for minting
under clause 4 and empowers the Government to prescribe the remedy
allowed in making such coins from time to time.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the sum for which certain specified
coins will be a legal tender and the silver coins issued under the
Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 1906), after the 10th day of March, 1940, and
all nickel, copper and bronze coins which may have been issued before
the 24th day of January, 1942, shall continue as before to be a legal
tender.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the decimal system of coinage
and provides that a rupee shall be divided into one hundred units
and empowers the Government to designate any such units by
notification, under such name as it thinks fit.
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Government to call in any coin
of any date or denomination from a specified date from which the
said coin shall cease to be legal tender, however, save to the extent
as may be specified in the notification.
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers certain persons to cut diminished
or to defaced coins which have been diminished in weight by such

49
per cent. below the provided standard weight. It also provides for
payment of face value of the coin when there is reason to believe
that the coin has not been defaced fraudulently. The person cutting
or breaking the coin has to observe the procedure as specified.
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers certain persons to cut or break the
counterfeit coins where they have reasons to believe that coins are
counterfeit.
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers a Mint to delegate its functions to
any organisation of the Government with regard to melting of the
withdrawn coins.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for prohibition of making or melting
or destruction of coins or having possession, custody or control of
melted coins or coins in mutilated or destroyed state. It also prohibits
possession of coins by any person in excess of reasonable daily
requirement of the coins for carrying out his business, occupation or
profession. But this provision does not apply to Mint, Reserve Bank
of India or any person having possession of coins as a result of valid
auction by a Mint.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for penalty of imprisonment and
fine for contravention of clause 12.
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the prohibition of unlawful
making, issue or possession, custody or control of pieces of any metal
to be used as money and also punishment for contravention of this
provision with imprisonment up to one year or fine or with both.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the prohibition for bringing a
metal piece for use as coin into India without the permission of
Government by sea, land or air and punishment for its contravention.
Clause 16 of the Bill provides that every person who at the time
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of its business, shall be deemed to be
guilty of that offence.
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for the forfeiture of any coin or
metal in relation to which any offence under this Act has been
committed.
Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958 (20 of 1958) shall not apply to offences under this Act.

50
Clause 19 of the Bill provides for the offences to be cognizable,
bailable and non-compoundable.
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the consequential amendment in
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) in respect of references
of the Indian Coinage Act, 1906 occurring therein.
Clause 21 of the Bill provides that notwithstanding the provisions
of section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
the offences are to be tried summarily by a Judicial Magistrate of the
first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate.
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for protection of action taken in
good faith in pursuance of the provisions of this Bill.
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Government to make provision
by order published in the Official Gazette, to remove difficulties which
may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. However,
such order shall not be made after the expiry of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules to
carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for laying of the rules made under
this Act before each House of Parliament.
Clause 26 of the Bill enables the Mints to make coins intended for
the issue as money by foreign Government beyond the limits of India.
Clause 27 of the Bill provides for repeal of the Metal Tokens Act,
1889 (1 of 1889), the Coinage Act, 1906 (3 of 1906), the Bronze Coin
(Legal Tender) Act, 1918 (22 of 1918) and the Small Coins (Offences)
Act, 1971 (52 of 1971) and also provides that repeal of these enactments
is not to affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of
anything done or suffered, any right acquired, accrued or liability
incurred, etc., from the enactments repealed.
Clause 28 of the Bill provides for continuance of existing coins as
legal tender in payment or on account.

51
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Mint at any
place which may be managed by the Government of India in the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs or by any other
person which may be authorised for this purpose. However, the Mints
established before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to
have been established by the Government under this clause.
2. Clause 3 also provides for abolition of any Mint by the
Government of India. However, in public interest, it also provides for
minting of coins by any organisation or Government of any foreign
country for acquiring such coins.
3. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other expenditure
of recurring or non-recurring nature.

52
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Government to prescribe the
dimensions and design of coins containing such metal or mixed metals
which may be minted at the Mints or any other place authorised
under the proviso to clause 3.
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Government to prescribe the
standard weight of the coin of any denomination which may be minted
under the provisions of clause 4.
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Government to designate by
notification in the Official Gazette any unit of a rupee under such
name as it thinks fit.
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Government to call in with
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification in the
Official Gazette any coin of whatever date or denomination to cease
to be a legal tender from such date.
Clause 23 of the Bill empowers the Government to pass an order
published in the Official Gazette to remove the difficulty arising in
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules,
by notification in the Official Gazette, to carry out the purposes of
this Act.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides that every rule made under this
Act shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
The matters in respect of which notification may be issued or
rules to be made under the aforesaid provisions pertain to procedure
or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

53
LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to consolidate the laws relating to coinage and the Mints, the protection
of coinage and to provide for the prohibition of melting or
destruction of coins and prohibit the making or the possession
thereof for issue and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
—————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance )