 1 
40 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
 
(2010-11) 
  
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance  
(Department of Financial Services) 
 
 
 
THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY  
AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BILL, 2011 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
                                        
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
August, 2011/ Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)


 2 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance  
(Department of Financial Services) 
 
 
THE PENSION FUND REGULATORY  
AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BILL, 2011 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  30 August, 2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August, 2011/ Bhadra,  1933 (Saka)


 3 
CONTENTS 
 
                      PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .............................….…………………(iii)   
INTRODUCTION ..................................................…………………….……….. (iv) 
 
REPORT 
I  Background 
 
1 
II  Rationale for Legislation 
 
2 
III  Salient features of the PFRDA Bill, 2011 
 
2 
IV  Main recommendations of the Committee on PFRDA Bill, 
2005 – 21st Report (14th Lok Sabha) 
 
5 
V  The provisions incorporated in the PFRDA Bill, 2011 in 
pursuance to the Committee‘s recommendations (21st 
Report, 14th Lok Sabha) 
 
8 
VI  New provisions incorporated in the PFRDA Bill, 2011 vis-à-
vis the PFRDA Bill, 2005 
  
12 
VII  Insight from the international experience on pension reforms 
 
14 
VIII  Coverage of the voluntary NPS  
 
15 
IX  Performance of pension fund managers 17 
X  Foreign Investment Policy for Pension Sector 
 
21 
XI  Clause 4 Composition of Authority 
 
23 
XII  Clause 14 – Duties, Powers and Functions of Authority 
 
24 
XIII  Clause 20 –National Pension System- withdrawal, 
guaranteed returns, etc. 
 
26 
XIV  Clause 23 – Pension Funds  
 
30 
XV  Clause 44 – Establishment of Pension Advisory Committee 32 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I.       Dissent note submitted by Shri Moinul Hassan, MP…………………….   36   
II.       Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 21 July, 2011,  
         18 August, 2011 and 29 August, 2011...........……………………………   37   
  
   III.      The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2011*   
 
*  Not appended in cyclostyled copy 

 4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2010-11    
 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
   MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3. Vacant** 
4. Shri C.M. Chang 
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
12. Smt. Jaya Prada  Nahata 
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
16. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara 
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
18. Shri Manicka Tagore 
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav 
21. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
23.   Shri Raashid Alvi 
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
25.   Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan 
27.   Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
28.   Shri Mahendra Mohan 
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
31.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 28.01.2011 vice Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, ceased to be a member of the 
Committee on his resignation from Lok Sabha. 
**  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f 12.07.2011 consequent upon his 
induction to the Union Council of Ministers 

 5 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by the 
Committee, present this Fortieth Repo rt on the P ension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority Bill, 2011. 
 2. The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2011 (PFRDA Bill, 
2011) introduced in Lok Sabha on 24 March, 2011, was referred to the Committee on 29 March, 
2011 for e xamination and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  The Standing Committee on Finance 
had earlier examined the P ension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 200 5 and 
presented report on the same in the Parliament on 26 July, 2005.  However, the said Bill (PFRDA 
Bill, 2005) could not be passed in the Parliament due to the lapse of 14th Lok Sabha. 
 3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions  contained in the 
PFRDA Bill, 2005 from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 4.    The Committee, at their sitting held on 21 July and 18th August, 2011 took evidence 
of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services).   
5.      The Committee, at their sitting held on 29 August, 2011 considered and adopted the 
draft report and authorised the Chairman to finalise the same and present it to the Parliament. 
6.    The Committee wish to express their than ks to the officials of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) as well as the officials of Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material 
and information which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.  
7. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;                YASHWANT SINHA, 
29 August, 2010                                                            Chairman, 
07 Bhadra, 1933(Saka)                                                     Standing Committee on Finance.  
 

 6 
REPORT 
 
I.    Background 
 
 
Pension reforms in most countries initially are driven by the budgetary difficulties of 
supporting a public pension system, the longer -term problems of ageing of the population 
and social change, including breakdown of traditional family support for old age income 
security, are equally important factors . However, in India, in the absence of a country -
wide social security system (formal pension coverage being about 12% of the working 
population), while the ageing and social change are important considerations for 
introducing pension reform in the unorgani sed sector, fiscal stress of the defined benefit 
pension system was the major factor driving pension reforms for employees in the 
organized public sector (Government employees).  In this regard, there were series of 
Budget announcements starting from 2001 -02 and in the years 2002 -03 and 2003 -04, 
Government underlined the need for pension reforms for both Central Government 
employees and the workers in the unorganised sector. To implement these 
announcements the Government had introduced the New Pension System (NPS). 
2. The New Pension System (NPS) is based on the concept of defined contribution 
pension system. The Government approved in August 2003 the proposal to implement 
the budget announcement of 2003 -04 relating to introducing a new restructured defined  
contribution pension system for new entrants to Central Government service, except to 
Armed Forces, in the first stage, replacing the then existing system of defined benefit 
pension system. The new system would also be available, on a voluntary basis, to all 
persons including self employed professionals and others in the unorganised sector. 
3. Accordingly the Central Government operationalised the New Pension System 
(NPS) from the 1 st January, 2004 through a notification dated the 22 nd December, 2003. 
The NPS is mandatory for new recruits to the Central Government services (except the 
armed forces). The Government had constituted an interim pension sector regulator 
named as ―The Interim Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority‖ through a 
Government Resolution in October, 2003 as a precursor to a statutory regulator. The 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2005 (hereafter referred to as 
PFRDA Bill, 2005) was introduced in Lok Sabha in March, 2005 to establish a statutory 
Pension F und Regulatory and Development Authority. The PFRDA Bill, 2005 was 

 7 
referred to the Standing Committee on Finance on the 24 th March, 2005 for examination 
and report thereon. The Standing Committee on Finance gave its Report on the 26 th July, 
2005. The Gover nment proposed official amendments in January, 2009 to give effect to 
certain recommendations of the Standing Committee on Finance, but the official 
amendments could not be moved and the PFRDA Bill, 2005 could not be considered and 
passed and the same lapsed due to dissolution of the 14th Lok Sabha. 
 
II.   Rationale for legislation 
 
4. An early legislative mandate was considered necessary as the NPS was already in 
place without the statutory regulatory mechanism. However, pending the passage of the 
PFRDA Bill, 2005, the Interim Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority has 
created the institutional arrangement of NPS Trust, central recordkeeping agency, 
pension fund and a trustee bank. Twenty -Seven State Governments and Union territories 
have adopted the NPS for their employees and are in the process of extending the NPS 
to their employees. Sixteen State Governments have already joined the NPS institutional 
architecture. The NPS has been launched for all citizens of the country including 
unorganised sector workers, on voluntary basis, with effect from the 1 st May, 2009. It has 
now become necessary to replace the interim arrangements with proper infrastructure 
under a regulatory framework in order to avoid future complications. 
5. On the need for the le gislation on the pension sector, Secretary, Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) during briefing of the Committee held on 
21.7.2011 made the following oral submission: 
―A large number of employees of the Central Government, 
State/UT Governments and other entities had joined the NPS since 
its inception in January, 2004. In order to effectively invest and 
manage huge funds belonging to a large number of subscribers 
and to ensure the integrity of the NPS, creation of a statutory 
PFRDA with we ll-defined powers, duties and responsibilities was 
considered absolutely necessary and would benefit all NPS 
subscribers.‖ 
 
III.    Salient features of the PFRDA Bill, 2011 
 
6. In view of the urgency of the matter, the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2011 is being introduced in Parliament to provide for the 

 8 
establishment of a statutory Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
(PFRDA) to promote old age income security by establishing, developing and regulating 
pension funds,  to protect the interests of subscribers of various pension fund schemes 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24 March, 
2011 and the s ame has been referred to the Standing Committee on Finance on 29 
March, 2011 for examination and report thereon. The Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2011, inter alia, provides for: 
(a) establishing a statutory regulatory body to be called the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority which will undertake promotional, 
developmental and regulatory functions in respect of pension funds; 
(b) empowering the PFRDA to regulate the National Pension System, as amended 
from time to time; 
(c) empowering the PFRDA to perform promotional, developmental and regulatory 
functions relating to pension funds (including authorising and regulating 
intermediaries) through regulations or guidelines, prescribing the disclosure 
standards, protecting the interests of subscribers to schemes of pension funds; 
(d) authorising the PFRDA to levy fees for services rendered, etc., to meet its 
expenses; 
(e) empowering the PFRDA to impose penalties for any violation of the provisions 
of the legislation, rules, regulations, etc. 
 
 Proposed modifications in the PFRDA Bill, 2011 vis-à-vis the PFRDA Bill, 2005 
 
7. It has been stated in the objects and reasons of the Bill that the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2011 is broadly on the lines of the PFRDA 
Bill, 2005 as modified by the official amendments proposed to the Bill by the Government 
in January, 2009. The salient features of the proposed modifications in the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2011 are as under:— 
(a) the foreign investment policy for pension sector intermediaries, (including the 
pension funds and central recordkeeping agency) would be determined and 
notified outside the proposed legislation under the Foreign Exchange Management 
Act, 1999. This is on lin es with the recent legislations in the financial sector where 

 9 
foreign investment is determined under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 
1999. In the PFRDA Bill, 2005, as modified by the official amendments, the foreign 
investment policy for pension funds  and central recordkeeping agency was part of 
the said Bill; 
(b) to make a provision for establishment of PFRDA consisting of a Chairperson, 
three Whole -time Members and three Part -time Members instead of a 
Chairperson, three Whole-time Members and two Par t-time Members as proposed 
in the PFRDA Bill, 2005, as modified by the official amendments; 
(c) to make a provision that the period of transitional arrangement for continuance 
of the intermediary‘s business would be six months till his application for 
registration certificate is decided by the PFRDA instead of three months as 
provided in PFRDA Bill, 2005; 
(d) to make certain new provisions providing that, — 
(i) actions done by the Interim Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority would also be saved; 
(ii) the New Pension System as provided in the PFRDA Bill, 2005 would 
be renamed as the National Pension System in the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2011; 
(iii) the National Pension System Trust would be recognised as an interme diary in 
the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2011; 
(iv) the main features of the National Pension System would be part of the statute 
and the Government notification of 22nd December, 2003 introducing the NPS 
could be modified through the regulations under the proposed legislation; 
(v) no withdrwals shall be permitted from the individual Tier -I Pension Account, 
except as may be specified under the regulations; and 
(vi) the provisions of clause 7 of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Dev elopment 
Authority Bill, 2011 relating to restriction on future employment of Members of the 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority would also be applied to the 
Chairperson and Members of the Interim Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority. 
 
 
 

 10 
IV.      Main recommendations of the Committee on PFRDA Bill, 2005 – 21st Report 
(14th Lok Sabha)  
 
8. During the course of undertaking examination of the PFRDA Bill, 2005, for report 
thereon, the Committee had sought memoranda and had personal he arings of a cross -
section of experts and representatives of employees associations, trade unions and 
individuals apart from taking evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Finance, 
Chairman, PFRDA and Chairman IRDA, with a view to seek clarifications  on various 
aspects of the ‗New Pension System‘ viz. contributory pension system and the provisions 
of PFRDA Bill, 2005. Most of the trade and employees unions  contended that the 
‗contributory pension scheme‘ and the provisions of the PFRDA Bill seek to de prive 
government employees of their old age security guarantee by way of statutory pension, 
which is considered the best of social security measures . On the other hand, the 
Chambers of Commerce as well as most of the Experts have supported the pension 
reform measures and establishment of Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority. It has been contended that the defined benefit pension scheme for Civil 
Servants was beginning to consume an alarming proportion of Central and State 
Government revenues an d was therefore becoming unsustainable, EPFO Members 
received poor returns on their contributions and on the other end of the spectrum, social 
assistance schemes did not reach many of the poorest.  
9. The Committee, having considered the diverse views expr essed from a cross -
section of experts and representatives of employees associations, trade unions and 
individuals and the clarifications given by the Ministry of Finance were of the opinion that 
the reform process in the pension sector involving the settin g up of the PFRDA as a 
statutory regulatory body for managing the NPS was an urgent necessity mainly on 
account of burgeoning fiscal stress of pension payments on the Central and State 
revenues and the need to provide a viable alternative to the populace a t large to save for 
old age income security. The Committee added that the apprehensions expressed by the 
concerned sections on the new contributory pension system were borne out of genuine 
concerns. The Committee were of the opinion that such apprehensions  could be 
minimised, if not totally eliminated, if proper safeguards were introduced in the larger 
interest of the subscribers - both the Government employees who are compulsorily 
covered under the scheme as well as the others. After having considered the PFRDA Bill, 

 11 
2005 clause wise, the Committee approved the same for enactment subject to certain 
modifications/amendments/ recommendations. 
10. The gist of the observations/recommendations in the 21 st Report (14th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on finance on the PFRDA, Bill 2005 are given below: 
(i) Composition of Authority –(Clause 4) 
The Committee recommended that the clause be rephrased to clearly depict the 
composition of the authority viz. (a) a Chairperson; (b) not more than three whole time 
members; a nd (c) not more than two part -time members. The Committee desired that 
selection of both whole -time and part -time members of the Authority should be confined 
to professionals having experience in economics or finance or law only. 
 
(ii) Duties, Powers and Functions of Authority - (Clause 14) 
        The Committee were of the view that with specific reference to matters relating to 
protection of subscribers’ interests, the following aspects should inter -alia be inserted in 
clause 14:  
- Ensuring safety of the subscribers’ contributions to various pension schemes and 
funds under the New Pension System;  
- Ensuring payment of benefits or returns in accordance with guarantees, if any, 
attached to the pension schemes or investment options chosen; and  
- Ensuring that t he intermediation and other operational costs under the New 
Pension System do not have an adverse bearing on the returns to the subscribers. 
 
(iii) New Pension System - (Clause 20) 
  (a) Withdrawal from Pension Account: 
 The Committee desired that even in the ca se of Tier I account, an element of 
flexibility should be provided under the New Pension System to enable subscribers to 
withdraw moneys to meet unforeseen and urgent expenses. 
      (b) Benefits to subscribers: 
The Committee recommended that the option of  100% investment of   the pension 
funds in Government Securities be made available to the subscribers and this aspect be 
indicated in clear terms in Clause 20 (c) of the PFRDA Bill.  
The Committee recommend that in the matter of selection of pension fund 
managers preference be given to such companies which offer guarantees on returns. 

 12 
As regards the coverage of the unorganised sector, the Committee desired that the 
Government must bring forward a comprehensive legislation in order to cater to the social 
security of the unorganised sector inclusive of pension coverage of the workforce 
simultaneous to the setting up of PFRDA as a statutory body. 
 
(iv) Pension Funds – (Clause 23) 
The Committee recommended that the aspect about one of the pension funds being from 
the public sector be specified in clear terms in Clause 23 of the PFRDA Bill which would 
be in the interest of subscribers. 
 
(v) Registration of Intermediaries – (Clause 24) 
 
   The Committee were the opinion that the criteria for selection of other 
intermediaries who would become operative under the New Pension System viz. Central 
Record Keeping Agency etc. also need to be specified in the Bill.  
The Committee were of the considered opinion that any decision relating to permitting FDI 
in the pension sector should  be implemented only by way of bringing forward suitable 
amendment in the present legislation. They were further of the view that the decisions 
relating to permitting FDI in the pension sector and deployment of pension funds outside 
the Country, should, in no way be in variance with the related provisions applicable to the 
insurance sector. 
 
(vi) Attachment of Assets and Supersession of Management of  Intermediary – (Clause – 28) 
 
The Committee found that no mention under this Clause had been made with rega rd to 
the appointment of an Administrator in the event of dissolution of the Board. The 
Committee desired that clause 28 be suitably amended for enabling the appointment of 
an Administrator. 
 
(vi) Power to Make Regulations 
The Committee recommended that a Pensi on Fund Advisory Committee on lines similar 
to that of IRDA may be set up, with the representatives of the employees and subscribers 
co-opted into it.  
The Committee were of the view that the initial or broad contours of the regulations 
governing the imple mentation of the New Pension System under the infrastructure of 

 13 
PFRDA should be framed and made clear in the public domain prior to the enactment of 
the PFRDA Bill. 
 
(vii) Delegation of Powers – (Clause 50) 
 
             To protect the interests of the subscribe rs the Committee recommended that the 
representatives of the employees associations and subscribers should be co -opted in the 
special committees to be set up by the Authority. 
 
V. The provisions incorporated in the PFRDA Bill, 2011 in pursuance to the 
recommendations of the Committee (21st Report - 14th Lok Sabha) 
 
11. The recommendations accepted and the incorporated the PFRDA Bill, 2011 as 
furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) are summarized 
in the following table: 
Sl. 
No. 
Recommendation of the Standing Committee 
on Finance 
Proposed Amendment in 
PFRDA Bill, 2011 
 
1 Paragraph 62: to insert the following additional 
aspects in clause 14 to ensure safety of 
subscribers‘ contributions, payment of benefits 
in accordance with gu arantees, if any, attached 
to the pension schemes or investment options 
chosen; and ensuring that costs under the NPS 
do not have an adverse bearing on returns. 
   
Accepted. Sub-Clause (e) of 
Clause 14 of the PFRDA Bill, 
2011 suitably worded. 
2 Paragraph 65: to include the differentiation 
between Tier-I and Tier II accounts as a part of 
the basic or essential features of the New 
Pension System in clause 20 of the Bill. 
 
Accepted. 
Clause 20 of the PFRDA Bill, 
2011 suitably worded. 
3 Paragraph 74: to make a vailable to subscribers 
an option of 100% investment in Government 
securities and to indicate this in the Bill; 
Accepted. 
Clause 20 suitably worded by 
adding a proviso to new sub -
clause (d) of clause 20 of the 
PFRDA Bill, 2011. 
4 Paragraph 79: to specify in the Bill that one of 
the pension funds would be from the public 
sector; 
Accepted. 
A proviso in sub -clause (2) of 
Clause 23 of the PFRDA Bill, 
2011 added. 
5 Paragraph 86: Bill to include a provision The prohibition of offshore 

 14 
regarding FDI; such decisions and decisions 
relating to deployment of pension funds outside 
the country not to be at variance with related 
provisions applicable to the insurance sector. 
investment of subscribers‘ 
funds accepted. Clause 24 of 
the PFRDA Bill, 2011 inserted 
providing that no deployment of 
pension funds of subscribers 
overseas would be allowed. 
6 Paragraph 89: to suitably amend clause 28 for 
enabling the appointment of an Administrator 
under this clause; and 
 
Accepted. 
Sub-clause (3) of clause 30 of 
the PFRDA Bill, 201 1 provides 
for management of affairs of 
the intermediary by the 
Administrator. 
7 Paragraph 97: to co -opt representatives of 
employees‘ associations and subscribers in the 
special committees to be set up by PFRDA 
under clause 50. 
Accepted. This has been 
addressed in the proposed 
Pension Advisory Committee 
under new Clause 44 of the 
PFRDA Bill, 2011. 
 
Recommendations of the 21 st report of the Committee that were partially accepted by the 
Government: 
12. Recommendations of the 21st report of Standing Committee on Finance on PFRDA 
Bill, 2005 that are partially accepted by the Government as furnished by the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) are as below: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Recommendation  Proposal for Partial 
Acceptance in the PFRDA 
Bill, 2011 
1 Paragraph 59: to clearly depict the composition 
of the Authority; viz. (a) a Chairperson; (b) not 
more than three whole time members; and (c) 
not more than two part -time members; to select 
members of the Authority only from amongst 
professionals having experience in economics or 
finance or law; one of the part -time members to 
be a Central Government nominee.  
It is proposed to accept the 
recommendation regarding 
number of full -time members 
but that regarding areas of 
specialisation/background the 
restriction m ay not be 
accepted.  
(Clause 4 of the PFRDA Bill, 
2011 suitably amended). 
 
2 Paragraph 67: to allow withdrawal from Tier I 
account also or repayable advance. 
Sub-Clause (b) of Clause 20 of 
the PFRDA Bill, 2011 permits 
withdrawals under the 
Regulations. As  the facility of 
withdrawal is provided under 
Tier-II account without any 

 15 
conditions attached, withdrawal 
should not be generally 
permitted from Tier -I pension 
account. Further, NPS is aimed 
at providing old age income 
security and not at meeting 
periodic or occasional fund 
requirements during the 
working period.  If withdrawals 
were to be freely permitted, the 
link between contributions and 
final benefits would be 
weakened. In fact, unrestricted 
withdrawals will result in trends 
noticed in General Providen t 
Fund and Employees‘ 
Provident Fund namely, small 
value balances at the time of 
retirement. This will   reduce 
the terminal pension wealth 
available for purchase of 
annuities and defeat the very 
objective of providing 
meaningful old age income 
security. S o, withdrawals for 
only limited purpose (e.g. 
critical illness of the subscriber) 
may be permitted under the 
regulations. 
 
3 Paragraph 75: to give preference to such 
pension fund managers that guarantee returns.  
It is being proposed that the 
criteria for  selection will also 
include track record and ability 
to offer guaranteed returns. 
(new clause 25 of the PFRDA 
Bill, 2011). 
 
4 Paragraph 85: to spell out the pre -requisites 
relating to capital structure and experience 
criteria for selection of pension fun ds and other 
intermediaries in the Bill.  
 
It is proposed to incorporate 
only qualitative criteria for 
selection of intermediaries, 
including pension funds, such 
as minimum capital 
requirement, past track record, 
ability to provide guaranteed 
returns, cost s and fees, 
geographical reach, customer 
base, information technology 
capability, human resources 

 16 
etc.  
(new clause 25 of the PFRDA 
Bill, 2011). 
5 Paragraph 86: Bill to include a provision 
regarding FDI. Such decisions not to be at 
variance with related provisions applicable to the 
insurance sector. 
FDI could be capped at any 
percent including at 26% under 
the general regulations framed 
under provisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 
1999. So, no express 
provisions are inserted in the 
PFRDA Bill, 2011. 
 
6 Paragraph 94: to set up a Pension Advisory 
Committee on lines similar to that of IRDA, with 
the representatives of the employees and 
subscribers co -opted into it to enable in 
safeguarding the interests of the subscribers 
and help the authority in  discharging the 
multifarious functions of regulating the pension 
funds and schemes 
It is proposed to provide for the 
establishment of a Pension 
Advisory Committee, which will 
also have representatives of 
employees and subscribers 
which will advise the Aut hority 
on matters referred to it by the 
Authority. 
(new clause 44 of the PFRDA 
Bill, 2011). 
 
7 Paragraph 95: to frame at least the broad 
contours of the regulations governing the 
implementation of the NPS and placed in the 
public domain before the enactme nt of the Bill.  
Parameters will be placed in the public domain 
by the Regulator after the Bill is passed and 
PFRDA is appointed. 
 
The idea of regulations being in 
the public domain is 
acceptable. The Interim 
Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authori ty 
(PFRDA) had placed 
preliminary draft regulations 
outlining the broad contours of 
registration, selection etc. of 
intermediaries, on the Ministry 
of Finance website for public 
comments. However, the final 
regulations can only be drafted 
by the Authority under clause 
51 after passage of the PFRDA 
Bill, 2011.  
 
 

 17 
VI.     New provisions incorporated in the PFRDA Bill, 2011 vis -à-vis the PFRDA Bill, 
2005 
 
13. New provisions incorporated in the PFRDA Bill, 2011 vis -à-vis the PFRDA Bill, 
2005 alongwith the rationale thereof as furnished by the Ministry of  Finance, (Department 
of Financial  Services) are given below: 
 
Clause No. Provisions in PFRDA Bill,2005  New/revised provisions in 
PFRDA Bill, 2011 
Clause 2.(1) g intermediary‖ includes pension 
fund, central recordkeeping 
agency, pension fund adviser, 
retirement adviser, point of 
presence and such other person or 
entity connected with collection, 
management, recordkeeping and 
distribution of accumulations; 
 
intermediary‖ includes pension 
fund, central recordk eeping 
agency, National Pension 
System Trust , pension fund 
adviser, retirement adviser, point 
of presence and such other 
person or entity connected with 
collection, management, 
recordkeeping and distribution of 
accumulations; 
 
Clause 2(1)(i) New Pension System‖ means the 
contributory pension system 
referred to in section 20 whereby 
contributions from a subscriber are 
collected in an individual pension 
account using points of presence 
and a central recordkeeping 
agency and accumulated by 
pension funds for pay offs as 
specified by regulations; 
―National Pension System‖ 
means the contributory pension 
system referred to in section 20 
whereby contributions from a 
subscriber are collected and 
accumulated in an individual 
pension account using a system 
of points of presence and, a 
central recordkeeping agency 
and accumulated by  pension 
funds for pay off  as may  be 
specified by regulations; 
Clause 5(1) The Chairperson and every whole -
time member shall hold office for 
such term as may be prescribed 
The Chairperson a nd every 
other whole-time member shall 
hold office for a term of five 
years from the date on which 
he enters upon his office and 
shall be eligible for 
reappointment :  
Provided that no person shall 
hold office as a Chairperson 
after he has attained the age of 
sixty-five years: 
Provided further that no person 
shall hold office as a whole -
time member after he has 

 18 
attained the age of sixty -two 
years. 
 
Clause 5 (2) A part-time member shall hold 
office for such term as may be 
prescribed. 
A part-time member shal l hold 
office as such for a term not 
exceeding five years from the 
date on which he enters upon 
his office. 
Clause 12 (5) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in clause ( c) of sub -
section ( 3), the Central 
Government may, by notification, 
extend the application of this Act to 
any other pension scheme 
[including any other pension 
scheme exempted and notified 
under clause (c) sub-section (3)]. 
Notwithstanding anything 
contained in clause ( c) of sub -
section ( 3), the Central 
Government may, by notification, 
extend the application of this Act 
to any other pension scheme 
[including any other pension 
scheme exempted and notified 
under clause ( c) of sub-section 
(3)]. 
Clause 14 
(2)(e)(i) 
ensuring safety of the contribution 
of subscribers to various schemes 
of pension funds under the New 
Pension System.  
 
ensuring safety of the 
contribution of subscribers to 
various schemes of pension 
funds under the National Pension 
System to which this Act 
applies 
Clause 20 
(2)(b) 
no withdrawals shall be permitted 
from the individual  pension 
account; 
 
no withdrawals shall be permitted 
from the individual pension 
account, except as may be 
specified under the 
regulations; 
Clause 29 (1) For the purposes of adjudging 
under section 276, the Authority 
shall appoint any of its officers not 
below the rank specified by 
regulations to be an adjudicating 
officer for holding an inquiry as 
may be determined by regulations, 
after giving the person concerned 
a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard for the purpose of imposing 
any penalty. 
For the pur poses of adjudging 
under section 276  27, the 
Authority shall appoint any of its 
officers not below the rank 
specified by regulations to be an 
adjudicating officer for holding an 
inquiry as may be determined by 
regulations, after giving the 
person concerne d a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard for the 
purpose of imposing any penalty. 
 
Clause 30 
(1)(d) 
such other interim measures as 
may appear the Authority to be just 
and necessary, 
such other interim measures as 
may appear to the Authority to 
be just and necessary, 
Clause 50 
(2)(a) 
the tenure of Chairman, whole-time 
member and the tenure of part-time 
member under sub-section (1) and 
the tenure of Chairman, whole -time 
member and the tenure of part -time 
member under sub -section (1) and 

 19 
sub-section (2) of section 5; sub-section (2) of section 5;  (TO BE 
DELETED). 
II) The clauses under sub -
section (2) re-numbered   from 
(a) to (j) 
 
 
14. While deposing before the Standing Committee on Finance, Secretary, Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Service) has made the following oral submission as 
stated below: 
―As you have very correctly mentioned, there were some earlier 
recommendations which were accepted fully, some partially accepted and there 
are some new provisions which have been introduced. They are  all in the nature 
of textual changes and they are not much significant things except the term of the 
Office of the Chairperson and the whole-time Member.” 
 
VII.    Insight from the international experience on pension reforms  
15. On being asked about the international experience on pension reforms and what 
have been learnt by the Government from these efforts the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) inter alia made the following written submission as 
stated below: 
―There is growing Intern ational trend towards movement away from the defined 
benefit pension schemes to defined contribution pension schemes. Even under 
the defined benefit schemes, there are parametric changes to reduce the benefit 
structure to bring down the funding gap, which arises basically from increasing 
longevity and dwindling fiscal resources to support these schemes. We have 
gained from the learning of other countries and mistakes these countries have 
made. For example, while taking the positive learning from the Chilean  
experience of introducing individual defined contribution retirement accounts, we 
have tried to avoid their criticism of high administrative cost and charges under 
the NPS by unbundling the functions of all the players (contribution collection, 
recordkeeping and accounting, asset management and benefit payouts) and 
providing full transparency in costs, fees and charges by selecting market players 
(Central Recordkeeping Agency and pension fund managers) through 
competitive bidding. Keeping investment choice s simple and introducing an 
intelligent default option for uninitiated and less sophisticated subscribers is 
another design feature of NPS, which has been adopted following international 
practices. While many design features of NPS are incorporated based o n 
international practices, the unbundling of functions and a Central Recordkeeping 
Agency framework is rather unique to India. Very few countries have 
experimented with a Central Recordkeeping Agency for the entire pension 
system.‖ 
 

 20 
VIII.    Coverage of voluntary NPS  
 
16. When the Committee asked the reasons for the low  popularity of the voluntary 
NPS for all citizens including that of the unorganised sector workers, the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) furnished the following written submission: 
―The coverage of vast masses of unorganised sector workers under NPS 
is a tremendous challenge as about 88% of the workers are without the 
benefit of any formal pension provision. It requires a huge educational and 
awareness effort to inform a nd enthuse the workers to join a pension system 
with no easy withdrawal benefits for 30 -40 years. Central Government has 
launched the co -contributory pension scheme in the form of ―Swavalamban‖ 
in the Budget 2010 -11 to allow unorganised sector workers to j oin NPS. On 
the request of the Central Government, two state Governments, namely, 
Haryana and Karnataka have also come forward to launch co -contributory 
pension schemes for specific group of workers to supplement pension 
contributions under ―Swavalamban.‖ Many other State Governments are also 
examining the possibility of joining the Swavalamban Scheme. Around 3 lakh 
subscribers had joined Swavalamban Scheme by 31 st March, 2011, although 
it was launched in the second half of 2010 -11. Around 51,000 subscriber s 
have joined voluntary NPS for all citizens as on 31 st March, 2011. It is 
expected that with financial literacy and awareness campaign, which is an 
integral part of the NPS, the number subscribers under voluntary NPS for all 
citizens and the Swavalamban would grow rapidly in the coming years.‖    
 
17. The Committee note from the Ministry‟s submission that the reform process 
in the pension sector involving setting up of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority (PFRDA) as a statutory body for ma naging the National 
Pension System (NPS) was necessary mainly on account of the burgeoning fiscal 
stress of pension payments on Central and State revenues and the need to provide 
a viable alternative to the populace at large to save for old age income secu rity. 
The Committee note that the official amendments proposed by the Government in 
pursuance to the recommendations of the Committee on PFRDA Bill, 2005 (21 st 
Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) could not be moved since the said Bill lapsed due to the 
dissolution of the 14th Lok Sabha.  The provisions of the Bill being broadly in line 

 21 
with the lines of the PFRDA Bill, 2005, the Committee reiterate in principle their 
recommendations on the PFRDA Bill, 2005 (21st Report, 14th Lok Sabha).  
18. The Committee note that the NPS was launched as a compulsory scheme for 
the Government employees from January, 2004, and it was launched on voluntary 
basis for all citizens of the country including the unorganised sector workers w.e.f 
1 May, 2009.  The Committee further note that as  on 16.07.2011, the total corpus of 
NPS has grown to Rs. 9924.72 crore with a subscriber base of 23.56 lakh. However, 
facts and figures made available to the Committee show that in the unorganised 
sector only around 3 lakh subscribers have so far joined th e “Swavalamban” 
pension scheme, and that only around 51,000 have joined the voluntary part of the 
NPS so far. The Committee thus find that the subscriber base of the voluntary 
component of the NPS has been rather narrow, suggesting low popularity of the 
scheme launched on countrywide scale.  The Committee would,  therefore, expect 
the Government to make serious efforts to popularise the scheme so as to achieve 
the intended objectives.    
19. The Committee having dwelt upon the various provisions of the Bill , 
recommend for enactment of the Bill with the modifications as recommended in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
IX.    Performance of Pension Fund Managers  
 
 
20. As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services), as  on 16.07.2011 the total corpus of NPS has grown to Rs.9924.72 
crore with a subscriber base of 23.56 lakh which will expand further with regular 
uploading of the funds of the existing subscribers and also more State / UT Governments 
and other entities joining the NPS. 

 22 
21. On being enquired about the performance of pension fund managers under the 
New Pension System as to whether their performance appraisal has been done and how 
the fund managers fare when compared with the performance of (rate of return) of 
Employees Provident Fund, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
inter alia furnished their reply as stated under: 
 
―The contributions of the employees of the Central Government and State 
Governments were invested in the financial instr uments only after the 
institutional architecture of NPS including the Central Recordkeeping 
Agency, Pension Fund Managers etc. was established. So the funds of the 
subscribers under NPS were invested with effect from April, 2008 onwards. 
The performance of  the three pension fund managers for the Central 
Government employees indicate that the returns on subscribers‘ 
contributions under NPS ranged between 16.38% and 8.05% during the 
period 2008 -09 to 2010 -11. For State Government employees the returns 
ranged between 11.34 to 5.94 during the period 2009 -10 and 2010-11. For 
the period 2009 -10 and 2010 -11, the returns for Unorganised sector 
workers ranged between 12.52% and 1.82% for the Government securities, 
12.66% and 4.02% for the Corporate bonds and 25.94% a nd 7.95% for 
equity. The details are given as below in the Table:  
 
Returns under NPS for Government Employees 
 
Years Central Government 
Employees 
State Government 
Employees 
 Highest 
Return 
Lowest 
Return 
Highest 
Return 
Lowest 
Return 
2008-09 16.38 12.18 - - 
2009-10 12.27 8.88 6.34 5.94 
2010-11 8.45 8.05 11.34 9.88 
 
 
 

 23 
Returns for NPS for Unorganised Sector (Tier I) 
 
Years Return on 
Government 
Securities 
Return on 
Corporate Bonds 
Return on Equities 
 Highest 
Return 
Lowest 
Return 
Highest 
Return 
Lowest 
Return 
Highest 
Return 
Lowest 
Return 
2009-10 10.02 1.82 10.04 4.02 25.94 7.95 
2010-11 12.52 6.97 12.66 6.26 11.89 8.05 
 
22. It may be mentioned that low investment returns for State Government employees 
and Unorganised sector workers in Government Securitie s and Corporate Bonds reflect 
the fact that these investments were made for short period and in short term instruments 
as the contributions of funds for these two sets of employees was irregular and in small 
lots which are less than the market lot for Government Securities and Corporate Bonds.    
 
The details of the relative performance of fund managers is given as below: 

 24 
 
 
 

 25 
23. The NPS Trust has been constituted for taking care of the assets and funds under 
the NPS in the interest of the beneficiaries. Se curities are being purchased by Pension 
Fund(s) on behalf of, and in the name of the Trustees. However, individual NPS 
subscribers remain beneficial owners of these securities, assets and funds. The Trustees 
manage the affairs of the NPS Trust with utmost trust, good faith and economy, 
consistent with the maintenance of efficiency of administration and sub serving the 
interests of the beneficiaries. The Board of Trustees are required to strictly adhere to 
Investment guidelines, code of conduct and ethics and such other guidelines/directions as 
may be issued by PFRDA from time to time. The allocation of funds of the subscribers of 
the Central Government amongst three different pension fund managers is done based 
on their past performance only.   
24. The Employees‘ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) has declared rate of return 
for the subscribers to the Employees‘ Provident Fund at the rate of 8.5% for the year 
2008-09 and 2009 -10. The declared rate was 9.5% for 2010 -11. However, it may be 
mentioned that this is an administered rate of return which includes return on investments 
as well as some reserve funds and penalties and damages for violations of the 
Employees‘ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, which have been 
utilised by EPFO to declar e the rate of interest. So, these are strictly not investment 
returns of the Employee‘ Provident Fund. For example, the EPFO decided to utilise Rs. 
1732 crore lying in the interest suspense account during 2010 -11 to declare the rate of 
interest at 9.5%. Si milarly, for the year 2008 -09, contingency reserve fund was utilised to 
declare rate of interest of 8.5%.‖ 
 
25. The Committee find that the performance of the Fund Managers appointed by 
the PFRDA to implement the scheme has been uneven over the last three years or so 
and the returns generated by them show a downward trend, particularly with regard to 
the unorganised sector, where the returns have been abysmal.  The Committee are 
extremely concerned to note the negative returns in some of the schemes involving all 
fund managers.  Against such a dismal performance scenario, it becomes imperative 
that the PFRDA exercises stringent monitoring and reviews the guidelines / 

 26 
instructions issued to the Fund Managers periodically and strictly evaluates their 
performance with a view to ensuring stability of returns to the subscribers. 
 
X. Foreign Investment Policy for Pension Sector 
  
26. Though there is no provision in the Bill on the issue of policy for Foreign Direct 
Investment in pension sector, the same has been in cluded as one of the salient features of 
proposed modifications in PFRDA Bill, 2011 vis-à-vis PFRDA Bill, 2005.  It has been stated in 
the objects and reasons of the PFRDA Bill, 2011 as given below:- 
―…the foreign investment policy for pension sector inter mediaries, (including 
the pension funds and central recordkeeping agency) would be determined 
and notified outside the proposed legislation under the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999. This is on lines with the recent legislations in the 
financial sect or where foreign investment is determined under the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999. In the PFRDA Bill, 2005, as modified by 
the official amendments, the foreign investment policy for pension funds and 
central recordkeeping agency was part of the said Bill‖ 
 
27. On the issue the Committee had earlier made the following recommendation as 
stated under: 
“The Committee were of the considered opinion that any decision relating to 
permitting FDI in the pension sector should be implemented only by way of 
bringing forward suitable amendment in the present legislation. They were 
further of the view that the decisions relating to permitting FDI in the pension 
sector and deployment of pension funds outside the Country, should, in no 
way be in variance with the re lated provisions applicable to the insurance 
sector.” 
 
28. On being asked why the foreign investment ceiling for pension sector not 
prescribed in the PFRDA Bill 2011 by leaving the decision on FDI in the executive 
domain, the Ministry inter alia furnished the following written reply as stated under: 
―The Government is of the view that the Foreign investment in Pension Sector 
may be capped at 26% on par with that in the Insurance Sector under the 
general regulations framed under the Foreign Exchange Manageme nt Act, 
1999 (FEMA). However, no express provision has been made in the PFRDA 
Bill, 2011. This is in line with most of the legislations in the Financial Sector. 
For example, the foreign investment limit for private sector banks under the 
Banking Regulation  Act, 1949, stock exchanges, depositories, clearing 

 27 
corporations under the securities laws, asset reconstruction companies under 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest Act, 2002, credit information compan ies under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 is not determined under the 
respective legislations under which these are constituted, but under the 
regulations framed under FEMA. Even for State Bank of India, the foreign 
investment limit is administratively determined and not under the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955. It may be mentioned that the regulations framed under 
FEMA are required to be laid in both the Houses of Parliament for ratification 
and as such the FEMA route specifying fore ign investment ceiling is also 
subject to Parliamentary scrutiny. In view of this, the Government is of the 
view that foreign investment ceiling for Pension sector may not be specified in 
the PFRDA Bill, 2011. The ceiling may be specified under the regulat ions 
under FEMA.‖  
 
29. The Committee note that foreign investment in the pension sector may be 
capped at 26% under the general regulations framed under the Foreign Exchange 
management Act, 1999 (FEMA) which, as stated in the reply of Government, is in 
line with most of the legislations in the financial sector.  Further, the Committee 
believe that spelling out the foreign investment policy in the pension sector clearly 
in the provisions of the PFRDA Bill will be more in the fitness of things, as the 
pension fund managers holding the stake of the old age income security of their 
clients cannot be compared with other agencies/companies/institutions in the 
financial sector.  The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that any decision relating to permitting FDI in the pension sector 
should be implemented only by way of bringing forward suitable amendment in the 
present legislation.  
XI.     Composition of Authority  
        
30. Clause 4 of the PFRDA, 2005 reads as under: 
 
―The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and not more than five members, of 
whom at least three shall be whole -time members, to be appointed by the Central 
Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing and having 

 28 
experience and knowle dge in economics, finance, law or administrative matters 
with at least one person from each discipline.‖ 
 
31. The Committee made their observation/recommendation in the 21 st report as 
stated under: 
“The above provision conveys that the Authority shall incl ude two part -time 
members. Yet the qualifications required to be met for selection of part -time 
members in terms of expertise and knowledge in specified fields have not been 
provided in the clause. With a view to provide clarity, the Committee recommend 
that the clause be rephrased to clearly depict the composition of the authority viz. 
(a) a Chairperson; (b) not more than three whole time members; and (c) not more 
than two part -time members. The Committee further desire that selection of both 
whole-time an d part -time members of the Authority should be confined to 
professionals having experience in economics or finance or law only. The 
Committee are also of the opinion that if the Central Government so desire, one of 
the part time members in the Authority could be their nominee.” 
    
Clause 4 of the PFRDA Bill, 2011 reads as below: 
  ―The Authority shall consist of the following Members, namely:— 
 
(a)  a Chairperson; 
(b)  three whole-time members; and 
(c)  three part-time members, 
to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity 
and standing and having knowledge and experience in economics, finance, law or 
administrative matters with at least one person from each discipline.‖ 
 
32. On being asked why the Government have not f ully accepted the Committee‘s 
recommendation on the matter by including ‗administration‘ as one of the fields of 
knowledge and experience to determine eligibility for appointment as member in the 
PFRDA Board, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financia l Services) inter alia 
furnished their reply as stated under: 
―It is proposed to accept the recommendation regarding number of whole-time 
members. As regards the areas of specialisation/background for the Members of 
PFRDA Board, with a view to broadbase the selection zone, it has been provided 
that Members of PFRDA would be appointed by the Central Government from 
amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing and having knowledge and 
experience in economics, finance, law or administrative matters with at least one 
person from each discipline.‖ 

 29 
 
33. On the issue of composition of the Pension Fund Regulatory Development 
Authority (PFRDA), the Committee note that the Government has accepted their 
earlier recommendation except for persisting to include „adm inistration‟ as one of 
the fields of knowledge and experience to determine eligibility for appointment as 
one of the members of the Authority. The reason adduced by the Government for 
including „administration‟ as one of the fields of knowledge and experie nce apart 
from economics, finance and law is stated to be to broadbase the selection zone. 
The Committee are, however, not convinced by this explanation given by the 
Government and believe that with economics, finance and law as the fields of 
experience an d knowledge for appointment as members of the Authority, the 
selection zone would be broad enough.  They would, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that membership of the Authority should be confined to 
professionals having experience in economics or finance or law only. 
 
XII.    Clause 14 - Duties, Powers and Functions of Authority  
 
34. Clause 14 (1)(2) (e) of the PFRDA, 2005 reads as under: 
 
―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the time being in 
force, the Author ity shall have the duty, to regulate, promote and ensure orderly 
growth of the New Pension System and pension schemes to which this Act applies 
and, to protect the interests of subscribers of such System and schemes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section 
(1), the powers and functions of the Authority shall include-  
                     (e) protecting the interests of subscribers;‖ 
 
35. The Committee made their observation/recommendation in the 21 st report as 
stated under: 

 30 
“In view of the fact that vast powers are going to be bestowed on the 
PFRDA, which include, issuing of certificates of registration to pension funds 
and other intermediaries; promoting efficiency in the development and 
functioning of pension fu nds and schemes; approving and regulating pension 
schemes; and adjudication of disputes, the Committee are of the view that with 
specific reference to matters relating to protection of subscribers‟ interests, the 
following aspects should inter-alia be inserted in clause 14:  
 
-  Ensuring safety of the subscribers‟ contributions to various pension 
schemes and funds under the New Pension System;  
-   Ensuring payment of benefits or returns in accordance with guarantees, if   
any, attached to the pension schemes or investment options chosen; and  
- Ensuring that the intermediation and other operational costs under the 
New Pension System do not have an adverse bearing on the returns to the 
subscribers.” 
 
36. Clause 14 (1)(2) (e) of the PFRDA, 2011 reads as under: 
―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law for the time being 
in force, the Authority shall have the duty, to regulate, promote and ensure 
orderly growth of the National Pension System and pension schemes to 
which this Act applies and to protect the interests of subscribers of such 
System and schemes. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -
section (1), the powers and functions of the Authority shall include– 
(e) protecting the interests of subscribers by— 
 
(i) ensuring safety of the contribution of subscribers to various schemes of 
pension funds to which this Act applies; 
(ii) ensuring that the intermediation and other operational costs under the 
National Pension System are economical and reasonable;‖ 
 
37. The Committee in their earlier report (21 st Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended that aspects relating to protection of subscribers‟ interest should be 
provided for in the Bill.  The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has duly 
addressed the  concern expressed by them for protecting the interest of the 

 31 
subscribers in Clause 14 (e) of the Bill.  The Committee, however, would like to 
recommend that Clause 14(e)(i) should be appropriately amended so as to make it 
mandatory for pension fund manage rs to insure the funds deposited by the 
subscribers in order to provide complete security for their funds.  
 
XIII.    Clause 20 - National Pension System – withdrawals, guaranteed returns, etc. 
 
 
 38. Clause 20 of the PFRDA, 2011 reads as under: 
 
―20. (1) The contributory pension system notified by the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Finance vide notification number F. No. 5/7/2003 -ECB&PR dated the 
22nd December, 2003, shall be deemed to be the National Pension System with 
effect from the 1 st day of January, 2004, and such National Pension System may 
be amended from time to time by regulations. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said notification, the National Pension 
System shall, on the commencement of this Act, have the following basic features, 
namely:– 
(a) every subscriber shall have an individual pension account under the National 
Pension System; 
(b) no withdrawals shall be permitted from the individual pension account, except as 
may be specified under the regulations; 
(c) the functions of recordkeeping, accounting and switching of options by the 
subscriber shall be effected by the central recordkeeping agency; 
(d) there shall be a choice of multiple pension funds and multiple schemes: 
Provided that one of the schemes shall offer the s ubscriber an option of investing 
hundred per cent. of his funds in Government securities; 
(e) there shall be portability of individual pension accounts in case of change of 
employment; 
(f) collection and transmission of contributions and instructions shall  be through 
points of presence to the central recordkeeping agency; 

 32 
(g) there shall not be any implicit or explicit assurance of benefits except 
marketbased guarantee mechanism to be purchased by the subscriber; 
(h) a subscriber shall not exit from the Nat ional Pension System except as may be 
specified by the regulations; and 
(i) at exit, the subscriber shall purchase an annuity from a life insurance company in 
accordance with the regulations. 
(3) In addition to the individual pension account mentioned in clause (a) of subsection 
(2), a subscriber may also, at his option, have an additional account under the 
National Pension System having the features mentioned in clauses ( c) to ( g) of sub -
section 
(2) and also having the additional feature that the subscribe r shall be free to withdraw 
part or all of his money at any time from the additional account.‖ 
 
39. On the issue of withdrawal from the pension accounts under NPS, the Committee 
made their observation/recommendation in the 21st report as stated under: 
 
“The New Pension System provides for a „non withdrawable‟ and compulsory 
Tier I account and a voluntary Tier II account, for a Government servant. Anyone 
who wants a „withdrawable‟ facility has to opt for Tier II also. The Committee are 
of the view that this would be an additional burden particularly to Group „D‟ 
employees. The Committee, therefore, desire that even in the case of Tier I 
account, an element of flexibility should be provided under the New Pension 
System to enable subscribers to withdraw moneys to meet unforeseen and urgent 
expenses. For instance, the subscribers could be allowed to take one repayable 
advance from their accounts after completion of 15 years of service and also 
permanently withdraw upto 50% of his contribution after completion of a 
minimum of 25 years of service to meet expenses on exigencies, which should be 
appropriately listed by regulations.” 
40. On the issue of returns on investments of pension funds by subscribers, the 
Committee further recommended as follows: 
 
“The Committee  note that a major cause of concern for the employees is 
the fact that unlike the present pension system which guarantees a monthly 
retirement income of 50% of the average of the last ten months pay, devoid 
of any risk, the New Pension System leaves the li kely retirement benefits of 
the subscribers to be determined by the market. The Committee‟s attempt to 
address this issue inter alia evoked the response that the Government was 
open to the ideas of permitting or giving preference to such pension fund 
managers also who guarantee returns to operate in the market; and making 

 33 
available to the subscribers the option of 100% investment of pension funds 
in Government securities.  
The Committee recommend that the option of 100% investment of the 
pension funds in Go vernment Securities be made available to the 
subscribers and this aspect be indicated in clear terms in Clause 20 (c) of 
the PFRDA Bill.  
The projections of likely returns or benefits that may accrue to the 
subscribers under different possible investment o ptions as furnished by the 
Ministry reveal that returns from an investment option involving equities 
would amount to much more than the returns on investments in 
Government Securities. Even in the case of pessimistic asset return 
assumptions, the returns to an employee are expected to be more beneficial 
than the present pension scheme of Central Government employees which 
provides for a monthly pension amounting to 50% of the average of the pay 
drawn in the last ten months of service and the facility of com mutation. 
However, with the specific intention of minimizing, if not totally eliminating 
the apprehensions or fears expressed about market based returns, the 
Committee recommend that in the matter of selection of pension fund 
managers preference be given to such companies which offer guarantees on 
returns. At the same time, it needs to be ensured that the subscribers have 
sufficient options of choosing funds/schemes that may fetch high returns on 
the basis of market performance.”  
 
41. On being asked what ― marketbased guarantee mechanism‖, the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) inter alia furnished their reply as stated 
below: 
 
―Types of guarantees 
There are four types of guarantees in the funded pension schemes that result in a 
contingent liability for the funded pension system. The first two relate to the 
accumulation stage while the last two apply during the payout phase.  These are: 
 
 Absolute return guarantees 
 Relative rate of return guarantees (sector and benchmark-based) 
 Guarantees on benefit payouts  
 Minimum pension guarantees 
 
The financing arrangements for such guarantee require a fairly developed financial 
market including the financial derivatives market. Currently, no Pension Fund 
Management Company in India offers guaranteed pe nsion products. When the 
fund managers are registered under the PFRDA Act, possibility would be explored 
to register those fund managers also which are capable of offering any kind of 
guaranteed pension products.  The investment guidelines would be framed by 
PFRDA in such a manner that besides the other financial instruments an option 

 34 
would be given to the subscribers of the New Pension System where 100% 
investment in government securities would be permitted.‖ 
 
42. The Committee had emphasized in their earl ier Report (21 st Report, 14 th LS) 
the need for making provision in the PFRDA Bill, 2005 to enable subscribers to 
avail repayable advance as well as to withdraw from their pension accounts.  
Pursuant to the Committee‟s recommendations, a provision has now b een 
incorporated in the Clause 20(b) of PFRDA Bill, 2011 which reads – „no withdrawals 
shall be permitted from the individual pension account, except as may be specified 
under the regulations .‟ In this regard, the Committee would recommend that the 
spirit of the Committee‟s earlier recommendations may be captured in the above 
clause relating to „withdrawals‟ by wording the same positively as – „withdrawals 
shall be permitted from the individual pension account, as may be specified under 
the regulations.‟    
43. The Committee desire that the facility of repayable advance should also be 
provided to subscribers to enable them to meet important commitments.   For this 
purpose, the subscribers may be allowed to take a repayable advance from their 
accounts, say af ter 10 -15 years of service.  Suitable enabling amendments may 
accordingly be made in the Bill.  
44. The Committee, deeply concerned about the uncertainty of returns on the 
funds of the subscribers, are dismayed at the casual approach of the Government 
as r eflected in Clause 20(g), wherein the hapless subscribers have no implicit or 
explicit assurance of benefits, except market based guaranteed return mechanism, 
neither tried nor tested.  As any effective pension scheme needs to be underpinned 
by stability of returns and reasonable post retirement incomes, it is imperative that 

 35 
Government should provide for minimum guaranteed return and not the mere 
camouflage of market based guarantee, which should not be less than the 
minimum return available currently under the defined benefit pension scheme.  The 
Committee therefore desire that the Government must devise a mechanism to 
enable subscribers of NPS to be ensured of such a minimum assured/guaranteed 
returns for their pensions so that they are not put to any dis advantage vis -à-vis 
other pensioners .  The Committee would recommend that the minimum rate of 
return on the contributions to the pension fund of the employee should not be less 
than the rate of interest on the Employees Provident Fund Scheme.   In the absence 
of such a guarantee/assurance, the NPS cannot justifiably claim to provide „old age 
income security .‟  Such a provision will also be complementary to the proposed 
Clause 25 wherein ability to provide guaranteed returns has been made one of the 
eligibility criteria for the fund managers. If there is any shortfall, then the 
Government in its Budget could bear the same and assume that additional 
responsibility.  The Committee hope that this will go a long way in creating a sense 
of security amongst the empl oyees that not only would their capital be safe but 
they would also be getting stable returns on the same. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Clause 20(2)(g) of the Bill should be altered accordingly.  
 
XIV.   Clause 23 - Pension Funds  
 
45.  Clause 23 of the PFRDA, 2005 reads as under:  
 
The Authority may, by granting a certificate of registration under sub -section (3) of 
section 24, permit one or more persons to act as a pension fund for the purpose of 
receiving contributions, accumulating them and making payments to the subscriber 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  

 36 
(2) The number of pension funds shall be determined by regulations and the 
Authority may, in public interest, vary the number of pension funds.  
(3) The pension fund shal l function in accordance with the terms of its 
certificate of registration and the regulations made under this Act.  
(4) The pension fund shall manage the schemes in accordance with the 
regulations.  
 
46. The Committee made their observation/recommendation  in the 21 st report as 
stated under: 
“The Committee note that in terms of the provisions of Clause 23, the 
PFRDA is entitled to grant a certificate of registration to one or more pension 
funds for the purpose of receiving contributions, accumulating them a nd making 
payments to the subscribers. As informed to the Committee, the Government 
have decided that one such pension fund would be from the public sector. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that this aspect about one of the pension funds 
being from the public sector be specified in clear terms in Clause 23 of the 
PFRDA Bill which would be in the interest of subscribers.” 
 
 
47.  Clause 23 of the PFRDA, 2011 reads as under:  
 
23. (1) The Authority may, by granting a certificate of registration under sub-section 
(3) of section 26, permit one or more persons to act as a pension fund for the 
purpose of receiving contributions, accumulating them and making payments to the 
subscriber in such manner as may be specified by regulations. 
(2) The number of pension fu nds shall be determined by regulations and the 
Authority may, in public interest, vary the number of pension funds: 
Provided that at least one of the pensions fund shall be a Government company and 
wholly owned by a Government company or Government companies. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ―Government 
company‖ shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 617 of the Companies 
Act, 1956. 
(3) The pension fund shall function in accordance with the terms of its certificate of 
registration and the regulations made under this Act. 
(4) The pension fund shall manage the schemes in accordance with the regulations. 
 

 37 
48. In their earlier Report, (21 st Report, 14 th Lok Sabha), the Committee had 
recommended that at least one of the p ension funds should be from the public 
sector, which may be specified in the Bill itself.  While revisiting this issue in view 
of the present day economic scenario, where volatility and uncertainties in the 
financial sector require to be adequately cushion ed, the Committee are of the view 
that more players from the public sector should be encouraged to handle pension 
funds under NPS in the interest of subscribers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the proviso at Clause 23(2) should be amended appropr iately to 
ensure that at least one -third of the fund managers are selected from the public 
sector. 
 
XV.    Establishment of Pension Advisory Committee 
     
49. Clause 44 of PFRDA, 2011 reads as under: 
 
―44. (1) The Authority may, by notification, establish  with effect from such date as it 
may specify in the notification, a Committee to be known as the Pension Advisory 
Committee. 
(2) The Pension Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than twenty -five 
members, excluding ex officio members, to represent the interests of employees‘ 
associations, subscribers, commerce and industry, intermediaries, and organisations 
engaged in pension research. 
(3) The Chairperson and the members of the Authority shall be the ex officio 
Chairperson and ex officio members of the Pension Advisory Committee. 
(4) The objects of the Pension Advisory Committee shall be to advise the Authority 
on matters referred to it by the Authority.‖  
50. On this issue, the Committee made their observation/recommendation in the 21 st 
report as stated under: 
“The Committee are of the opinion that constitution of an Advisory Committee, 
as provided in the case of IRDA would be beneficial in enabling the authority in 
making regulations under section 47. Moreover, as admitted by the Ministry, the 

 38 
Pension sector or market is in a very nascent stage of development and firming up 
of regulatory aspects would be witnessed in course of time. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a Pension Fund Advisory Committee on lines similar to 
that of IRDA may be set up, with the representatives of the employees and 
subscribers co-opted into it. This would enable in safeguarding the interests of the 
subscribers and help the authority in discharging the multifarious functions of 
regulating the pension funds and schemes.” 
 
51. On being asked why the Government not consider constituting the Pension 
Advisory Committee which would enable in safeguarding the interests of the subscribers 
and help the PFRDA in discharging the multifarious functions of regulating the pension 
funds and schemes, the Ministry of Finance,(Department of Financial Services) inter alia 
gave the following reply: 
―The objects of the Insurance Advisory Committee constituted under the IRDA 
Act, 1999 is to advise the IRDA on matters relating to the making of  the 
regulations under section 26 of the IRDA Act, 1999.  The Government is willing to 
constitute the Pension Advisory Committee exactly on the lines of Insurance 
Advisory Committee in the IRDA Act, 1999.‖ 
 
52. The Committee are of the view that the Pensio n Advisory Committee to be 
constituted under Clause 44 (2) of the Bill should be made more representative by 
specifically providing that the representatives of stakeholders including the 
employees are directly made as Members of the Committee instead of ‘members, to 
represent the interests of employees’ associations, subscribers etc.’  as proposed 
in the Bill.  This change, the Committee believe, will enable the Advisory Committee 
to function as a truly representative body instead of being only a proxy 
representation of stakeholders.   
53. The Committee also desire that the Pension Advisory Committee should be 
delegated more power and independence. As per the existing provision, the 
Pension Advisory Committee can only advise the Authority on matters referred to it 
by the Authority. When the Chairperson and members of the Board of the PFRDA 
are already the ex -officio Chairperson and members of the Pension Advisory 

 39 
Committee, the provision that only matters referred to it by the Authority can be 
considered, limits the advisory role of the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Clause 44(4) may be amended appropriately to allow the Pension 
Advisory Committee to play a more meaningful role by rendering advice suo -motu 
even on matters not referred to it. 
54. In conclusion, the Committee would like to emphasise that NPS is no longer 
New Pension Scheme but a National Pension System which is far wider in scope 
and far more comprehensive.  Therefore, the Committee would expect the 
Government to make concert ed efforts to extend the coverage of the scheme in 
both public and private sector without remaining confined to Central Government 
employees. 
55. As the unorganized sector is a very important part of our society and 
economy, the Committee desire that their  social security should be adequately 
safeguarded in the present era of craving for social inclusion.  The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Government to work out a tripartite kind of a scheme 
where the State Government, the Central Government and the unorganized sector 
workers could make contributions .  With such a comprehensive coverage, the 
present pension scheme which is rather narrow in scope now could move forward 
so as to truly justify its nomenclature as the National Pension System. 
56. The Comm ittee would further like to emphasise that the National Pension 
System should not put employees in a straitjacket or in a very rigid framework.  
The Committee, therefore, desire greater flexibility in the operation of the scheme, 
whereby the employees will  have the choice of the model / scheme as well as the 
fund managers .  They may also be permitted the flexibility to exercise this 

 40 
choice/option periodically or even annually. The question of returns to be 
guaranteed will also thus depend on the option exer cised by the employee.  The 
Committee, therefore, believe that such flexibility in choice and ensuring 
employees‟ own volition will go a long way in not only dispelling the 
apprehensions in their minds but also making the scheme more acceptable and 
popular.  On the whole, the Committee would like the National Pension System to 
evolve in a manner that is more re-assuring to its subscribers. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 August, 2011       YASHWANT SINHA, 
07 Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)               Chairman, 
        Standing Committee on Finance. 
         

 41 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT 
 
 
Shri Moinul Hassan, MP 
 
 
 The very premise of the initiative for reform of pension system on the ground 
of it being costly and creating budgetary difficulty is not acceptable.  
Government must prioritize it‘s commitment to common people.  Employees 
and their pension is a basic right to be assured in a centralized democratic 
society. 
 
 Concept of defined contribution benefit pension system is not acceptable 
since it pressures the common people/employers to purcha se pension from 
the market without ―assured pension amount‖. 
 
 In the main recommendations of the Committee on PFRDA Bill, 2005 – 21st 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) it did not take into account or even recognize the 
points raised in the ‗note of dissent‘ 
 
 The Com mittee did not consider, rather ignored the unanimous views of 
employees associations and trade unions who objected the ―defined‖ benefit 
system. 
 
 Growing international trend in the drastic decline in the relative share of 
workers and employees in the gain s of value addition and sharp increase in 
the appropriation by the employers/entrepreneurs/management. 
 
Should a democratic government or this Committee of democratically elected 
representatives endorse such a trend? 
 
 Talking about ―funding gap‖ in employe es welfare by the Government in 
making the pensions scheme and pension return ―market dependent‘ is 
nothing but abdication of State‘s responsibility on employees welfare. 
 

 42 
 Under Coverage of voluntary NPS add one paragraph after point no. 19 one 
page 16: 
 
NPS should ensure payment of pension at 50% of the last pay drawn (basic 
plus periodical upward revision + DA) in tune with rise in price level. 
 
 Clause 20(2)(g) which states that ―there shall not be any implicit or explicit 
assurance of benefits except mar ketbased guarantee mechanism to be 
purchased by the subscriber‖.  Should be dropped/deleted. 
 
 Involvement of foreign companies in pension sector should be forbidden. 
 
 The Pension fund created by the employees‘ subscription and employers‘ 
contribution which directly flows from the exchequer (which is nothing but tax 
revenue of the Government) is made available for the stock market 
operations which is not only unethical but also blatant diversion of public fund 
for private profit, both Foreign and Indian capitalists. 
 
 The PFRDA Bill when enacted, it is rightly feared, will empower the 
Government to alter or even deny the present employees and pensioners the 
statutory defined pension benefit as has been done in the case of those who 
are appointed after the cut-off date. 
 
 I may, in fine, quoting the concluding paragraph of the Committee set up by 
the 6th CPC: 
 
―Mainly given the fact that the future liability although may be large in terms of 
absolute size is not likely to last very long and does not constitute an  
alarmingly big share of the GDP which is  also on the decline.  It appears that 
pursuing the existing ‗Pay as you go‘ to meet the liability will be an ideal 
solution.‖ 
 
The New Pension scheme enshrined in the PFRDA Bill may be withdrawn from 
the Parliament both in the interest of the Civil Servants and the exchequer. 
 
 
Sd/- 
(MOINUL HASSAN) 

 43 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21st July, 2011 from 1100 hrs to 1300 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
 
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
 
    MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
3.   Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
7.   Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
8.   Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana    
9.   Dr. M. Thambidurai   
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri S.S. Ahluwali 
11.  Shri Raashid Alvi  
12.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
13.  Shri Piyush Goyal  
14.  Shri Moinul Hassan 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Shri Mahendra Mohan 
17.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain    – Director 
3.   Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Deputy Secretary  
4.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  – Under Secretary 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
 
1.   Shri R. Gopalan, Secretary 
2.   Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary 
   3.    Shri Arvind Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 
Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority (PFRDA) 
 
1.    Shri Yogesh Agarwal, Chairman 
   2.   Shri Puskal Upadhyay, Chief General Manager 

 44 
 
-2- 
 
2.   The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) in connection with examination of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2011 .  The major issues discussed during the briefing 
included minimum returns guarantee, implementation status of the Standing Committee 
on Finance Report on the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 
2005, inter - regulatory issues concerning pension funds, policy regardi ng FDI, 
constitution of Pension Advisory Committee, performance record of pension fund 
managers, coverage of the unorganised sector by the new pension system etc.  The 
Chairman directed the representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the discussion at 
an early date. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
                The Committee then adjourned. 

 45 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th August, 2011 from 1600 hrs to 1715 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
 
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri C.M. Chang 
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey  
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
8.   Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
9.   Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
10.  Shri Manicka Tagore    
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.   Shri Moinul Hassan 
12.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
13.  Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain    – Director 
3.   Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Deputy Secretary  
4.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  – Under Secretary 
 
      Part – I 
(1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs) 
WITNESSES 
 
     Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 
1. Shri D.K. Mittal, Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary 
 
         Indian Banks‟ Association (IBA) 
Shri M.R. Umerji, Chief Legal Advisor, IBA 
 

 46 
 
2. XX   XX   XX  XX. 
XX   XX   XX  XX. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part II 
(1630 hrs. to 1715 hrs) 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)  
 
1.    Shri D.K. Mittal, Secretary 
2.    Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary 
3.    Shri Arvind Kumar, Joint Secretary 
  
Pension Fund Regulatory & Development Authority (PFRDA) 
 
4.    Shri Yogesh Agarwal, Chairman 
5.    Smt. Padma Iyer Kaul, ED 
  
3.   The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of Finance ( Department 
of Financial Services) in connection with examination of the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority Bill, 2011 .  The major issues discussed included policy on FDI in 
pension sector, minimum guaranteed returns under NPS, provisions for giving more options 
and freedom of choice for subscribers of NPS, pension coverage of unorganised sector etc. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
                The Committee then adjourned 

 47 
       Minutes of the Twenty Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th August, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
MEMBERS     
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3. Shri C.M. Chang 
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
6. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
8. Shri Manicka Tagore 
9. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav 
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
12.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
13.   Shri Moinul Hassan 
14.   Shri Mahendra Mohan 
15.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
16.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi   
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri R.K. Jain    – Director 
3.   Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Deputy Secretary  
   4.  Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  – Under Secretary 
 
 
2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:-  
(i) The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011; and  
(ii) The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Bill, 2011.  
 
 

 48 
 
3.  The C ommittee adopted the draft reports at (i) and (ii) above with some 
modifications/changes as suggested by Members .  The Committee authorised the Chairman 
to finalise the Reports in the light of the modifications suggested and present these Reports 
to Parliament. 
 
            The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 