STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
THE REGULATION OF FACTOR
(ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES) BILL, 2011
THIRTY-NINTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)
39

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
THE REGULATION OF FACTOR (ASSIGNMENT
OF RECEIVABLES) BILL, 2011
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 August, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2011/Bhadra, 1933 (Saka)

COF No. 39
Price : Rs. 65.00
© 2011 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
1. Background ...................................................................................... 1
2. Definitions ........................................................................................ 6
3. Exemption of factoring bu siness from Stamp duty ................. 8
4. Pricing of Factor Services .............................................................. 9
5. Inconsistency between Clauses 8 and 18 in respect of
determining responsibilities of all parties to the factoring
assignment ....................................................................................... 10
6. Clause  32—Rule making powers of the Central Government.....
11
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 29 July,
2011, 18 August, 2011 and 29 August, 2011 ........................ 13
II. The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables)
Bill, 2011 ..................................................................................... 20

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Vacant **
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
12. Smt. Jaya Prada Nahata
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao*
(iii)
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 28.01.2011 vice Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, ceased to
be a member of the Committee on his resignation from Lok Sabha.
**Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay, MP ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 12.07.2011
consequent upon his induction to the union Council of Minister.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23.  Shri Raashid Alvi
24.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal
26.  Shri Moinul Hassan
27.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28.  Shri Mahendra Mohan
29.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.  Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao
31.  Shri Y.P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance,
having been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-
Ninth Report on ‘The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables)
Bill, 2011’.
2. ‘The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011’
introduced in Lok Sabha on 24 March, 2011, was referred to the Committee
on 29 March, 2011 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the IFCI Factors
Limited, New Delhi, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and Shri Sangeet
Shukla, Retired Deputy Managing Director, SBI.
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 29 July and 18 August,
2011 took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services).
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 29 August, 2011
considered and adopted the draft report and authorised the Chairman
to finalise the same and present it to the Parliament.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and
information which were desired in connection with the examination of
the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the IFCI
Factors Limited, New Delhi, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and
Shri Sangeet Shukla, Retired Deputy Managing Director, SBI for
placing before them their considered views on the Bill in the form of
memoranda.

9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
NEW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
29 August, 2011 Chairman,
07 Bhadra, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
Background
Purchasers of goods and services are often delaying the payments,
therefore, resulting in working capital problems for the suppliers,
particularly the smaller ones. Many Industrial and Commercial
Undertakings, especially the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs) Units continue to suffer delays in payment or non-payment of
their dues by other enterprises. A specific Act called “The interest on
Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings
Act, 1993” made it mandatory for the buyer to pay to the Small Scale
Industry promptly, failing which he is required to pay interest to the
supplier. However, the Act was repealed by the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Act, 2006 after the substantive provisions of the
Act of 1993 were suitably incorporated in the said Act of 2006. The Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 also did not
improve the situation of delayed payments to MSMEs. Factoring is one
of the important mechanisms to address issues of resource constraints,
delayed payment from buyers of goods and services and receivable
management for the MSMEs Sector.
2. In India, there is no consolidated legal framework with specific
provisions covering all aspects of factoring transactions. This could be
attributed, to a large extent, to the absence of demand from business
community, and the resultant absence of pressure on the legal system to
consider appropriate change and innovation. Most of the factoring
companies abroad also provide factoring services on ‘without recourse’
basis (without recourse factoring means the factor has no recourse to the
supplier or assignor if the factored debt turns out to be irrecoverable).
However, in India the factoring services are offered by majority of the
companies, including those in public sector, mainly on ‘with recourse’
basis (with recourse factoring means the factor has recourse to the supplier
or assignor if the factored debt turns out to be irrecoverable). The reasons
for this could primarily be attributed to the inadequate legislative
protection in the country in favour of these services. Currently, factoring
activities, like other modes of financing, have to operate within the existing
laws such as the Indian Contract Act, the Indian Sale of Goods Act, the
Transfer of Property Act, etc.

2
3. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) constituted a Study Group in
1988 under the chairmanship of Shri C.S. Kalyansundaram, former
Managing Director, State Bank of India for examining the feasibility and
mechanics of starting factoring organisations in the country and making
recommendations regarding its theory, constitution, organisational set
up, scope of activities and other related matters. The Committee had
noted that inadequacy of working capital finance with its attendant
liquidity problem has been one of the major stumbling blocks in the
viable running of small scale industries (SSI) units and factoring for SSIs
could be mutually beneficial to both factors and SSI units.
4. Pursuant to the acceptance of some of the recommendations of
Kalyansaundaram Committee, RBI identified some banks to set up their
subsidiaries for factoring operations. Accordingly, SBI factors and
Commercial Services Pvt. Ltd. (SBIF) and Canbank Factors Limited (CFL)
were established in 1991 as subsidiaries of the State Bank of India and
the Canara Bank, respectively. Apart from the two companies mentioned
above, a few players have also entered into the field of factoring viz.,
Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd., IFCI Factors Ltd.,
Small Industries Development Bank of India, Standard Chartered Bank,
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Ltd. In addition, a
few Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) have also started factoring
services.
5. The Hon‘ble Prime Minister announced setting up of a Task
Force to formulate an agenda for action within a period of three
months after deliberations with all stakeholder, after meeting the
representatives of 19 prominent MSME Associations to discuss matters
impacting the growth of MSME sector. Several important issues were
highlighted by the MSME Associations including shortage of credit, need
for a focused procurement policy, prompt payment of MSME dues,
simplification of labour laws, formulation of a one-time settlement policy,
etc. to strengthen the MSMEs and remove bottlenecks in their
development.
6. The Task Force constituted 6 Sub-Groups on the major areas of
concern for the MSME sector, namely, credit, marketing, labour, exit policy,
infrastructure/technology/skill development and taxation. A separate Sub-
Group was constituted to look into specific problems relating to special
package for North-East and Jammu and Kashmir.
7. The Task force made many recommendations for enhancing the
flow of credit to MSMEs. The Task Force also recommended that workable
legal options should be developed for the securitisation of trade credit
receivables and for the promotion of factoring services .

3
8. In the year 1985, the Committee appointed by the Government
for reviewing the working of the monetary system had in its report
provided several directions, with respect to future shape of financial
sector reforms and made various recommendations in relation thereto.
The Committee had inter-alia  advocated bringing in stricter credit
discipline and reduction in the importance in the cash credit, greater
resort to financing of working capital through loans, bills, and receivables.
Various other committees were set up to review the State of financing
in the country, and some of them, including the Vaghul Committee on
Money Market Reforms (1987) made references to the need for introducing
factoring in India.
9. The report of the S.P. Gupta Group (Study Group on
Development of Small Enterprises, 2000) recommended that in order to
mitigate the post sale problems of SSI there is a need to encourage bills
culture without recourse to SSI. In this context, Government of India be
requested to help creating conducive climate for development of factoring
services through appropriate policy prescriptions/legislative changes to
ease the problems relating to stamp duty, registration fee, assignment of
debt etc. A Task Force comprising Government/RBI/SIDBI should be
appointed to look into these problems. The provisions of Delayed
Payments Act should be extended to factors.
10. Report of the National Commission on Enterprises in
Unorganised Sector, 2009 recommended that Innovative financing
instruments such as factoring, venture capital, credit rating, and a single
multi-purpose Swarojgar Credit Card for the unorganised sector on the
pattern of Kisan Credit Card with a limit of up to Rs. 10 lakh may be
introduced.
11. In view of the above, the Central Government decided to enact
a legislation relating to factoring services and introduce a Bill titled as
“The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011”, to provide
for and regulate the assignment of receivables by making provision for
registration therefor and rights and obligations of parties to contract for
assignment of receivables and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. Factoring service is one of the important mechanisms
to address the issue of resources management for the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Sector. The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of
Receivables) Bill, 2011, provides for a mechanism for assignment of
receivables of the industry to a ‘factor’ and the payment of consideration
by the ‘factor’ to the industrial unit.

4
The salient features of the Bill
12. The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011,
inter-alia, provides,—
(a) for the process of assignment of receivables due and payable
to any assignor (being any enterprise or medium enterprise,
micro enterprise or small enterprise as defined in clauses ( e),
(g), (h) and ( m) of section 2 of the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Act, 2006, respectively engaged in
any business activity) by any debtor, to any factor, being the
assignee, by an agreement;
(b) that the debtor shall have the right to notice of assignment
and till the notice is given, the assignee shall not be entitled
to demand payment of the receivable from the debtor;
(c) that the liability of the debtor shall not be discharged unless
he makes the payment due on an assigned receivable to the
assignee;
(d) that the assignor would be the trustee of assignee for any
payment received which is due on an assigned receivable;
(e) that if the assignor of receivables is a micro or small enterprise,
the liability of the debtor to make payment on assigned
receivables shall be subject to the provisions of the Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 with
regard to delayed payments of receivables;
(f) for regulation of the factoring business;
(g) for empowering the Reserve Bank to issue directions, call for
information from the factor and prohibit the financial
institutions from undertaking factoring business, if the factor
fails to comply with the direction given by the Reserve Bank;
(h) that the rights and obligations of the debtor cannot be changed
without the express consent of the debtor;
(i) that any breach of contract with the debtor by the assignor
shall not entitle the debtor to recover from the assignee any
sum paid by the debtor to the assignor or the assignee;
(j) provides for compulsory registration by the factor of every
transaction of assignment of receivable with the Central
Registry to be set up under section 20 of the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 within a period of thirty days

5
from such assignment or from the date of establishment of
such Registry, as the case may be, subject to payment of such
fee as may be prescribed and provides that the particulars
of transaction would be entered into the Central Register
kept at the Head Office of the Central Registry;
(k) for penal provisions in cases of certain default or contraven-
tion of the provisions of the proposed legislation.
13. The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivable) Bill, 2011
was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24 March, 2011 and referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 29 March,
2011 for examination and report thereon.
14. The Committee received memoranda/suggestions regarding the
Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivable) Bill, 2011 from Indian
Banks’ Association, IFCI Factors Limited, Shri Sangeet Shukla, Retired
Deputy Managing Director, State Bank of India and Ex-CEO, SBI Global
Factors Ltd. The Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) in connection
with the examination of the Bill.
15. The Committee note that in India since there is no
consolidated legal framework with specific provisions covering all
aspects involved in factoring business, the Government has proposed
this Bill to support the establishment and operations of efficient and
viable factoring organizations. Earlier, instead of making a specific law
for this purpose, the Government relied on two legislations namely the
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary
Undertakings Act, 1993 which was repealed by the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006. Both the Acts aimed at
improving the situation of delayed payments to MSME but failed to
achieve their objectives. The Committee observe in this regard that the
Government has taken an unduly long time for introducing the present
Bill since RBI accepted the recommendations of the Expert Group
headed by Shri C.S. Kalyansundarm (1988) to bring forth a legislation
on factoring more than two decades ago. Even after taking such a long
time to introduce the Bill, the Government have not done due diligence
and in-depth study on the subject suggesting that wider consultations
were not held before formulating the proposals. After the Committee
pointed out several infirmities, the Ministry at evidence stage agreed
to rectify the same. The Committee now hope that the present legislation
with these modifications will serve the desired purpose to address the
issue of resources management for the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Sector. They also desire that the Administrative Ministry

6
should be made responsible in respect of delayed payment from PSUs
to MSMEs. Hence, they recommend this Bill for enactment subject to
such modifications as spelled out in the succeeding paragraphs.
Definitions
16. The Committee during the course of oral evidence pointed out
lack of clarity in the present Bill as well as its title. The title of the Bill
viz. ‘The Regulation of Factor (Assignment) of Receivables Bill, 2011’
seemed to give an impression that there exists a law on factors and the
Bill is proposing to regulate them. Moreover, in the Hindi Version of the
Bill the word ‘ Adhatia’ has been used as translation for the ‘Factor’ which
also creates a doubt that the proposed Bill will create an intermediary/
middleman between the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)
and the buyers of MSME products and particularly in agricultural
operations.
17. When asked to clarify, the Ministry in a written note stated as
under:—
“ At the outset it may be stated that Factor is not an agent or ‘ Adhatia’
for sale of goods. Factor steps in only after the goods/services are
sold. He is not concerned with sale which will continue to be done
by MSMEs as per their existing practices. However, a specific
exclusion about sale of agricultural produce by farmers to Adhatias
will be included in the definition of ‘factoring business’ under clause
2(j) of the Bill. Further to declare specific exclusion of Adhatia from
the scope of the Bill, the word ‘factor’ will be used as such instead
of the word ‘ Adhati’ in the Hindi version of the Bill also.
The Bill defines a Factor as a “Non-Banking Financial Company”
as defined in clause (f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934. Clause 4 of the Bill further provides that provisions of
Chapter III-B of the RBI Act, 1934 relating to NBFCs shall apply
to Factors. In terms of definitions contained in section 45-I of the
RBI Act, 1934, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) are not
permitted to carry on, inter alia , following business activities:—
(i) agricultural operations; and
(ii) the purchase or sale of any goods (other than securities) or
providing of any services.
Since factors are NBFCs governed by the RBI Act, 1934, such Factors
cannot undertake any agricultural operations or purchase or sale
of any goods. In view of this position Factors, as non-banking

7
financial companies cannot act as agents for sale of goods including
agricultural produce.
However, a specific exclusion about sale of agricultural produce
by farmers to Adhatias will be included in the definition of ‘factoring
business’ under clause 2 (j) of the Bill by inserting Explanations as
below:
Explanation (1)
For removal of doubts it is hereby declared that factoring business
shall not include any activity as commission agent or otherwise for
sale of agricultural produce or goods of any kind whatsoever or
any activity relating to the production, storage, supply, distribution,
acquisition or control of such produce or goods or provisions of
any services other than factoring services.
Explanation (2)
For the purpose of this clause the expression ‘agricultural produce’
shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (a) of section
2 of the Agricultural Produce (Grading and marking) Act, 1937
(Act of 1937), and the expressions ‘commission agent’ and ‘goods’
shall have the meanings assigned to them by and explanation (ii)
below clause (i) and clause (d) of section 2 of the Forward Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1952 (Act 74 of 1952).”
18. The Ministry further added as under:—
“Factoring is purchase of receivables with or without recourse to
the business entity selling the receivables. Such transactions can be
undertaken by any person under the general laws of contracts and
transfer of property. If such activity/business of purchase of
receivables (Factoring) is undertaken by a company such business
is treated as business of financial institution as defined in clause
(c) of section 45-1 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. Any
company engaged in business of financial institution which includes
factoring business is required to obtain registration from RBI as
Non-Banking Finance Company and such companies are already
subject to regulatory law namely Chapter III-B of the RBI Act, 1934.
The present Bill seeks to segregate NBFCs engaged in factoring
business and make the proposed law applicable to the business of
factoring but at the same time clause 4 of the Bill provides that
provisions of Chapter III-B of the RBI Act, 1934 shall continue to
apply to such NBFCs save as otherwise provided in the Bill.

8
It is a settled principle of law that only after a law is enacted can
there by any scope of specifying a regulation of under that statute.
As such the name of the Bill is being changed to “The Factoring
Regulation Bill, 2011”.
19. The Committee are happy to note that in order to remove
ambiguity and to give clarity to the Bill, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) have acted upon the suggestions
of the Committee and agreed to include the modifications and changes
in the Bill appropriately pertaining to the short title and definitions.
The Committee are of the considered view that the proposed new
name viz. the Factoring Regulation Bill will dispel the needless
confusion of a non-existent parent Act. The replacement of the word
‘Adhatia’ by ‘Factor’ also, will allay the doubt that the proposed Bill
deals with mechanism/agency which is different from Commission
agents engaged in sale and purchase of agricultural produce. The
Committee recommend that these modifications should be suitably
incorporated in the Bill.
Exemption of factoring business from Stamp duty
20. Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), IFCI Factors Ltd. and an expert
in their memoranda suggested that one major impediment in the
development of the factoring business is multiple stamp duties which
are payable on document of assignment of receivables. Such stamp duty
varies from State to State and on account of high rates of duty and very
low margins available to the Factors renders assignment of receivables
non-viable. In order to make the law effective and encouraging growth
and development of the factoring transactions it is necessary to exempt
document of assignment of receivables from Stamp Duty. Similar
exemptions have been given under Central Laws enacted by Parliament
in the past. One example of such exemption of Stamp Duty is Section 8C
of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 which was inserted by the provisions of
Warehousing (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007.
21. The Ministry in their written submission on the above said
suggestion stated as follows:—
“ Although many experts (including Kalyansundaram Group) have
recommended that to make factoring economically viable, it is
essential that assignment of receivables in favour of a factor is
exempted from stamp duty, we have not made any explicit provision
in this Bill. We are proposing to exempt factoring transactions from
stamp duty by moving an amendment to the Indian Stamp Act,
1899 as part of a comprehensive exercise to amend that law.

9
However, it is possible to amend the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 through
a schedule to the present Bill.”
22. The Committee note that despite specific recommendation of
the Expert Group headed by Shri C.S. Kalyansundaram, the Government
has not made any explicit provision in the Bill in this regard. The
Committee are convinced that to make factoring economically viable,
it is essential that assignment of book debts is exempted from stamp
duty. They are happy that the Government has agreed to this view of
the Committee and has proposed to bring an amendment to the Indian
Stamp Act, 1889 through a schedule to the present Bill. The Committee
find that as two Central Acts are being amended by way of the schedule
appended to the Bill, the amendment with regard to the stamp duty
may also be added in the schedule.
Pricing of Factor Services
23. Provisions of the Bill are silent regarding the amount of
commission or discount charged by the factor to the MSME.
24. When asked about the need to stipulate a ceiling on the charges
the factor would recover from the MSME in the proposed Bill, the Ministry
in a written note submitted as under:—
“The amount of commission charged or discount charged by the
factor to the assignor (Micro and Small Industries) would depend
upon the bilateral contact between the two and the level of
competition in the market. The rate of commission or discount
would depend on the risk perception of the factor and business
relations between the two parties. The regulator, RBI has moved
away from administered rate of interest regime for financial
products. Therefore, any suggestion to administratively determine
the rates would not be in line with the existing policy.”
25. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that it
would not be feasible to administratively determine the rates/fees/
commission chargeable by a factor on the ground that RBI as the
regulator has moved away from the regime of administered rates of
interest. The Committee are, however, not convinced with this reply,
as this is not in harmony with the policy to promote and protect MSMEs.
As the Committee believe that unregulated factor pricing will only
lead to exploitative practices, they would recommend that a suitable
guidelines on pricing should be issued by the RBI with a view to
safeguarding the interest of the MSMEs and to reduce their financial
costs. In this context, it may also be emphasized that since factors will

10
be competing with banks in financing receivables, the rate charged by
them should not be made higher than that charged by banks. From
a larger perspective the Committee would like the Government to
ensure that this legislation actually promotes factoring business as a
facilitator of MSMEs rather than making it yet another exploitative
middleman.
Inconsistency between Clauses 8 and 18 in respect of determining
responsibilities of all parties to the factoring assignment
26. Clause 8 reads as follows:—
“ Any assignee of a receivable shall not be entitled to demand
payment of the receivable from the debtor in respect of such
receivables unless notice of such assignment is given to the debtor
by the assignor or the assignee along-with express authority in its
favour granted by the assignor.”
27. Clause 18 reads as follows:—
“If the assignor commits any breach of the original contract with
the debtor, such breach shall not entitle the debtor to recover from
the assignee any sum paid by the debtor to the assignor or the
assignee.”
28. A doubt has arisen that the two clauses are inconsistent to each
other regarding determining responsibilities and powers of the parties
to the factoring assignment.
29. When the attention of the Ministry was drawn to the
contradiction in the above said clauses, the Ministry in a written note
stated as under:—
“The Bill has been prepared to judiciously determine responsibilities
of all parties to the factoring assignment. As a matter of debtor
protection, it has been provided in Clause 8 that the debtor shall
have the right to notice of assignment and till the notice is given,
the assignee shall not be entitled to demand payment of the
receivable from the debtor. However, since the factor (assignee) is
not a party to the bilateral contract between assignor (as a supplier
of goods or services) and the debtor (purchaser of goods or services),
the deficiency on the part of the assignor towards the debtor should
not affect the rights of the factor (assignee), who has purchased the
financial asset (receivables of the seller) without knowledge of this
deficiency and has acquired rights to recover the receivables from
the debtor and any sum received after the assignment even with

11
the assignor is kept in trust for the factor. So, the inter-se relations
of the three parties involved in the factoring business are fixed in
an objective manner.
The object of this provision is to provide finality to the transaction
of assignment of receivables. If any disputes between the Debtor
and Assignor (MSME) are allowed to be raised against the Assignee,
there will be no certainty about the payment made to the Assignor
by the Factor and to the Factor (Assignee) by the Debtor. While
no claims can be made against the Factor (Assignee) the Debtor
can claim any losses on account of defective goods or short supply
from the Assignor. To remove any doubts such a provision can be
added by way of explanation to clause 18 of the Bill.”
30. The plain reading of these two clauses provides that the debtor
is responsible to make payment to the factor (assignee) only when the
notice has been issued to him either by the assigner or the assignee.
But Clause 18 is silent about his (debtor) rights in case there is a
breach in the original contract by the assigner. The Committee are
happy that the Government has agreed to insert an explanation to
Clause 18 with a view to remove any ambiguity with regard to debtor’s
protection. The Committee desire that the necessary amendment may
be brought forward in this regard.
Clause 32 - Rule making powers of the Central Government
31. Clause 32 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may keep rules in respect of the matters specific in the said clause.
Sub-clause (2) (a) specifies as follows:—
“The form and manner in which the transactions of assignment of
receivables in favour of a non-banking financial company shall be
filed and the fee for filing such transaction under sub-section (1)
of Section 19.”
32. In this regard, Indian Banks’ Association in their written
submission suggested that:—
“In clause 32 (2) (a) the words ‘Non-Banking Financial Companies’
need to be charged to the word Factor.”
33. The written comments received from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) on the above said suggestion stated
as follows:—
“This suggestions is accepted as the registration of transaction
of assignment in favour of a ‘factor’ is to be filed with the

12
Central Registry. A factor may be a non-banking financial company
or a statutory corporation.”
34. The Committee find that the word ‘non-banking financial
companies’ used in the clause restricts the scope to the ‘non-banking
financial companies’ whereas the factor includes in its ambit other
statutory corporations besides non-banking financial companies. The
substitution of ‘factor’ in place of ‘non-banking financial companies’
will enlarge its scope and include all the constituents that comes under
the purview of definition of factor. The Committee find that the
Government has agreed to make necessary amendment in this regard.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to substitute
‘non-banking financial companies’ by ‘factor’ in clause 32(2)(a) of
the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
29 August, 2011 Chairman,
07 Bhadra, 1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

13
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 29th July, 2011 from 1100 hrs.
to 1715 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Manicka Tagore
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
12. Shri Moinul Hassan
13. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
16. Dr. K.V .P. Ramachandra Rao

14
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri. Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
PART-I
(1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs.)
2. * *** *
* *** *
PART-II
(1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri R. Gopalan, Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)
Shri Amrendra Sinha, Joint Secretary and DC
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
Shri M.R. Umerji, Chief Legal Advisor, IBA
IDBI Bank
Shri R.M. Malla, CMD, IDBI Bank
Small Industrial Development Bank of India (SIDBI)
Shri Sushil Muhnot, CMD, SIDBI
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
1. Smt. Archana Mangalagiri, General Manager
2. Shri S.S. Barik, General Manager
3. The Committee heard the representatives of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Financial Services) in connection with examination of the

15
Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011’. The major
issues discussed during the briefing included, definitions clause, regulation
of factors, powers of RBI to regulate factors, assignment of receivables,
liability and principle of debtor protection, registration of certain
assignments of receivables transactions, exemption of factoring transactions
from stamp duties, incoporation of suggestions/recommendations made
by the Study Group headed by Shri C.S. Kalyansundram in the proposed
Bill. The Committee also drew the attention of representatives of Ministry
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) to contradictions in the
various provisions of the Bill. The Chairman directed the representatives
of Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) to furnish replies
to the points raised by the Members during the discussion within ten
days.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-III
(1400 hrs. to 1715 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
4. * *** *
* *** *
The witnesses then withdrew
WITNESSES
5. * *** *
* *** *
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

16
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY -THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th August, 2011 from
1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri Manicka Tagore
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
12. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
13. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri. Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

17
PART-I
(1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
1. Shri D.K. Mittal, Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Singh, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Alok Nigam, Joint Secretary
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)
Shri M.R. Umerji, Chief Legal Advisor, IBA
3. The Committee took further oral evidence of the representatitives
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on ‘the
Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011’. After
examining the replies furnished by the Ministry on the queries raised by
the Members during their sitting held on 29 July, 2011, the Committee
expressed their satisfaction that the Ministry at their behest has agreed
to incorporate modifications in the Bill as suggested by them. The
representatives of the Ministry further clarified to the queries raised by
the Members.
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-II
(1630 hrs. to 1715 hrs.)
W
ITNESSES
4. *** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ***
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

18
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th August, 2011 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Shri Manicka Tagore
9. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
12. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
13. Shri Moinul Hassan
14. Shri Mahendra Mohan
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
16. Shri Y.P. Trivedi

19
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ram Kumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri. Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill,
2011; and
(ii) The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i) and (ii) above
with some modifications/changes as suggested by Members. The
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light
of the modifications suggested and present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

20
APPENDIX II
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 24 of 2011
THE REGULATION OF FACTOR (ASSIGNMENT
OF RECEIVABLES) BILL, 2011
_____
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
_____
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION OF FACTORS
3. Registration of factors.
4. Provisions of non-banking financial
companies apply to factor.
5. Requirement for registration as a
factor not to apply to bank or
Statutory corporation or Government
company.
6. Powers of Reserve Bank to give
directions and to collect information
from factors.

21
CHAPTER III
ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES
7. Assignment of receivables.
8. Notice to debtor and discharge of
obligation of such debtor.
9. Discharge of liability of debtor on
payment to assignee.
10. Payment made to debtor to be held
in trust for benefit of assignee in
certain cases.
CHAPTER IV
RIGHT AND OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO CONTRACT
FOR ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES
11. Rights and obligations of parties to
contract for assignment of
receivables.
12. Liability of debtor.
13. Assignor to be trustee of assignee.
14. Liability of debtor in case of an
assignor being micro or small
enterprises.
15. Principle of debtor protection.
16. Defences and right of set off of
debtor.
17. Modification of original contract.
18. Breach of contract.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF ASSIGNMENTS
19. Registration of certain assignments
of receivables transactions.
20. Public inspection.

22
CHAPTER VI
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
CLAUSES
21. Penalties.
22. Penalties for non-compliance of
direction of Reserve Bank.
23. Offences.
24. Cognizance of offences.
25. Offences by factors.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
26. Provisions of this Act to override
other laws.
27. Application of other laws not barred.
28. Limitation.
29. Confidentiality of information.
30. Power to exempt.
31. Provisions of this Act not to apply
or affect in certain cases.
32. Power of Central Government to
make rules.
33. Laying of rules.
34. Power to remove difficulties.
35. Amendments to certain enactments.
THE SCHEDULE

23
As introduced in Lok Sabha
Bill No. 24 of 2011
THE REGULATION OF FACTOR (ASSIGNMENT
OF RECEIVABLES) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to provide for and regulate assignment of
receivables by making provision for registration
therefor and rights and obligations of parties to
contract for assignment of receivables and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-
second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation
of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint:—
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act,
and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that
provision.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

24
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) ‘‘assignment’’ means transfer by
agreement, of undivided interest of any
assignor in any receivable due from any
debtor in favour of a factor and includes an
assignment where either the assignor or the
debtor, are situated or established outside
India;
(b) “assignee” means a factor in whose
favour the receivable is transferred;
(c) “assignor” means any person who is
the owner of any receivable;
(d) “bank” means,—
(i) a banking company;
(ii) a corresponding new bank;
(iii) the State Bank of India;
(iv) a subsidiary bank;
(v) such other bank which the Central
Government may by notification specify
for the purposes of this Act on the
recommendations of the Reserve Bank;
or
(vi)  a Multi-State Co-operative
Society registered under the Multi-State
Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 and
licensed to undertake business of banking
20 by the Reserve Bank under the
provisions of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949;
(e)  “banking company” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in clause (c)
of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949;
Definitions.
39 of 2002.
10 of 1949.
10 of 1949.

25
(f) “business enterprise” means any
enterprise or medium enterprise, micro
enterprise or small enterprise as defined in
clauses (e), (g), (h) and (m) of section 2 of
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006, respectively engaged
in any business activity;
(g) “corresponding new bank” shall
have the meaning assigned to it in clause (da)
of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949;
(h) “debtor” means any person liable to
the assignor, whether under a contract 30 or
otherwise, to pay any receivable or discharge
any obligation in respect of the receivable
whether existing, accruing, future,
conditional or contingent;
(i)  “factor” means a non-banking
financial company as defined in clause (f) of
section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 which has been granted a certificate of
registration under sub-section (1) of section
3 or anybody corporate established under
an Act of Parliament or any State Legislature
or any Bank or any company registered under
the Companies Act, 1956 engaged in the
factoring business;
(j) “factoring business” means acquisition
of receivables of assignor by accepting
assignment of such receivables or financing,
whether by way of making loans or advances
or otherwise against the security interest over
any receivables;
(k)  “financial contract” means any
spot, forward, future, option or swap
transaction involving interest rates,
commodities, currencies, shares, bonds,
debentures or any other financial ins-
trument, any repurchase of securities and
27 of 2006.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1934.
1 of 1956.

26
lending transaction or any other similar
transaction or combination of such
transactions entered into in the financial
markets;
(l)  “netting agreement” means any
agreement among the system partici-
pants for the purpose of determination by
the system provider of the amount of
money or securities due or payable or
deliverable as a result of setting off or
adjusting the payment obligations or
delivery obligations among the system
participants, including the claims and
obligations arising out of the termination by
the system provider, on the insolvency or
dissolution or winding up of any system
participant or such circumstances as the
system provider, may specify in its rules or
regulations or bye-laws (by whatever name
called), of the transactions admitted for
settlement at a future date so that only a net
claim be demanded or a net obligation be
owned;
(m) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(o) “property” means,—
(i) the immovable property;
(ii) the movable property;
(iii) any debt or any right to receive
payment of money, whether secured or
unsecured;
(iv) the receivables;
(v) the intangible assets, being know-
how, patent, copyright, design, trade

27
mark, licence, franchise or any other
business or commercial right of similar
nature;
(p) “receivables” mean all or part of or
undivided interest in any right of any person
under a contract including an international
contract where either the assignor or the
debtor or the assignee is situated or
established in a State outside India; to
payment of a monetary sum whether
such right is existing, future, accruing,
conditional or contingent arising from and
includes, any arrangement requiring payment
of toll or any other sum, by whatever name
called, for the use of any infrastructure facility
or services; or
(q) “Reserve Bank”, means the Reserve
Bank of India constituted under section 3 of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(r) “State Bank of India” means the State
Bank of India constituted under section 3 of
the State Bank of India Act, 1955;
(s) “subsidiary Bank” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of section
2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary
Banks) Act, 1959;
(t) words and expressions used and
not defined in this Act but defined in
the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934, the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Companies
Act,1956, the Securitisation and Re-
construction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002,
the Credit Information Companies
(Regulation) Act, 2005, or the Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises Development Act,
2006, shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in those Acts.
2 of 1934.
23 of 1955.
38 of 1959.
2 of 1934.
10 of 1949.
1 of 1956.
54 of 2002.
30 of 2005.
27 of 2006.

28
CHAPTER II
REGISTRATION OF FACTORS
3. (1) No factor shall commence or carry on
the factoring business unless it obtains a
certificate of registration from the Reserve Bank
to commence or carry on the factoring business
under this Act.
(2) Every factor shall make an application
for registration to the Reserve Bank in such form
and manner as it may specify:—
Provided that a company registered as a non-
banking financial company and existing on the
commencement of this Act and engaged in
factoring business before such commencement
shall make an application for registration as a
factor to the Reserve Bank before the expiry of
the period of six months from such
commencement and, notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section  (1) , may continue to
carry on the factoring business until a certificate
of registration is issued to it or rejection of
application for registration is communicated to
it.
(3) Every applicant for grant of a certificate
of a registration as a factor shall comply, for the
purpose of registration, with all the requirements
to be fulfilled by an applicant for grant of
certificate of registration as non-banking financial
company under the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 and all the provisions of that Act, so far as
they relate to the registration of non-banking
financial companies, shall (except those provided
for under this Act) mutatis mutandis apply.
(4)  In the case of existing non-banking
financial company the Reserve Bank may issue
a fresh certificate of registration as a factor, if the
principal business of the non-banking financial
company is the factoring business.
Registration
of factors.
2 of 1934.

29
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
every factor including factors not subject to
requirement of registration under section 5, shall
be governed by the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934, the rules and regulations made thereunder
and the directions or guidelines issued by the
Reserve Bank, from time to time.
4. All provisions of Chapter IIIB of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 relating to non-
banking financial companies which have been
granted a certificate of registration under sub-
section (5) of section 45-IA of the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934 shall (except those specifically
provided for under this Act) mutatis mutandis
apply to a factor which has been granted a
certificate of registration under section 3.
5. Nothing contained in section 3 shall apply
to a bank or any corporation established under
an Act of Parliament or State Legislature, or a
Government Company as defined under section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
6. (1) The Reserve Bank may, at any time by
general or special order, direct that every factor
shall furnish to it, in such form, at such intervals
and within such time, such statements,
information or particulars relating to factoring
business undertaken by the factor, as may
be specified by the Reserve Bank from time to
time.
(2) The Reserve Bank may, if it considers
necessary in the interest of business enterprises
availing factoring services or in the interest of
factors or interest of other stake holders give
directions to the factors either generally or to
any factor in particular or group of factors in
respect of any matters relating to or connected
2 of 1934.
2 of 1934.
1 of 1956.
Provisions
of non-
banking
financial
companies
apply to
factor.
Require-
ment for
registration
as a factor
not to
apply to
bank or
Statutory
corporation
or Govern-
ment
company.
Powers of
Reserve
Bank to
give
directions
and to
collect
information
from
factors.

30
with the factoring business undertaken by such
factors.
(3) If any factor fails to comply with any
direction given by the Reserve Bank under
sub-section (2), the Reserve Bank may prohibit
such factor from undertaking the factoring
business:—
Provided that before prohibiting any factor
from undertaking the factoring business, the
factor shall be given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard.
CHAPTER III
A
SSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES
7. (1) Any assignor may, by an agreement in
writing, assign any receivable due and payable
to him by any debtor, to any factor, being the
assignee, for a consideration as may be agreed
between the assignor and the assignee:—
Provided that if the debtor liable to pay the
receivable or the factor is situated or established
outside India, any assignment of receivable shall
be subject to the provisions of the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999.
(2) On execution of agreement in writing for
assignment of receivables, all the rights, remedies
and any security interest created over any
property exclusively to secure the due payment
of receivable shall vest in the assignee and the
assignee shall have an absolute right to recover
such receivable and exercise all the rights and
remedies of the assignor whether by way of
damages or otherwise, or whether notice of
assignment as provided in sub-section (1) of
section 8 is given or not.
(3) Any assignment of receivables which
constitute security for repayment of any loan
42 of 1999.
Assignment
of  receiv-
ables.

31
advanced by any Bank or other creditor and if
the assignor has given notice of such
encumbrance to the assignee, then on accepting
assignment of such receivable, the assignee shall
pay the consideration for such assignment to the
Bank or the creditor, as the case may be.
8. Any assignee of a receivable shall not be
entitled to demand payment of the receivable
from the debtor in respect of such receivables
unless notice of such assignment is given to the
debtor by the assignor or the assignee alongwith
express authority in its favour granted by the
assignor.
9. Where a notice of assignment of receivable
is given by the assignor or the assignee, as the
case may be, under section 8 the debtor on
receipt of such notice, shall make payment to the
assignee and payment made to such assignee in
discharge of any obligation in relation to the
receivables specified in the notice shall fully
discharge the debtor making the payment, from
corresponding liability in respect of such
payment.
10. Where no notice of assignment of
receivables is given by the assignor or under
his authority by the assignee, any payment
made by the debtor in respect of such re-
ceivables to the assignor shall be held in trust for
the benefit of the assignee which shall be
forthwith be paid over to such assignee, as the
case may be, or its agent duly authorised in this
behalf.
CHAPTER IV
R
IGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO CONTRACT
FOR ASSIGNMENT OF RECEIVABLES
11. Without prejudice to the provisions
contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the debtor shall have the right to notice of
Notice to
debtor and
discharge of
obligation
of such
debtor.
Discharge
of liability
of debtor
on payment
to assignee.
Payment
made by
debtor to
assignor to
be held in
trust for
benefit of
assignee in
certain
cases.

32
assignment under section 7 and till notice is
served on the debtor, the rights and obligations
in its contract with the assignor, shall remain
unchanged, excepting the change of the party to
whom the receivables are assigned which may
become entitled to receive the payment of the
receivable from the debtor.
12. Where a notice of assignment as
referred to in section 8 is served, the debtor
shall:—
(a) intimate the assignee the details of
the deposits or advance or payment on
account made to the assignor before the
receipt of notice of assignment and also
provide any other information to the assignee
relating to the receivable as and when called
upon by the assignee to do so;
(b) not be entitled to a valid discharge of
his liability in respect of assigned receivables,
unless he makes the payment due on an
assigned receivables to the assignee.
13. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in
force, where a debtor makes any payment to an
assignor which represents payment due on an
assigned receivable, such payment shall be
deemed to be for the benefit of the assignee, and
the assignor shall be deemed to have received
the amount of such payment as a trustee of the
assignee and the assignor shall make payment of
such amount to the assignee.
14. If the assignor of receivables is a micro
or small enterprise, the liability of the debtor
to make payment due on assigned receivables
shall be subject to the provisions contained
in sections 15 to 17 of the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006
with regards to the delayed payments of the
receivables.
Right and
obligations
of parties
to contract
for
assignment
of receiv-
ables.
Liability of
debtor.
Assignor to
be trustee
of assignee.
Liability of
debtor in
case of an
assignor
being micro
or small
enterprises. 27 of 2006.

33
15. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, any assignment of the receivable shall not,
without the express consent of the debtor in
writing, affect the rights and obligations of the
debtor, (including the terms and conditions of
the contract).
(2) Consequent upon the assignment of
receivables, the payment instruction under
the contract entered into between assignor and
debtor may modify the person, address or
account to which the debtor is required to make
payment, but such instructions shall not
modify:—
(a) the amount of debt specified in the
original contract; or
(b) the place specified in the original
contract at which payment is to be made orat
a place other than that in which the debtor
is situated; or
(c) the date on which payment is to be
made or other terms of the original contract
relating to payment.
16. In a claim by the assignee against the
debtor for payment of the assigned receivable,
the debtor may raise against the assignee,—
(a) all defences and rights of set off
arising from the original contract, entered into
between the assignor and debtor or any other
contract that was part of the same transaction,
of which the debtor could avail himself as if
the assignment had not been made and such
claim were made by the assignor instead of
assignee;
(b) any other right of set-off if it was
available to the debtor at the time
notice,under section 8, of the assignment was
received by the debtor.
Principle of
debtor
protection.
Defences
and right of
set off of
debtor.

34
17. (1) Any agreement made before service
of notice, under section 8, of the assignment of
a receivable between the assignor and the debtor
that affects the assignee’s rights in respect of that
receivable shall be effective as against the
assignee, and the assignee shall acquire rights in
the assigned receivables, as modified by such
agreement.
(2) Any agreement made, after notice of the
assignment between the assignor and the debtor
that affects the assignee’s rights, shall be
ineffective as against the assignee unless,—
(a) the assignee consents to it; or
(b) the receivable is not fully earned by
performance and either the modificationis
provided for in the original contract or, in
the context of the original contract,
a reasonable assignee would consent to the
modification.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1)
and (2) shall affect any right of the assignor or
the assignee arising from breach of an agreement
between them.
18. If the assignor commits any breach of the
original contract with the debtor, such breach
shall not entitle the debtor to recover from the
assignee any sum paid by the debtor to the
assignor or the assignee.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF ASSIGNMENTS
19. (1) Every factor shall file, for the purposes
of registration, the particulars of every transaction
of assignment of receivables in his favour with
the Central Registry to be set-up under section
20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Modifica-
tion of
original
contract.
Breach of
contract.
Registration
of Certain
assignements
of receiv-
ables
transactions.

35
Interest Act, 2002, within a period of thirty days
from the date of such assignment or from the
date of establishment of such registry, as the case
may be, in the manner and subject to payment
of such fee as may be prescribed in this behalf.
Explanation.— For the purpose of filing of
particulars of every transaction of assignment of
receivables with the Central Registry, the
receivables may be described specifically or
generally with reference to the debtor, or the
period to which they relate or by any other
general description by which such receivables can
be identified.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a record
called the Central Register shall be kept at
the head office of the Central Registry for
entering the particulars of the transactions
relating to assignment of receivables in favour
of a factor.
(3) On realisation of the assigned receivables
or settlement of the claim against the debtors,
the factor shall file satisfaction of the assignment
of receivables in its favour, in such manner and
subject to payment of such fees as may be
prescribed in this behalf.
(4)  The provisions for registration of
transactions contained in the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 and
the rules made thereunder shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply to the record of assignment of
receivables in favour of a factor in the Central
Register with the Central Registry.
20. (1) The particulars of transactions of
assignment of receivables entered in the Central
Register of such transactions under section 19
shall be open during business hours for inspection
by any person on payment of such fee as may
be prescribed.
54 of 2002.
54 of 2002.
Public
inspection.

36
(2) The Central Register referred to in sub-
section (2) of section 19 maintained in electronic
form, shall also be open during the business hours
or such extended hours as may be specified by
the Central Registry for inspection by any person
through electronic media on payment of such fee
as may be prescribed.
(3) The provisions for maintenance of Central
Register and public inspection thereof contained
in the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 and the rules made thereunder
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply.
CHAPTER VI
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
21. If a default is made in filling under
section 19 the particulars of any transaction of
assignment of receivables and realisation of
receivables by a factor, such company and every
officer of the company who is in default shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees for every day during which the
default continues.
22. If any factor fails to comply with any
direction issued by the Reserve Bank under
section 6, such factor and every officer of the
factor who is in default, shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and
in the case of a continuing offence, with an
additional fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees for every day during which the default
continues.
23. If any person contravenes or attempts to
contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act or of any rules made
thereunder, for which no specific penalty has been
provided for, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.
54 of 2002.
Penalties.
Penalties
for non-
compliance
of direction
of Reserve
Bank.
Offences.

37
24. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any
offence punishable under this Act except upon
a complaint in writing made by an officer of the
Reserve Bank, generally or specially authorised
in writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank.
(2) No Court other than that of a Metropolitan
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first
class or a court superior thereto shall try any
such offence punishable under this Act.
25. (1) Where an offence under this Act has
been committed by a factor, every person who
at the time the offence was committed was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the factor, for
the conduct of the business of the factor, as well
as the factor, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly:—
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-
section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves
that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he has exercised all due
diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act
has been committed by a factor and it is proved
that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to,
any neglect on the part of any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the factor, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section,
a “director”, in relation to a factor means any
officer entrusted with the management of the
whole or substantially the affairs of the factor.
Cognizance
of offences.
Offences by
factors.

38
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
26. The provisions of this Act shall have
effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or any instrument having effect by
virtue of any such law.
27. The provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of the Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881, the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, the Companies Act, 1956,
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,
2002, the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006 or any other law for the
time being in force.
28. No assignee of any receivable shall be
entitled to take any measures for recovery of any
assigned receivable, through any court or
Tribunal unless his claim in respect of the
receivable is made within the period of limitation
specified under the Limitation Act, 1963.
29. Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
or unless required to do so by an order passed
by any Court or Tribunal or any other statutory
authority under any provision of law for the time
being in force or for the purpose of recovery of
the receivable, a factor shall maintain
confidentiality and shall not disclose to any
person information obtained by it from, any
assignor, its present and future customers, its
commercial and business activities and the terms
of sale between the assignor and any debtor and
other detail about the assignor.
30. (1)  The Government may, on the
recommendation of the Reserve Bank, declare by
Provisions
of this Act
to override
other laws.
Application
of other
laws not
barred.
Limitation.
Confidenti-
ality of
information.
Power to
exempt.
26 of 1881.
4 of 1882.
2 of 1934.
10 of 1949.
1 of 1956.
54 of 2002.
27 of 2006.
36 of 1963.

39
notification in the Official Gazette that any or
all the provisions of this Act shall not apply to
any bank or company or factor or class of or
factors either generally or for such period as may
be specified, subject to such conditions,
limitations or restrictions as it may think fit to
impose.
(2)  A copy of every notification issued
under sub-section (1), shall be laid before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for
a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in
the notification or both the Houses agree that
the notification shall not be issued or, the
notification shall have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under the
notification.
31. (1) The provisions of this Act shall not
apply to any assignment of receivables arising
under or from the following transactions,
namely:—
(a) any merger, acquisition or amalga-
mation of business activities or sale or change
in the ownership or legal status of the
business;
(b) transactions on any stock exchange
or commodities exchange regulated by the
Securities and Exchange Board of India
constituted under the provisions of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992 or by the Forward Markets Commission
under the Forward Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1952, respectively;
Provisions
of this Act
not to
apply or
affect in
certain
cases.
15 of 1992.
74 of 1952.

40
(c) financial contracts governed by netting
agreements, except a receivable owed on the
termination of all outstanding transactions;
(d) foreign exchange transactions except
receivables in any foreign currency;
(e) inter-bank payment systems, inter-
bank payment agreements or clearance and
settlement systems relating to securities or
other financial assets or instruments;
(f) bank deposits;
(g) a letter of credit or independent
guarantee;
(h) rights and obligations of any person
under the law governing negotiable
instruments, negotiable warehouse receipts
under the Warehousing (Development and
Regulation) Act, 2007 or to instruments which
are for the time being, by law or custom
negotiable or any mercantile document of
title to goods;
(i) sale of goods or services for any
personal, family or household use.
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall affect
the rights and obligations of a consumer,
manufacturer, trader or service provider under
the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act,
1986.
32. (1)  The Central Government may,
in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by
notification and in the Electronic Gazette as
defined in clause (3)  of section 2 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 make rules for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power such rules may
37 of 2007.
68 of 1986.
21 of 2000.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.

41
provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the
transactions of assignment of receivables in
favour of a non-banking financial company
shall be filed and the fee for filing such
transaction under sub-section (1) of section
19;
(b)  the form and manner in which
satisfaction of assignment of receivable or
settlement of the claim shall be registered
and the fee for filing such transactions under
sub-section (2) of section 19;
(c) fee for inspecting the Central Register
under section 20; and
(d) any other matter which is required to
be or may be prescribed, in respect of which
provision is to be made or may be made by
rules.
33. Every rule made under this Act shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
34. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in Official
Laying of
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

42
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act, as may appear
to be necessary for removing the difficulty:—
Provided that no order shall be made under
this section after the expiry of a period of two
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall
be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before
each House of Parliament.
35. The enactments specified in the Schedule
shall be amended in the manner specified therein.
Amend-
ments to
certain
enactments.

43
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 35)
Year Act No. Short Title Amendment
1908 5 The Code of Civil In Order XXXVII, in rule 1, in
Procedure, 1908 sub-rule (2 ), in clause (b), after
sub-clause (iii) , the following
sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(iv) suit for recovery of
receivables instituted by
any assignee of a
receivable.”.
2005 30 The Credit Informa- In section 2, in clause (f), after
tion Companies sub-clause (ii),  the following
(Regulation) Act, sub-clause shall be inserted,
2005 namely:—
“(iia) a factor as defined under
clause (i) of the Regulation
of Factor (Assignment of
Receivables) Act, 2011.”.

44
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Inadequate working capital in a small scale or an ancillary industrial
undertaking caused serious and endemic problems affecting the health
of such undertaking. It was, therefore, felt that prompt payments of money
by buyers should be statutorily ensured and mandatory provisions for
payment of interest on the outstanding money, in case of default, should
be made. With a view to provide for and regulate the payment of interest
on delayed payments to small scale and ancillary industrial undertakings
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, a legislation
titled as “The Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary
Industrial Undertakings Act” was enacted in 1993. The provisions of the
said Act made it mandatory for the buyer to pay to the Small Scale
Industry promptly, failing which he is required to pay interest to the
supplier.
2. However, the aforesaid Act did not improve the situation of
delayed payments and the same was repealed by the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 which provided for
facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the
competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. This Act made provision for
liability for buyer to make payment to the supplier, being a micro or
small enterprise and the National Small Industries Corporation, the Small
Industries Development Corporation of a State or Union territory and
any company, co-operative society, trust or a body, by whatever name
called, registered or constituted under any law for the time being in force
and engaged in selling goods produced by micro or small enterprises
and rendering services which are provided by such enterprises referred
to in clause (n) of section 2 of the said Act (hereafter referred to as micro
or small enterprises).
3. The Central Government received complaints regarding delay
in payment to the micro or small industries. However, the enactment of
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 also
did not improve the situation of delayed payments to small scale
industries. The Reserve Bank constituted a Study Group in January, 1998
under the Chairmanship of Shri C.S. Kalyansundaram, former Managing
Director, State Bank of India for examining the feasibility and mechanics

45
of starting factoring organisations in the country and making
recommendations regarding its theory, constitution, organisational
set-up, scope of activities and other related matters. The Committee had
noted that inadequacy of working capital finance with its attendant
liquidity problem has been one of the major stumbling blocks in the
viable running of small scale industry units and recommended that
factoring for small scale industries could be mutually beneficial to both
factors and small scale industry units. Besides, the said Committee, various
other Committees set-up for alleviating the problems of small scale
industry units, by the Government and the Reserve Bank during the last
decade [including the Prime Minister’sTask Force on Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (2010)] have also recommended development of
factoring services for small scale industries through policy and legislative
prescriptions to address the problem of liquidity for the micro or small
industries.
4. In view of the above, the Central Government decided to
enact a legislation relating to factoring services and introduce a Bill
titled as “The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011”,
to provide for and regulate the assignment of receivables by making
provision for registration therefor and rights and obligations of
parties to contract for assignment of receivables and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. Factoring service is one
of the important mechanisms to address the issue of resources
management for the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Sector.
The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011,
provides for a mechanism for assignment of receivables of the industry
to a ‘factor’ and the payment of consideration by the ‘factor’ to the
industrial unit.
5. The Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) Bill, 2011,
inter alia , provides,—
(a) for the process of assignment of receivables due and payable
to any assignor (being any enterprise or medium enterprise,
micro enterprise or small enterprise as defined in clauses (e),
(g), (h) and (m) of section 2 of the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Act, 2006, respectively engaged in
any business activity) by any debtor, to any factor, being the
assignee, by an agreement;
(b) that the debtor shall have the right to notice of assignment
and till the notice is given, the assignee shall not be entitled
to demand payment of the receivable from the debtor;

46
(c) that the liability of the debtor shall not be discharged unless
he makes the payment due on an assigned receivable to the
assignee;
(d) that the assignor would be the trustee of assignee for any
payment received which is due on an assigned receivable;
(e) that if the assignor of receivables is a micro or small enterprise,
the liability of the debtor to make payment on assigned
receivables shall be subject to the provisions of the Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 with
regard to delayed payments of receivables;
(f) for regulation of the factoring business;
(g) for empowering the Reserve Bank to issue directions, call for
information from the factor and prohibit the financial
institutions from undertaking factoring business, if the factor
fails to comply with the direction given by the Reserve Bank;
(h) that the rights and obligations of the debtor cannot be changed
without the express consent of the debtor;
(i) that any breach of contract with the debtor by the assignor
shall not entitle the debtor to recover from the assignee any
sum paid by the debtor to the assignor or the assignee;
(j) provides for compulsory registration by the factor of every
transaction of assignment of receivable with the Central
Registry to be set up under section 20 of the Securitisation
and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 within a period of thirty days
from such assignment or from the date of establishment of
such Registry, as the case may be, subject to payment of such
fee as may be prescribed and provides that the particulars
of transaction would be entered into the Central Register
kept at the Head Office of the Central Registry;
(k) for penal provisions in cases of certain default or
contravention of the provisions of the proposed legislation.
6. It is expected that the enactment of the proposed legislation
would address the delay in payment and liquidity problems faced by the
micro or small enterprises, though the proposed legislation applies to all
enterprises including micro or small enterprises.

47
7. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the proposed legislation.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE
The 17th March , 2011.

48
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title, extent and
commencement of the proposed legislation. This clause enables the
Central Government to appoint a date with respect to the commen-
cement of the proposed legislation. However, different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of the proposed legislation and any
reference in any such provision to the commencement of proposed
legislation shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision.
Clause 2.—This clause defines certain expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause relates to registration of factors.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no factor shall commence
or carry on the factoring business unless it obtains a certificate of
registration from the Reserve Bank to commence or carry on the factoring
business under the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every factor shall make
an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in such form and
manner as it may specify. However, a company registered as a non-banking
financial company and existing on the commencement of the proposed
legislation and engaged in factoring business before such commencement
shall make an application for registration as a factor to the Reserve Bank
before the expiry of the period of six months from such commencement
and, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (1), may continue
to carry on the factoring business until a certificate of registration is
issued to it or rejection of application for registration is communicated
to it.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that every applicant for grant
of a certificate of a registration as a factor shall comply, for the purpose
of registration, with all the requirements to be fulfilled by an applicant
for grant of certificate of registration as non-banking financial company
under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and all the provisions of that
Act, so far as they relate to the registration of non-banking financial
companies shall, mutatis mutandis , apply.

49
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that in the case of existing
non-banking financial company the Reserve Bank may issue a fresh
certificate of registration as a factor, if the principal business of the non-
banking financial company is the factoring business.
Sub-clause (5)  of this clause provides that every factor including
factors not subject to requirement of registration under clause 5, shall
be governed by the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the rules and
regulations made thereunder and the directions or guidelines issued by
the Reserve Bank, from time to time.
Clause 4.—This clause relates to the provisions of non-banking
financial companies which apply to a factor.
This clause provides that all provisions of Chapter IIIB of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934 relating to non-banking financial companies which
have been granted a certificate of registration under sub-section (5) of
section 45-IA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 shall (except those
specifically provided for under the proposed legislation) mutatis mutandis
apply to a factor which has been granted a certificate of registration
under clause 3 of the proposed legislation.
Clause 5.—This clause relates to requirement for registration as a
factor which would not apply to bank or statutory corporation or
Government company:—
This clause provides that nothing contained in clause 3 shall apply
to a bank or any corporation established under an Act of Parliament or
State Legislature, or a Government Company as defined under section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
Clause 6.—This clause relates to powers of Reserve Bank to give
directions and to collect information from factors.
Sub-clause (1)  of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may,
at any time by general or special order, direct that every factor shall
furnish to it, in such form, at such intervals and within such time, such
statements, information or particulars relating to factoring business
undertaken by the factor, as may be specified by the Reserve Bank from
time to time.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Reserve Bank may,
if it considers necessary in the interest of business enterprises availing

50
factoring services or in the interest of factors or interest of other stake-
holders give directions to the factors either generally or to any factor in
particular or group of factors in respect of any matters relating to or
connected with the factoring business undertaken by such factors.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that if any factor fails to
comply with any direction given by the Reserve Bank under sub-
clause (2), the Reserve Bank may prohibit such factor from undertaking
the factoring business. However, before prohibiting any factor from
undertaking the factoring business, the factor shall be given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
Clause 7.—This clause relates to assignment of receivables.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any assignor may, by an
agreement in writing, assign any receivable due and payable to him by
any debtor, to any factor, being the assignee, for a consideration as may
be agreed between the assignor and the assignee. However, if the debtor
liable to pay the receivable or the factor is situated or established outside
India, any assignment of receivable shall be subject to the provisions of
the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that on execution of agreement
in writing for assignment of receivables, all the rights, remedies and any
security interest created over any property exclusively to secure the due
payment of receivable shall vest in the assignee and the assignee shall
have an absolute right to recover such receivable and exercise all the
rights and remedies of the assignor whether by way of damages or
otherwise, or whether notice of assignment as provided in sub-clause (1)
of clause 8 is given or not.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that any assignment of
receivables which constitute security for repayment of any loan advanced
by any Bank or other creditor and if the assignor has given notice of such
encumbrance to the assignee, then on accepting assignment of such
receivable, the assignee shall pay the consideration for such assignment
to the Bank or the creditor, as the case may be.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to notice to debtor and discharge of
obligation of such debtor.
This clause provides that any assignee of a receivable shall not be
entitled to demand payment of the receivable from the debtor in respect

51
of such receivables unless notice of such assignment is given to the debtor
by the assignor or the assignee along with express authority in its favour
granted by the assignor.
Clause 9.—This clause relates to discharge of liability of debtor on
payment to assignee.
This clause provides that where a notice of assignment of receivable
is given by the assignor or the assignee, as the case may be, under clause
8 the debtor on receipt of such notice, shall make payment to the assignee
and payment made to such assignee in discharge of any obligation in
relation to the receivables specified in the notice shall fully discharge the
debtor making the payment, from corresponding liability in respect of
such payment.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to payment made by debtor to
assignor to be held in trust for benefit of assignee in certain cases.
This clause provides that where no notice of assignment of
receivables is given by the assignor or under his authority by the assignee,
any payment made by the debtor in respect of such receivables to the
assignor shall be held in trust for the benefit of the assignee which shall
be forthwith be paid over to such assignee, as the case may be, or its
agent duly authorised in this behalf.
Clause 11.—This clause relates to rights and obligations of parties
to contract for assignment of receivables.
This clause provides that without prejudice to the provisions
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the debtor shall
have the right to notice of assignment under clause 7 and till notice is
served on the debtor , the rights and obligations in its contract with the
assignor, shall remain unchanged, excepting the change of the party to
whom the receivables are assigned which may become entitled to receive
the payment of the receivable from the debtor.
Clause 12.—This clause relates to liability of debtor.
This clause provides that where a notice of assignment, as referred
to in clause 8, is served, the debtor shall, (a) intimate the assignee the
details of the deposits or advance or payment on account made to the
assignor before the receipt of notice of assignment and also provide any
other information to the assignee relating to the receivable as and when

52
called upon by the assignee to do so; (b) not be entitled to a valid discharge
of his liability in respect of assigned receivables, unless he makes the
payment due on an assigned receivables to the assignee.
Clause 13.—This clause relates to assignor to be trustee of assignee.
This clause provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force, where a debtor
makes any payment to an assignor which represents payment due on an
assigned receivable, such payment shall be deemed to be for the benefit
of the assignee, and the assignor shall be deemed to have received the
amount of such payment as a trustee of the assignee and the assignor
shall make payment of such amount to the assignee.
Clause 14.—This clause relates to liability of debtor in case of an
assignor being micro or small enterprises.
This clause provides that if the assignor of receivables is a micro
or small enterprise, the liability of the debtor to make payment due on
assigned receivables shall be subject to the provisions contained in sections
15 to 17 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,
2006 with regards to the delayed payments of the receivables.
Clause 15.—This clause relates to principle of debtor protection.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any assignment of the
receivable shall not, without the express consent of the debtor in writing,
affect the rights and obligations of the debtor.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that consequent upon the
assignment of receivables, the payment instruction under the contract
entered into between assignor and debtor may modify the person, address
or account to which the debtor is required to make payment, but such
instructions shall not modify, (a) the amount of debt specified in the
original contract; or (b) the place specified in the original contract at
which payment is to be made or at a place other than that in which the
debtor is situated; or (c) the date on which payment is to be made or
other terms of the original contract relating to payment.
Clause 16.—This clause relates to defences and right of set off of
debtor.
This clause provides that in a claim by the assignee against the
debtor for payment of the assigned receivable, the debtor may raise against

53
the assignee, (a) all defences and rights of set-off arising from the original
contract, entered into between the assignor and debtor or any other
contract that was part of the same transaction, of which the debtor could
avail himself as if the assignment had not been made and such claim
were made by the assignor instead of assignee; and (b) any other right
of set-off if it was available to the debtor at the time notice, under
clause 8, of the assignment was received by the debtor.
Clause 17.—This clause relates to modification of original contract.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that any agreement made
before service of notice, under clause 8, of the assignment of a receivable
between the assignor and the debtor that affects the assignee’s rights in
respect of that receivable shall be effective as against the assignee, and
the assignee shall acquire rights in the assigned receivables, as modified
by such agreement.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that any agreement made,
after notice of the assignment between the assignor and the debtor that
affects the assignee’s rights, shall be ineffective as against the assignee
unless, (a) the assignee consents to it; or (b) the receivable is not fully
earned by performance and either the modification is provided for in the
original contract or, in the context of the original contract, a reasonable
assignee would consent to the modification.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that nothing contained in
sub-clauses (1) and
(2) shall affect any right of the assignor or the assignee arising from
breach of an agreement between them.
Clause 18.— This clause relates to breach of contract.
This clause provides that if the assignor commits any breach of the
original contract with the debtor, such breach shall not entitle the debtor
to recover from the assignee any sum paid by the debtor to the assignor
or the assignee.
Clause 19.— This clause relates to registration of certain assignments
of receivables transactions.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that every factor shall file,
for the purposes of registration, the particulars of every transaction of
assignment of receivables in his favour with the Central Registry to be

54
set up under section 20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002,
within a period of thirty days from the date of such assignment or from
the date of establishment of such registry, as the case may be, in the
manner and subject to payment of such fee as may be prescribed in
this behalf.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that a record called the Central
Register shall be kept at the head office of the Central Registry for entering
the particulars of the transactions relating to assignment of receivables
in favour of a factor.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that on realisation of the
assigned receivables or settlement of the claim against the debtors, the
factor shall file satisfaction of the assignment of receivables in its favour,
in such manner and subject to payment of such fees as may be prescribed
in this behalf.
Sub-clause (4) of this clause provides that the provisions for
registration of transactions contained in the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest
Act, 2002 and the rules made thereunder shall, mutatis mutandis, apply
to the record of assignment of receivables in favour of a factor in the
Central Register with the Central Registry.
Clause 20.— This clause relates to public Inspection.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that the particulars of
transactions of assignment of receivables entered in the Central Register
of such transactions under clause 19 shall be open during business hours
for inspection by any person on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that the Central Register
referred to in sub-clause (2) of clause 19 maintained in electronic form,
shall also be open during the business hours or such extended hours as
may be specified by the Central Registry for inspection by any person
through electronic media on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Sub-clause (3) of this clause provides that the provisions for
maintenance of Central Register and public inspection thereof contained
in the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 and the rules made thereunder
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply.

55
Clause 21.— This clause relates to penalties.
This clause provides that if a default is made in filling under
clause 19 the particulars of any transaction of assignment of receivables
and realisation of receivables by a factor, such company and every officer
of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which the
default continues.
Clause 22.— This clause relates to penalties for non-compliance of
direction of Reserve Bank.
This clause provides that if any factor fails to comply with any
direction issued by the Reserve Bank under clause 6, such factor and
every officer of the factor who is in default, shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing
offence, with an additional fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
for every day during which the default continues.
Clause 23.— This clause relates to offences.
This clause provides that if any person contravenes or attempts to
contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of this Act or of
any rules made thereunder, for which no specific penalty has been
provided for, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Clause 24.— This clause relates to cognizance of offences.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that no Court shall take
cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except upon a
complaint in writing made by an officer of the Reserve Bank, generally
or specially authorised in writing in this behalf by the Reserve Bank.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that no court other than that
of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
or a court superior thereto shall try any such offence punishable under
the proposed legislation.
Clause 25.— This clause relates to offences by factors.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause provides that where an offence under
the proposed legislation has been committed by a factor, every person
who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was

56
responsible to, the factor, for the conduct of the business of the
factor, as well as the factor, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
However, nothing contained in this sub-clause shall render any such
person liable to any punishment provided in the proposed legislation,
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-clause (1), where an offence under the proposed
legislation has been committed by a factor and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the factor, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Clause 26.— This clause relates to provisions of this Act to override
other laws.
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument
having effect by virtue of any such law.
Clause 27.— This clause relates to application of other laws not
barred.
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any
other law for the time being in force.
Clause 28.— This clause relates to limitation.
This clause provides that any assignee can take any measure for
recovery of assigned receivable through any court or Tribunal only if his
claim is made within the period of limitation specified under the
Limitation Act, 1963.
Clause 29.— This clause relates to confidentiality of information.
This clause provides that a factor shall maintain confidentiality and
shall not disclose to any person information obtained by it from, any

57
assignor, its present and future customers, its commercial and business
activities and the terms of sale between the assignor and any debtor and
other detail about the assignor. However, this information could be
disclosed on the orders passed by any Court or Tribunal or any statutory
authority.
Clause 30.— This clause relates to power to exempt.
Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central Government,
on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, to exempt, by notification
in the Official Gazette, any Bank or Company or factor from the
applicability of any or all provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (2) of this clause provides that every such notification
made by the Central Government shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 31.— This clause relates to provisions of this Act not to
apply or affect in certain cases.
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
shall not apply, inter alia, to any assignment of receivable under or from
certain transactions such as merger of business activities, transactions on
stock exchange or commodities exchange, netting contracts, inter-bank
payments, bank deposits, negotiable instruments and sale of goods or
services for any personal, family or household dues.
Clause 32.— This clause relates to power of Central Government
to make rules.
This clause confers power upon the Central Government to make
rules in respect of matters specified in the said clause.
Clause 33.— This clause relates to laying of rules.
This clause provides that the rules made by the Central Government
under the proposed legislation shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 34.— This clause relates to power to remove difficulties.
This clause empowers the Central Government to remove any
difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed
legislation.

58
Clause 35.— This clause relates to amendments of certain enactments.
This clause provides to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
to make available the benefits of summary proceedings for recovery of
debts or dues under a factoring arrangement to a factor and amends the
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 to define factor as
a “credit institution which are consequential nature.”

59
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1)  of clause 32 empowers the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may
be made. These matters, inter alia , include, (a) the form and manner in
which the transactions of assignment of receivables in favour of a non-
banking financial company shall be filed and the fee for filing such
transaction under sub-clause (1) of clause 19; (b) the form and manner
in which satisfaction of assignment of receivable or settlement of the
claim shall be registered and the fee for filing such transactions under
sub-clause (2) of clause 19; (c) fee for inspecting the Central Register
under clause 20; and (d) any other matter which is required to be or may
be prescribed, in respect of which provision is to be made or may be
made by rules.
2. Clause 33 provides that the rules made by the Central
Government under the proposed legislation shall be laid before each
House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central
Government are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself.
4. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

60
LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for and regulate assignment of receivables by making
provision for registration therefor and rights and obligations
of parties to contract for assignment of receivables and
for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
_______
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance)