1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2013-14) 
 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
„POLICY ON NEW LICENCES IN THE 
BANKING SECTOR‟ 
 
 
SEVENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                         LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
79 


2 
 
SEVENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
„POLICY ON NEW LICENCES IN THE 
BANKING SECTOR‟ 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 18 October, 2013 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09  December, 2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2013/ Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


3 
 
CONTENTS  
Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee………………………………………. 
Introduction……………………………………………………………. 
 
REPORT 
Sl. No.                          
 
 
PART -I 
 
   
I Background 
 
1 
II Recommendations of Committees  
 
2 
III Rationale for new Banks 
 
3 
IV Earlier guidelines for licensing of Banks 
 
4 
V RBI‟s Experience with 12 New Private Banks 
 
6 
VI Lessons from the Global Crisis 
 
8 
VII Proposal for Additional banking licenses 
 
9 
VIII Discussion Paper on Entry of New Banks 
 
10 
IX Drafting of Guidelines on Licensing of New Banks in Pvt. Sector 
 
12 
X Guidelines on Licensing of New Banks, 2013 
 
14 
XI Comments furnished by the Ministry of Finance and RBI on  
Parameters 
 
24 
XII Recommendation of Standing Committee on Finance on Policy on New 
Banking License ( 43rd Report) 
 
32 
XIII Social Obligations 
 
36 
XIV Time Limit 
 
40 
                                  PART II 
      OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
44 
 
      Annexure I and II           50  
 
APPENDIX 
 
Minutes of sittings of the Committee held on 9 April, 2013 and 27 September, 2013……       57 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2013-14)    
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay 
5.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Shri Thakur  Anurag Singh  
18. Shri Subodh Kant Sahai
  
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   -  Additional Director 
3. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   -  Committee Officer 
                                                           
 Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  16th September, 2013 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Seventy Ninth report on the subject „Policy on New 
Licences in the Banking Sector‟. 
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Reserve Bank of 
India at their sittings held on 9 April, 2013. 
3. The Committee, at their sittings held on 27 September, 2013 considered and 
adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the same and present it 
to the Speaker/Parliament. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for 
furnishing the requisite materia l and information which were desired in connection with 
the examination of the subject.   The Committee wish to express their thanks to 
representatives of the Reserve Bank of India for appearing before the Committee.     
5. For facility of reference, the o bservations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                               YASHWANT SINHA, 
27 September, 2013                                                             Chairman, 
05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                                       Standing Committee on Finance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
I BACKGROUND  
 Financial sector reforms  were initiated in India in the early nineties based on 
the recommendations of Narasimham Committee (1991). With a view to injecting 
competitiveness and improving efficiency and productivity in the banking sector, the 
Committee had recommended that the Res erve Bank of India (RBI) should permit 
establishment of new banks in the private sector. In this backdrop, guidelines for 
licensing of new banks in the private sector were issued by RBI in January, 1993 and 10 
new banks were set up in the private sector. 
 1.2 Local Area Bank Scheme was introduced in August 1996 pursuant to 
announcement made by the then Finance Minister in his budget speech. Its objective 
was to bridge the gaps in availability of credit and to enhance the framework of 
institutional credit in  the rural and semi -urban areas, and also provide efficiency and 
competitive financial intermediation services in the areas of operation comprising three 
contiguous districts. Out of 6 LABs that were liscensed, one LAB‟s license was 
cancelled in January 20 02 for grave irregularities observed, and another LAB whose 
financial position was found to be unsatisfactory, was amalgamated with a Public sector 
Bank under section 45 of the Banking Regulation  Act, 1949 in August 2004. As such, 
only 4LABs are presently functioning. 
 1.3 Subsequently, the 1993  guidelines were revised in January 2001 and 
two more banks were set up in the private sector. While granting „ in principle‟ approval 
to two applicants in January 2002 to set up banks in the private sector under th e 2001 
guidelines, the Reserve Bank in its Press Release dated January 30, 2002  indicated 
that it would consider inviting fresh applications for new banks in the private sector after 
three years after further reviewing the working of the private sector ban ks. It was also 
indicated that the guidelines issued in 2001 may be revised if considered necessary.   
 Consolidation phase in India  
 1.4 Since the issue of guidelines on entry of new banks in the private sector in 
2001, there was a phase of consolidation in the private sector banking scenario. 15 

7 
 
amalgamations, of which, 9 voluntary and 6 compulsory, took place with other stronger 
banks. Ma ny of these private sector banks had been amalgamated with other strong 
banks either due to weak financials or voluntarily for the purpose of creating a stronger 
and larger bank. Further, a conducive environment for voluntary amalgamation was 
created by wa y of issue of a circular on dated May 11, 2005 on the subject, detailing 
with the process for such amalgamations. It was, therefore, felt that the immediate need 
was to consolidate and strengthen the banking system and leverage its strength for 
financial inclusion, than setting up of new banks in the private sector banks. 
II RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMITTEES  
 2.1 Meanwhile, certain recommendations were made by Committees for 
setting up new banks in the private sector. Some of the recommendations are as under:  
High Level Investment Commission  
 2.2 The February 2006 report of The High Level Investment Commission, 
constituted by the Government of India in December 2004 with the objective of 
enhancing both foreign and domestic investment levels in India, has, amo ng other 
things, recommended permitting of ownership in Indian banks up to 15 percent by 
Indian corporates, and also to increase the limit of holdings by any one foreign bank up 
to 15 percent in private banks.  
High Level Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility  
 2.3 The July 2006 report of The High Level Committee on Fuller Capital 
Account Convertibility, constituted by the Reserve Bank of India in March 2006 under 
the chairmanship of Shri S. S. Tarapore, has recommended that RBI should evolve 
policies to allow, on a case by case basis, industrial houses to have a stake in Indian 
banks or promote new banks. The policy may also encourage non -banking finance 
companies to convert into banks. It has also recommended that after exploring these 
avenues until 2009, foreign banks may be allowed to enhance their presence in the 
banking system.  
Committee on Financial Sector Reforms  
 2.4 The September 2008 report of The High Level Committee on Financial 
Sector Reforms, constituted by the Government of India in August 2007 under the 
chairmanship of Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan, has recommended allowing more entry to 

8 
 
private well -governed deposit -taking small finance banks with stipulation of higher 
capital adequacy norms, a strict prohibition on related party transactions, and lower 
allowable concentration norms (loans as a share of capital that can be made to one 
party). Such measures would also i ncrease financial inclusion by reaching out to poorer 
households and local small and medium enterprises.  
While the recommendations were examined, a letter dated December 3, 2009 was sent 
to the Government on the recommendations of the High Level Committee  on Financial 
Sector Reforms with particular reference to Local Area Banks. The letter indicated that 
there were entry level constraints in respect of exercising due diligence on the 
promoters of Local Area Banks. Further, the findings of the Review Group headed by 
Shri G. Ramachandran, former Finance Secretary, Government of India in July 2002 
that the LABs had not made any significant impact on the local communities in their 
areas of operation, the fundamental weaknesses inherent in the business model of the 
LABs and the operational disadvantages due to the limited area of operation were also 
mentioned. It was also indicated that, alternatives to small banks by way of leveraging 
technology and use of Business Correspondents and Business Facilitators models  
would be more suitable to achieve financial inclusion and to reach the rural households. 
III RATIONALE FOR NEW BANKS  
 
Welfare and Productivity 
 3.1 It is generally accepted that greater financial system depth, stability and  
soundness contribute to econo mic growth. But beyond that, for growth to be truly 
inclusive requires broadening and deepening the reach of banking. A wider distribution 
and access of financial services helps both consumers and producers raise their welfare 
and productivity. Such access  is especially powerful for the poor as it provides them 
opportunities to build savings, make investments, avail credit, and more important, 
insure themselves against income shocks and emergencies. 
 
Average Population Coverage by Commercial Banks  
 3.2 As of March 31, 2009, the Indian banking system comprised 27 public 
sector banks, 7 new private sector banks, 15 old private sector banks, 31 foreign banks, 

9 
 
86 Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), 4 Local Area Banks (LABs), 1,721 urban cooperative 
banks, 31 state co-operative banks and 371 district central co-operative banks. 
 3.3 The average population coverage by a commercial bank branch in urban 
areas improved from 12,300 as on June 30, 2005 to 9,400 as on June 30, 2010 and in 
rural and semi urban areas from 17, 200 as on June 30, 2005 to 15,900 as on June 30, 
2010. The all India weighted average during the same period improved from 15,500 to 
13,400. 
 
Promotion of Financial Inclusion 
 3.4 Though the Indian financial system has made impressive strides in 
resource m obilization, geographical and functional reach, financial viability, 
profitability and competitiveness, vast segments of the population, especially the 
underprivileged sections of the society, have still no access to formal banking 
services. 
 
 3.5 The Rese rve Bank is therefore considering providing licences to a 
limited number of new banks. A larger number of banks would foster greater 
competition, and thereby reduce costs, and improve the quality of service. More 
importantly, it would promote financial inc lusion, and ultimately support inclusive 
economic growth, which is a key focus of public policy. 
 
IV EARLIER GUIDELINES FOR LICENSING OF BANKS 
 
 4.1 When financial sector reforms were initiated in India in the early 
nineties, guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector were issued in 
January 1993.(Annexure I) 
  4.2 Again the guidelines for licensing new banks were revised  in January 
2001; the objective was to instill greater competition in the banking system to 
increase productivity and efficiency. .(Annexure I) 
 

10 
 
 4.3 The revised 2001 guidelines by and large were still cautious in nature. 
Large industrial houses were not permitted to promote new banks. However, 
individual companies, directly or indirectly connected with large industrial houses 
were permitted to own 10 percent of the equity of a bank, but without any controlling 
interest. 
 4.4 An NBFC with good track records was considered eligible to convert 
into a bank, provided it was not promoted by a large industrial house and satisfi ed 
the prescribed minimum capital requirements, a triple A (AAA) or its equivalent, 
credit rating in the previous year, capital adequacy of not less than 12 percent and 
net Non Performing Assets (NPA) ratio of not more than 5 percent. The initial 
minimum p aid up capital was prescribed at Rs. 200 crore to be raised to Rs.300 
crore within three years of commencement of business. 
 4.5 Promoters were required to contribute a minimum of 40 percent of the 
paid up capital of the bank at any point of time, with a l ock-in period of five years. 
However, if the promoter's contribution to the initial capital was more than the 
minimum 40 percent, they were required to dilute their excess stake after one year 
of the bank's operations. 
 4.6 Non Resident Indians (NRIs) were  permitted to participate in the 
primary equity of a new bank to the maximum extent of 40 percent. However, the 
equity participation was restricted to 20 percent within the above ceiling of 40 
percent, in the case of a foreign banking company or finance co mpany (including 
multilateral institutions) acting as a technical collaborator or a co-promoter.  
 
                       GUIDELINES FOR BANKING LICENSE 
2013 2001 1993 
Non Operative Finance 
Holding Companies 
(NOFHC) Registration with 
RBI as NBFC.  NOFC to  
own Bank 
Registration under Rule 11 
of Banking regulation 
(Companies) Rules 1949 
(Form III) 
Registration as public ltd. 
company under Company 
Act, 1956 
Large industrial houses can 
apply for banking license 
Specified that no large 
industrial house can app ly 
for license 
-- 
Spell out exposure norms -- -- 

11 
 
Capital adequacy Rs. 5 
billion 
Capital adequacy Rs. 200 
crore to be rasied to Rs. 
300 crore in 3 years 
Capital adequacy Rs. 100 
Number of license to be 
issued – no restriction 
Number of license to be 
issued restricted to 2 or 3 
Number of license to be 
issued no restriction 
Mandated that 25% of 
banks be unbanked/rural 
areas 
- Free to open branches 
anywhere as long as capital 
adequacy norms and 
prudential norms 
High level Advisory 
Committee to screen a nd 
examine the applications 
yet to be set up 
Details of the Chairman, 
members of the High level 
Advisory Committee to 
screen and examine the 
readily given 
No such  high level 
committee was formed 
 
V RBI‟S EXPERIENCE WITH THE 12 NEW PRIVATE BANKS 
 5.1 10 new banks were set up in the private sector after the 1993 guidelines 
and 2 new banks after the 2001 revised guidelines. Out of these, four were promoted by 
financial institutions, one each by conversion of co -operative bank and NBFC into 
commercial banks,  and the remaining six by individual banking professionals and an 
established media house. 
 5.2 Out of the four banks promoted by individuals in 1993, only one has 
survived with muted growth. One bank has been compulsorily merged with a 
nationalized bank d ue to erosion of networth on account of large capital market 
exposure. The other two banks have voluntarily amalgamated with other private sector 
banks over a period of 10 to 13 years due to the decisions of the majority shareholders 
arising out of poor governance and lack of financial strength. 
 5.3 Out of the remaining six banks that were licensed in 1993, one bank 
promoted by a media group has voluntarily amalgamated itself with another private 
sector bank within five years of operations and four banks p romoted by financial 
institutions have either merged with the parent or rebranded and achieved growth over 
a period of time. The bank that was converted from a Cooperative bank has taken some 
time in aligning itself to the commercial banking and is endeavoring to stabilize itself. 
 5.4 The two banks licensed in the second phase have been functioning for 
less than 10 years and their transition from the settling stage has been fairly smooth. 

12 
 
 5.5 In respect of their experience with new private banks since 1993 RBI 
submitted as under: 
“…… over these 17 years … banks promoted by individuals, 
though banking professionals, either failed or merged with other 
banks or had muted growth.” 
 
 5.6 RBI further added that: 
“Only those banks that had adequate experience in broad 
financial sector, financial resources, trustworthy people, strong 
and competent managerial support could withstand the rigorous 
demands of promoting and managing a bank.” 
Banks licensed under the 1993 and 2001 guidelines 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the bank Date of 
licence 
Name of the promoters Present position of the 
bank 
1 Axis Bank LTD. 28-02-1994 Financial institutions : 
SUUTI and LIC 
Still functioning  
2 IndusInd Bank Ltd. 2-04-1994 Individuals : 
Hindujas, through a number of 
companies representing Sindhi 
community 
Still functioning with 
muted growth  
3 ICICI Bank Ltd. 17-05-1994 Financial institutions : 
ICICI  
Still functioning  
4 Global Trust Bank 
Ltd. 
2-09-1994 Individuals : 
group of professionals led by Dr. 
Jayant Madhab and Ramesh Gelli 
Compulsorily merged 
with Oriental Bank of 
Commerce due to 
erosion of networth 
5 HDFC Bank Ltd. 5-01-1995 Financial institutions : 
HDFC group 
Still functioning  
6 Bank of Punjab Ltd. 5-04-1995 Individuals : 
principal shareholders of Punjab & 
Sind Bank prior to nationalisation 
Voluntary amalgamation 
with Centurian Bank on 
1-10-2005 
7 Times Bank Ltd. 26-04-1995 Times of India Group   Voluntary amalgamation 
with HDFC Bank Ltd. on 
26-2-2000 
8 DCB Ltd. 31-05-1995 Conversion of a Co -operative bank 
– promoter Agha Khan 
 
Still functioning  
9 Centurion Bank Ltd.  13-06-1995 Individuals : 
Demerger of an NBFC, promoter 
Shri Ahuja, ex -Citi Bank man and 
others 
Voluntary amalgamation 
with HDFC Bank Ltd. on 
23-5-2008 
10 IDBI Bank Ltd. 28-09-1995 Financial institutions : 
IDBI  
Still functioning  
 
Banks licensed under 2001 guidelines 
Sl. Name of the bank date of licence Promoter group Present position of 

13 
 
No.  the bank 
1 Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. 6-02-2003 NBFC Still functioning 
2 Yes Bank Ltd. 24-05-2004 Individuals along 
with Rabo Bank 
Still functioning 
 
Performance of Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. and Yes Bank Ltd. under priority sector over the 
last three years 
(Rupees in crore) 
Name 
of the 
bank 
As on 
last 
Friday of 
March 
Priority 
sector 
Priority 
sector 
as % of 
ANBC 
Total 
Agricultur
e 
Total 
Agricultu
re as % 
of ANBC 
Weaker 
Section
s 
As % 
of 
ANBC 
Kotak 
Mahin
dra 
Bank  
2009 6473 41.2 2588 16.5 906 5.8 
2010 6990 41.2 3586 19.5 1395 8.2 
2011 8991 42.5 4186 19.5 1982 9.4 
                
Yes 
Bank 
2009 4020 42.6 2255 22.8 649 6.9 
2010 5687 45.7 3969 23.9 616 5.0 
2011 10163 45.7 5888 20.1 1389 6.2 
 
 
Branch network of Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. and Yes Bank Ltd. in 2005 and 2011 
Bank name 31-3-2005 31-3-2011 
 Metro  Urban  Semi-
urban 
Rural  % of rural 
and semi 
urban to 
total  
Total  Metro  Urban  Semi-
urban 
Rural  % of rural 
and semi 
urban to 
total  
Total  
Kotak 
Mahindra 
Bank Ltd 
39 10 6 - 10.91% 55 156 81 55 30 26.40% 322 
Yes Bank 
Ltd. 
2 - - - 0 2 65 70 54 25 36.92% 214 
All 
scheduled 
commercial 
banks 
9328 11474 15387 32093 69.54% 68282 15635 17573 22229 33277 62.57% 88714 
 
VI LESSONS RECENT GLOBAL  FINANCIAL CRISIS ( 
 6.1 A constellation of regulatory practices, accounting rules and 
incentives magnified the credit boom ahead of the recent global financial crisis. The 
same factors accelerated the downturn in markets and intensified the crisis. 
Macroeconomic stability and fin ancial stability were generally treated as separate 
and unrelated constructs with the former focusing on preserving low and stable 

14 
 
inflation, while the latter dealing with the firm-level supervision of the formal banking 
sector. In this process, not only w as the growing shadow financial sector ignored, 
but also factors such as the interconnectedness within the complex financial 
system, especially between banks and the financial institutions, the systemic risk 
arising out of too -big-to-fail entities and syst em-wide liquidity needs. Though the 
epicentre of the crisis lay in the sub -prime mortgage market  in the US, it was 
transmitted rapidly throughout the globe, destabilizing financial markets and 
banking systems. The crisis eventually impacted the broader mac ro-economy, 
affecting economic growth and employment throughout the world. 
 6.2 The magnitude of this crisis has clearly signaled the need for major 
overhaul of the global financial regulatory architecture, the importance and need for 
improving  quality an d level of capital, risk management and governance standards, 
having strong domestic (indigenous) banks, avoiding large and complex banking 
structures 
VII PROPOSAL FOR ADDITIONAL BANKING LICENSES 
 7.1 The Union Finance Minister, in his budget speech for th e year 2010 -11 
had announced that „ The Indian banking system has emerged unscathed from the 
crisis. We need to ensure that the banking system grows in size and sophistication to 
meet the needs of a modern economy. Besides, there is a need to extend the 
geographic coverage of banks and improve access to banking services. In this context, I 
am happy to inform the Honourable Members that the RBI is considering giving some 
additional banking licences to private sector players. Non Banking Financial Companies 
could also be considered, if they meet the RBI’s eligibility criteria.‟  
 7.2 Subsequently, in line with the above announcement, the Governor, 
Reserve Bank of India indicated in the Annual Policy Statement for the year 2010 -11 
that the Reserve Bank will prep are a discussion paper marshalling the international 
practices, the Indian experience as well as the extant ownership and governance (O&G) 
guidelines and place it on the Reserve Bank‟s website by end -July 2010 for wider 
comments and feedback. The Reserve B ank also noted that detailed discussions would 
be held with all stakeholders on the discussion paper and guidelines would be finalised 

15 
 
based on the feedback. All applications received in this regard would be referred to an 
external expert group for examina tion and recommendations to the Reserve Bank for 
granting licenses.  
VIII DISCUSSION PAPER ON ENTRY OF NEW BANKS  
 8.1 RBI released a Discussion Paper on Entry of N ew Banks in the Private 
Sector on its website on August 11, 2010 based on international practices of granting 
licenses to new banks and its experience with licensing of 12 new private sector banks 
consequent to issue of guidelines in 1993 and 2001. The paper sought views/comments 
of banks, non-banking financial institutions, industrial houses, other institutions and the 
public at large. Suggestions and comments were invited on the following aspects 
delineated in the Discussion Paper:  
i) Minimum capital requirements for new banks and promoters contribution  
ii) Minimum and maximum caps on promoter shareholding and other shareholders  
iii) Foreign shareholding in the new banks  
iv) Whether industrial and business houses could be allowed to promote banks  
v) Should Non -Banking Financial Com panies be allowed conversion into banks or to 
promote a bank  
vi) Business model for the new banks  
 8.2 The issue of permitting industrial/business houses to promote banks was 
extensively covered in the Discussion Paper detailing the various approaches, their pros 
and cons and possible safeguards to address the downside risk of industrial houses 
promoting banks. The pros and cons are summarized as under:  
 
Pros:  
i) Industrial and business houses can be an important source of capital and can 
provide management expertise and strategic direction to banks as they have done 
to a broad range of non-banking companies and other financial companies.  
ii) Large industrial and business houses have already been permitted to operate in 
other financial services sectors, such as insurance companies, asset management 

16 
 
companies and other non -banking finance companies includin g loan and leasing 
companies. Many of the largest private sector companies in these segments are 
fully or partially owned by industrial and business houses. Thus, the industrial and 
business houses with their presence in the above mentioned sectors, are al ready 
competing with banks both on the assets and liabilities side.  
iii) Industrial and business houses have a long history of building and nurturing new 
businesses in highly regulated sectors such as Telecom, Power, Automobiles, 
Defence, infrastructure projects like Airports, Highways, Dams, Ports.  
iv) Equity of large industrial and business houses is widely held and all are listed on 
the stock exchanges and are accordingly subject to Companies laws, SEBI laws 
and regulations on transparency, disclosure and corporate governance.  
v) Permitting industrial and business houses to own a limited number of banks 
should not lead to undue concentration of control of banking activities as the Indian 
banking system is largely composed of public sector and private sector banks.  
 
 Cons:  
i) Allowing industrial and business houses to promote banks creates conflicts of 
interest through self dealing at the expense of bank clients. Conflicts of interest 
could also arise from transactions between the bank and its affiliates.  
ii) As large indus trial and business conglomerates have cross holding among their 
group entities engaged in diverse activities in India and abroad, dealing with 
complex structures of the industrial / business houses poses difficulties in 
supervision and regulation.  
iii) Ba nking being highly leveraged business and dealing with public money, it 
makes sense to keep Industry / business and banking separate.  
iv) The industrial and business houses may not be committed to attaining broader 
objectives of financial development part icularly ensuring financial inclusion and 
providing services to all sections of society.  

17 
 
v) Possible concentration of economic power in all major areas and finance could 
be potential threat to financial stability.  
 
 8.3 It was indicated in the Discussion  Paper that additional safeguards were 
necessary to address downside risks of allowing industrial and business houses to 
promote banks. Therefore, the Discussion Paper suggested strengthening of „fit and 
proper‟ criteria for the promoters, mandating of maj ority of independent directors in the 
Board with a part time Chairman, stronger corporate governance norms, strengthening 
of banking regulation & supervision, a more competitive banking market and stringent 
prudential regulations and disclosure requirements could mitigate the risks of affiliations 
of banks with the industrial and business houses. It is pertinent to mention that certain 
vital amendments to the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 have been proposed to 
strengthen the regulations in this regard.  
 8.4 Detailed discussions on issues flagged in the discussion paper were also 
held on October 7 and 8, 2010 with the stakeholders viz, Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII), Finance Industry Development Council (FIDC), Indian Banks‟ Association 
(IBA), The Ass ociated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), Indian Merchant 
Chambers (IMC), Micro Finance Institutions Network (MFIN), Consultants, All India RRB 
Officers‟ Federation, etc. Th e gist of the comments / suggestions received from the 
public as well as emerging out of the discussions with the stakeholders was placed in 
the RBI website on December 23, 2010 
IX DRAFTING OF  GUIDELINES ON LICENSING OF NEW BANKS IN THE 
PRIVATE SECTOR  
 9.1 Based on the feedback and suggestions received from public, 
stakeholders, experience gained from the functioning of the banks licensed under the 
guidelines of 1993 and 2001, extensive internal discussions, draft guidelines were 
prepared and sent to the M oF, GOI vide D.O letter dated March 3, 2011. Thereafter, a 
meeting was held by Secretary, Department of Financial Services with our Deputy 
Governor on March 29, 2011 where certain clarifications were called for. After the 
clarifications were furnished, the  draft guidelines were amended and forwarded to the 

18 
 
Government for their comments. Government had furnished their final comments on the 
draft guidelines vide letter dated August 12, 2011.  
Suggestions from Government  
 9.2 The main areas where the Governme nt had sought clarifications / 
suggested a few amendments were as under:  
(a) In order to enable banks to consolidate their position and access the market in a 
staggered fashion, the time given for dilution of promoters‟ stake from 40% to 15% 
could be slig htly elongated from 5 years to, say, 10 years. MoF had further 
recommended vide their letter dated August 12, 2011 that an elongated time span and a 
two stage dilution of the promoters‟ stake from 40% to 20% over a period of 5 years 
(after the lock -in peri od of 5 years) and the remaining 5% over next 2 years may be 
considered.  
(b) To enable the promoters to raise capital from all available sources, it may be 
explored if FDI upto the extent permissible under the policy is allowed after 5 years.  
(c) Instead of naming the penal measures (viz. imposition of penalty, removal of CEO 
and other officials, supersession of the Board, moratorium on branch expansion, etc., 
and withdrawal of use of brand and logo of the group), it would be better to state that 
deterrent action will be taken as per the licensing conditions and relevant law.  
(d) Instead of indicating that promoters from Real Estate and Broking sectors would not 
be eligible for promoting banks, the risks associated with the sectors may be mentioned.  
(e) The stipulation for opening 25% branches in unbanked rural centres upto 9,999 
population may be too onerous for the banks and Tier 4 centres (with population upto 
19,999) may also be included.  
6.3 The first three suggestions of the Government were accepte d. As regards the other 
two suggestions, it was felt that naming the two sectors in the ineligible category was 
required. However, the risks involved in the real estate and broking sectors were 
elaborated by suitably amending the draft guidelines. Further, the stipulation for opening 
25% branches in unbanked rural centres upto 9,999 was retained as the same was 
prescribed even for the existing banks as announced in the Monetary Policy statement 
2011-2012.  

19 
 
 9.3 Accordingly, the draft guidelines were amended  and finalized, and placed 
in the RBI website on August 29, 2011 for inviting views/comments from banks, non -
banking financial institutions, industrial houses, other institutions and the public at large 
by October 31, 2011.  
 9.4 Since certain amendments to the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in respect 
of removal of restriction of voting rights and concurrently empowering RBI to approve 
acquisition of shares and or voting rights of 5% or more in a bank to persons who are „fit 
and proper‟; empowering RBI to su persede the Board of directors and facilitating 
consolidated supervision were considered necessary, the same were taken up with the 
Government.  
X. GUIDELINES FOR LICENSING OF NEW BANKS IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
ISSUED ON FEBRUARY 22, 2013 
10.1 The draft guidelines were placed on the RBI‟s website on August 29, 2011 
for comments. The comments received on the draft guidelines have been examined. 
The guidelines have been finalized taking into account the important amendments in 
December 2012 to the  Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the suggestions/comments 
received on the draft guidelines and in consultation with the Government of India.  
While preparing these guidelines, the Reserve Bank recognizes the need for an explicit 
policy on banking structure i n India keeping in view the recommendations of the 
Narasimham Committee, Raghuram Rajan Committee and other viewpoints. 
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank has come out with the guidelines as shown below: 
Guidelines  
(A) Eligible Promoters  
(i) Entities / groups in the private sector that are ‘owned and controlled by 
residents’ [as defined in Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) 
Press Note 2, 3 and 4 of 2009 / FEMA Regulations as amended from time to 
time] and entities in public sector shall be eligible to promote a bank through a 
wholly-owned Non-Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC).  
(ii) Promoters / Promoter Groups  with an existing non -banking financial 
company (NBFC) will be eligible to apply for a bank licence. If c onsidered 
eligible for promoting a bank, they will have to comply with the requirements 

20 
 
laid down in these guidelines as also the conditions specified in paragraph 2 
(L) below.  
 
(B) „Fit and Proper‟ criteria  
Promoters/ Promoter Groups as defined in these  guidelines should be ‘fit and 
proper’ in order to be eligible to promote banks through a wholly owned 
NOFHC. RBI would assess the ‘fit and proper’ status of the applicants on the 
basis of following criteria:  
(a) Promoters/ Promoter Groups should have a p ast record of sound 
credentials and integrity;  
(b) Promoters/ Promoter Groups should be financially sound and have a 
successful track record of running their business for at least 10 years.  
 
 (c) Promoter / Promoter Groups’ business model and business cu lture 
should not be misaligned with the banking model and their business should 
not potentially put the bank and the banking system at risk on account of 
group activities such as those which are speculative in nature or subject 
to high asset price volatility.  
 
(C) Corporate structure of the NOFHC  
(i) Promoter / Promoter Group will be permitted to set up a bank only through 
a wholly-owned Non-Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC).  
(ii) The capital structure of the wholly -owned NOFHC set up by Promoter / 
Promoter Groups in Private Sector shall consist of :  
a) voting equity shares not exceeding 10 per cent of the total voting 
equity shares of the NOFHC held by any individual belongin g to the 
Promoter Group, along with his relatives (as defined in Section 6 of the 
Companies Act 1956) and along with entities in which he and / or his 
relatives hold not less than 50 per cent of the voting equity shares, and  
b)  companies forming part of the Promoter Group whereof companies in 
which the public hold not less than 51 per cent of the voting equity shares 
shall hold not less than 51 per cent of the total voting equity shares of the 
NOFHC.  
(iii)  The NOFHC shall hold the bank as well as all the other financial services entities of 
the Group regulated by RBI or other financial sector regulators. The objective is that the 
Holding Company should ring fence the regulated financial services entities of the 
Group, including the bank from other activities of the Group i.e., commercial, industrial 
and financial activities not regulated by financial sector regulators and also that the bank 
should be ring fenced from other regulated financial activities of the Group. Thus, only 
non-financial services companies / entities and non-operative financial holding company 

21 
 
in the Group and individuals belonging to Promoter Group will be allowed to hold shares 
in the NOFHC. Financial services entities whose shares are held by the NOFHC cannot be 
shareholders of the NOFHC.  
 
 (iv) The general principle is that no financial services entity held by the 
NOFHC would be allowed to engage in any activity that a bank is permitted 
to undertake departmentally. In this context, it is clarified that :  
(a) RBI requires certain specialised activities, such as, insurance, mutual 
funds, stock broking, infrastructure debt funds, etc. to be conducted 
through a separate Subsidiary / Joint Venture / Associate structure;  
(b) There are certain activities such as  credit cards, primary dealers, 
leasing, hire purchase, factoring, etc., which a bank can conduct either 
from within the bank or through a separate outside structure (Subsidiary / 
Joint Venture / Associate).  
Accordingly, the activities at (a) above and ac tivities at (b) above which are 
to be carried outside the bank will have to be carried out through separate 
financial entities under the NOFHC.  
(v) RBI will have to be satisfied that the corporate structure does not impede 
the financial services entities held by the NOFHC from being ring fenced, 
that it would be able to supervise the bank, the NOFHC, and its Subsidiaries 
/ Joint Ventures / Associates on a consolidated basis, and that, it will be able 
to obtain all required information relevant for this pur pose, smoothly and 
promptly. However, the primary supervision of the entities held by the 
NOFHC will be by the sectoral regulators.  
(vi)  The NOFHC shall not be permitted to set up any new financial services 
entity for at least three years from the date of commencement of business of 
the NOFHC. However, this would not preclude the bank from having a 
subsidiary or joint venture or assoc iate, where it is legally required or 
specifically permitted by RBI.  
(vii) Only those regulated financial sector entities in which a Promoter Group 
has significant influence or control will be held under the NOFHC.  
 
(viii) The Promoter / Promoter Group e ntities / individuals associated with 
Promoter Group shall hold equity investment, in the bank and other financial 
entities held by it, only through the NOFHC.  
(ix)  Shares of the NOFHC shall not be transferred to any entity outside the 
Promoter Group. An y change in shareholding (by the Promoter Group) with 
in the NOFHC as a result of which a shareholder acquires 5 per cent or more 
of the voting equity capital of the NOFHC shall be with the prior approval of 
RBI.  

22 
 
(D) Minimum voting equity capital requirem ents for banks and 
shareholding by NOFHC  
(i)  The initial minimum paid -up voting equity capital for a bank shall be Rs 5 
billion. Any additional voting equity capital to be brought in will depend on the 
business plan of the Promoters.  
(ii) The NOFHC shall hold a minimum of 40 per cent of the paid -up voting 
equity capital of the bank which shall be locked in for a period of five years 
from the date of commencement of business of the bank.  
(iii)  Shareholding by NOFHC in the bank in excess of 40 per cent of the total 
paid-up voting equity capital shall be brought down to 40 per cent within 
three years from the date of commencement of business of the bank.  
(iv)  In the event of the bank raising further voting equity capital during the 
first five years from the date of commencement of business, the NOFHC 
should continue to hold 40 per cent of the enhanced voting equity capital of 
the bank for a period of five years from the date of commencement of 
business of the bank. Voting equity capital , other than the holding by 
NOFHC, could be raised through public issue or private placements.  
(v)  The shareholding by NOFHC shall be brought down to 20 per cent of the 
paid-up voting equity capital of the bank within a period of 10 years, and to 
15 per cent within 12 years from the date of commencement of business of 
the bank.  
(vi)  The capital requirements for the regulated financial services entities held 
by the NOFHC shall be as prescribed by the respective sectoral regulators. 
The bank shall be requ ired to maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 
13 per cent of its risk weighted assets (RWA) for a minimum period of 3 
years after the commencement of its operations subject to any higher 
percentage as may be prescribed by RBI from time to time. On a  
consolidated basis, the NOFHC and the entities held by it shall maintain a 
minimum capital adequacy of 13 per cent of its consolidated RWA for a 
minimum period of 3 years.  
(vii) The bank shall get its shares listed on the stock exchanges within three 
years of the commencement of business by the bank.  
(E) Regulatory framework  
 
(i) The bank will be governed by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, other relevant Statutes and the 
Directives, Prudential regulations and other Guidelines/Instructions issued by RBI 
and other regulators from time to time, including the regulations of SEBI regarding 
public issues and other guidelines applicable to listed banking companies.  
(ii) The NOFHC will be registered as a non -banking financial company (NBFC) with 
the RBI and will be governed by a separate set of directions issued by RBI.  

23 
 
(iii) The financial entities held by the NOFHC will be gover ned by the applicable 
Statutes and regulations prescribed by the respective financial sector regulators.  
(F) Foreign shareholding in the bank  
 
Notwithstanding the current FDI policy, where foreign shareholding in private sector 
banks is allowed up to a ceiling of 74 per cent of the paid -up voting equity capital, the 
aggregate non -resident shareholding from FDI, NRIs and FIIs in the new private 
sector banks shall not exceed 49 per cent of the paid -up voting equity capital for the 
first 5 years from the date of licensing of the bank. No non -resident shareholder, 
directly or indirectly, individually or in groups, or through subsidiary, associate or j oint 
venture will be permitted to hold 5 per cent or more of the paid -up voting equity 
capital of the bank for a period of 5 years from the date of commencement of 
business of the bank. After the expiry of 5 years from the date of commencement of  
 (G) Corporate governance of NOFHC  
The NOFHC should comply with the corporate governance guidelines as issued by 
RBI from time to time. Such guidelines may include the following:  
(i) No NOFHC shall have as a Director in its Board of Directors, any person 
who is a Director in any other NOFHC or a bank other than a banking 
company under it.  
(ii) No NOFHC shall be managed by any person-  
(a) who is a Director in any other company not being  
(i) a subsidiary of the NOFHC or  
(ii) a company registered under Section 25 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or  
(b) who is engaged in any other business or vocation.  
(iii)  NOFHC shall comply with such soundness standards in terms of 
corporate governance including ‘fit and proper’  criteria, as applicable to 
banks to the extent they are appropriate.  
(iv)  At least 50 per cent of the Directors of NOFHC shall be totally 
independent of the Promoter or Promoter Group entities and their majo r 
customers and major suppliers.  
(v)  The Ind ependent Directors referred to above shall have special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of one or more of the following 
matters, namely,  
(a) Accountancy, (b) Agriculture, rural economy and co -operation, (c) 
Banking, (d) Insurance, (e) Economics, (f) Finance, (g) Micro, Small and  
Medium Enterprises (MSME), (h) Law; or, (i) any other matter, the special 
knowledge of, and practical experience in, which would, in the opinion of the 
Reserve Bank, be useful to NOFHC.  

24 
 
(vi)    NOFHC shall be managed  professionally with adequate corporate 
governance standards.  
(vii)   Ownership and management shall be separate and distinct in the 
NOFHC, the bank and entities regulated by RBI.  
(viii)  The source of funds for Promoters’ and Promoter Groups’ equity in the 
NOFHC shall be transparent and verifiable.  
(ix)    NOFHC shall ensure that there is a policy in place for ascertaining the 
‘fit and proper’ criteria for appointment of Directors of the NOFHC.  
(x)    NOFHC shall undertake a process of due diligence to  determine the 
suitability of the person for appointment and/or continuing to hold 
appointment as a Director on its Board based on qualification, expertise, 
track record, integrity and other ‘fit and proper’ criteria.  
(xi)   NOFHC shall obtain from every Director, a Deed of Covenant and a 
declaration and undertaking in its favour, as may be specified by RBI.  
(xii)  NOFHC shall obtain an annual declaration from its Directors that the 
information provided has not undergone change and where there is any 
change, obtain requisite details from them forthwith.  
(xiii)  NOFHC shall have a Nomination Committee to perfo rm due diligence 
in respect of its Directors.  
(xiv)  Nomination Committee shall scrutinize Deed of Covenant and 
declaration and undertaking submitted by each of its Directors and on a 
continuing basis perform due diligence in respect of each of its Direct ors 
and the NOFHC shall report to the Reserve Bank if any of its directors fails 
to fulfill the ‘fit and proper’ criteria as specified by Reserve Bank from time to 
time.  
(xv)  NOFHC shall have a Remuneration Committee of the Board to decide on 
the compensation payable to the key management executives of NOFHC.  
(H) Prudential Norms for the NOFHC  
 The prudential norms will be applied to NOFHC both on stand -alone as well as 
on a consolidated basis. Some of the major prudential norms are as under:  
  (i) NOFHC on a stand-alone basis  
(a) Prudential norms for classification, valuation and op eration of investment 
portfolio.  
(b) Prudential norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and 
Provisioning pertaining to Advances.  
(c) The NOFHC for the purpose o f its liquidity management can make 
investments in bank deposits, money market instruments, government 
securities and actively traded bonds and debentures.  

25 
 
(d) The NOFHC shall create a reserve fund and shall, out of the balance of 
profit each year as disclosed in the profit and loss account and before any 
dividend is declared, transfer to the reserve fund a sum equivalent to not less 
than 25 per cent of such profit.  
(e) Any dividend proposed to be paid by the NOFHC to its shareholders shall 
be payable only out of the profits and further subject to meeting the following 
conditions:  
• Compliance with all prudential norms prescribed for the NOFHC both on    
 stand-alone as well as consolidated level.  
• There are no serious observations by any of the regulators / supervisors   
 of the NOFHC as well as of entities held under it.  
•The financial statements of the NOFHC both on stand -alone and 
 consolidated level s hall be free of any qualifications by the statutory 
 auditors, which have an adverse bearing on the profit during that year. In 
 case of any qualification to that effect, the net profit should be suitably 
 adjusted while computing the dividend payout ratio.  
(f)  The NOFHC shall closely monitor its liquidity position and interest rate 
risk. For this purpose, the NOFHC shall prepare a structural liquidity statement 
(STL) and interest rate sensitivity statement (IRS).  
(g) The NOFHC may have a leverage up to 1.25 times of its paid -up equity 
capital and free reserves. The actual leverage assumed within this limit should 
be based on the ability of the NOFHC to service its borrowings from its dividend 
income.  
(ii) NOFHC on a consolidated basis  
(a) NOFHC shall m aintain capital adequacy and other requirements on a 
consolidated basis based on the prudential guidelines on Capital Adequacy 
and Market Discipline – New Capital Adequacy Framework (NCAF) issued 
under Basel II framework and Guidelines on Implementation of  Basel I II 
Capital Regulations in India, when implemented.  
 
(b)  The NOFHC shall prepare consolidated financial statements and other 
consolidated prudential reports in terms of the Guidelines for ‘consolidated 
accounting and other quantitative methods to facilitate consolidated 
supervision’ contained in circular DB OD.No.BP.BC.72 /21.04.018/2001 -02 
dated February 25, 20039 and in terms of Scope of Prudential Consolidation 
indicated under Basel III Capital Regulation.  
 
(c)  The consolidated NOFHC shall adhere to the instructions on disclosure 
in Financial Statements - Notes to Accounts11.  
(d)  The consolidated NOFHC shall prepare a structural liquidity statement 
(STL), interest rate sensitivity statement (IRS).  

26 
 
 
 
 
(I) Exposure norms  
 
(i) Exposure norms for stand-alone NOFHC  
(a)  NOFHC shall not have any credit and  investment (including investment 
in equity/ debt capital instrument ) exposure to any entity belonging to 
the Promoter Group except those held under it.  
 
(b)  NOFHC shall not have any equity, debt capital and credit exposure to 
any   entity outside the Gr oup including other NOFHCs or other banks, 
financial and non-financial entities.  
 
(c)  NOFHC’s exposure for the purpose of its liquidity management [please 
refer to paragraph 2 (H) (i) (c)] to non -Group entities will be within the 
extant exposure limits.  
(ii) Exposure norms for consolidated NOFHC  
(a) The consolidated NOFHC shall ad here to all the exposure norms  on the 
consolidated basis such as single and group borrower exposure limits, 
capital market exposure limit etc, as applicable to bank groups.  
(b) The consolidated NOFHC’s investments in the capital instruments 
issued by banking, financial and insurance entities outside its Group 
together with the unconsolidated  financial and insurance entities within 
the Group should not exceed 10 per cent of its consolidated capital 
funds.  
 
(iii) Exposure norms for the bank  
(a) The bank cannot take any credit and investments (including 
investments in the equity/debt capital instruments) exposure on the 
Promoters / Promoter Group entities or individuals associated with the 
Promoter Group or the NOFHC.  
(b)  The bank shall not inve st in the equity / debt capital instruments of any 
financial entities under the NOFHC.  
(c)  The bank’s credit and investment (other than equity / debt capital 
instruments) exposure to financial entities under the NOFHC will be 
subject to Intra-Group Transactions & Exposures (ITEs) norms.  
(d)  The bank cannot invest in the equity of other NOFHCs.  
 

27 
 
(e)  The bank’s investments in equity / debt capital instruments of other 
banks / financial institutions including other NOFHCs18 should be 
guided by the extant cross holding norms.  
(f)  The bank’s permissible exposures will be as per extant exposure 
norms.  
(g)  Investment in equity by the bank in the entities engaged in financial and 
non-financial activities, outside the Promoter Group would be subject to 
a limit of 10 per cent of the investee entity’s paid -up share capital or 10 
per cent of the bank’s paid -up share capital and reserves, whichever is 
less, and the aggregate of all such investments should not exceed 20 
per cent of the bank’s paid-up share capital and reserves.  
 
(iv) Exposure norms for the financial entities (other than bank) held by the 
NOFHC  
There is a need for the financial entities held by the NOFHC to follow certain 
overarching principles in order to avoid round tripping of funds and to avoid 
circular movement of funds in the banking group, such as :  
(a) The financial entities held by NOFH C shall not have any credit and 
investments (including investments in the equity/debt capital 
instruments) exposure to the Promoters / Promoter Group entities or 
individuals associated with the Promoter Group or the NOFHC.  
(b) The financial entities held by NOFHC shall not make investment in the 
equity / debt capital instruments amongst themselves.  
(c) The entities held by the NOFHC cannot invest in equity instruments of 
other NOFHCs.  
(J) Business Plan for the bank  
(a) Applicants for new bank licences will be required to furnish their 
business plans for the banks along with their applications. The 
business plan will have to address how the bank proposes to achieve 
financial inclusion.  
(b)  The business plan submitte d by the applicant should be realistic and 
viable. In case of deviation from the stated business plan after issue of 
licence, RBI may consider restricting the bank’s expansion, effecting 
change in management and imposing other penal measures as may 
be necessary.  
 
(K) Other conditions for the bank  
(i)  The Board of the bank should have a majority of independent 
Directors.  
(ii)  Any acquisition of shares which will take the aggregate holding of an 
individual / entity / group to the equivalent of 5 per cent  or more of the 
paid-up voting equity capital of the bank, will require prior approval of 
RBI.  

28 
 
(iii) No single entity or group of related entities, other than the NOFHC, 
shall have shareholding or control, directly or indirectly, in excess of 10 
per cent of the paid-up voting equity capital of the bank.  
(iv) Without prejudice to the requirements under paragraph 2 (I) (iii) (a), 
the bank shall maintain arm’s length relationship with Promoter / 
Promoter Group entities, and the major suppliers and major cust omers 
of these entities.  
(v)  In taking a view on whether an entity belongs to a particular Promoter 
Group or not or whether the entities are linked / related to the Promoter 
Group, RBI will be guided by the provisions of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949,  Accounting Standards and other related factors. The 
decision of the RBI in the matter will be final.  
(vi) The bank shall comply with the priority sector lending targets and sub -
targets as applicable to the existing domestic banks. For this purpose, 
the b ank should build its priority sector lending portfolio from the 
commencement of its operations.  
(vii) The bank shall open at least 25 per cent of its branches in unbanked 
rural centres (population up to 9,999 as per the latest census) to avoid 
over concen tration of their branches in metropolitan areas and cities 
which are already having adequate banking presence.  
(viii) The bank should operate on Core Banking Solutions (CBS) from the   
beginning with all modern infrastructural facilities.  
(ix) The bank should have a high powered Customer Grievances Cell to 
handle   customer complaints.  
(x) Banks promoted by Groups having 40 per cent or more assets / 
income from non-financial business will require RBI’s prior approval for 
raising paid-up voting equity capital beyond `10 billion for every block 
of `5 billion. RBI while examining such proposals would primarily look 
into whether the corporate governance standards are adequate, 
whether information from Promoter Group has been forthcoming to 
facilitate consolidated supervision and whether the Board members 
remain ‘fit and proper’.  
(xi) The compliance of terms and conditions laid down by RBI is an 
essential condition of grant of licence. Any non -compliance will attract 
penal measures including cancellation of licence of the bank.  
(L) Additional conditions for NBFCs promoting / converting into a bank  
 The Promoters / Promoter Groups with an existing NBFC, if considered eligible 
for a bank licence, will have three options:  
(a)  Promote a bank, if some or all the activities undertaken by the NBFC 
are not permitted to be undertaken by banks departmentally. In such 
cases, the activities undertaken by the NBFC which banks are 

29 
 
allowed to undertake departmentally, will have to be transferred to 
the new bank, or  
(b) Convert the NBFC into a bank, if all the activities undertaken by it are 
allowed to be undertaken by a bank departmentally. In such a case, 
the NBFC shall have a minimum networth of Rs 5 billion, or  
(c)  Convert the NBFC into a bank and divest the activities which banks 
are not allowed to undertake departmentally. In such a case, the  
bank shall have a minimum networth of Rs 5 billion.  
 Under the above options, the Promoters will have to set up a NOFHC. The 
NOFHC and the bank set up under it should comply with all the requirements laid 
down in the guidelines. RBI will consider allowin g the bank to take over and convert 
the existing NBFC branches into bank branches only in the Tier 2 to 6 centres. 
Existing branches of the NBFC in Tier 1 centres may be allowed to convert into bank 
branches only with the prior approval of RBI and subject to the existing rules / 
methodology applicable to domestic banks regarding opening of branches in these 
centres and also subject to maintaining 25 per cent of the bank branches in 
unbanked rural centres (population up to 9,999 as per the latest census) req uired of 
all banks as specified in 2 K (vii) above. 
XI. COMMENTS FURNISHED BY MINISTRY OF FINANCE AND RBI  
Reasons for revising guidelines: 
 11.1 On being asked the reasons that has prompted the RBI to revise 
guidelines, the Governor RBI made the following  oral submission while deposing 
before the Committee on 09.04.2013 as stated under: 
 “Sir, you have asked a question about why was it necessary for the 
Reserve Bank to revise the guidelines.  As you know, we have 
formulated the guidelines in the year 2001 and this is 2012-13.  A lot of 
things have changed.  In India and around the world, the financial 
sector has changed, the corporate sector has changed, our 
understanding of regulation is changed, our regulatory capability has 
improved in certain respects, we are aware of our deficiencies in 
certain respects.  So, taking into account the changed circumstances, 
we revise the guidelines to reflect the changed circumstances.” 
 
Reasons for allowing industrial houses to apply for banking license: 
 11.2 On being asked the reasons why large industrial houses are allowed to 
apply for banking license in the revised guidelines, the Governor RBI made the 

30 
 
following oral submission while deposing before the Committee on 09.04.2013 as 
stated under: 
“Why we had to allow corporates into the banking space? I want to 
briefly explain this issue. Firstly, industrial and business houses have 
already been allowed entry into other financial service sectors and are 
competing with both banks on asset and liability sides.  
 They have non-bank finance companies, they have management 
companies, they have insurance companies, and mutual funds. So, 
they are already in the financial sector.  
 Second, industrial and business houses have a long and 
credible history of bu ilding and nurturing new businesses in highly 
regulated sectors like telecom, power, airports, highways and ports. 
 Third, industrial and business houses can be an important 
source of capital. Also, we wanted to leverage on their entrepreneurial 
abilities, business experience and management expertise.  
 Fourth, there are some inherent safeguards. The equities of 
large industrial investment houses are widely held. They are listed on 
the Stock Exchanges. They are subject to Company Laws and SEBI 
regulations on transparency, disclosure and corporate governance.  
 Moreover, with huge business interests across a variety of 
sectors and regions, industrial and business houses can be expected 
to be quite keen on not compromising their business reputation. That 
itself, we believe, will act as a safeguard. 
 Finally, Sir, there is the frequently cited apprehension that 
allowing industrial and business houses will result in concentration of 
control of the Indian banking system. Given that our banking system is 
composed of public sector banks and non -industry promoted private 
sector banks, the probability of such concentration resulting is quite 
low.” 
11.3 The Governor, RBI further added: 
 “…..the Finance Minister did not explicitly said „corporates‟ but we have 
decided to allow corporates.  ……...  There is quite a sizeable opinion 
and some of it is quite learnt about not to allow corporate sector 
banking.  We had issued a discussion paper; we h ad consulted with all 
stakeholders; we had consulted with experts; and after extensive 
consultation, extensive discussion and after extensive internalization of 
all that; we have decided to allow corporates into banking.  It is for 
reasons that I had indic ated earlier because they are able to bring in 
capital; they are able to bring in business experience, expertise, 

31 
 
knowledge, etc.  Could we have done without corporates? That is the 
question that we should ask ourselves.  The answer that I got by and 
large is perhaps not.  At this point of time, if we had opened up for 
application it is quite likely that we would not have got sufficient 
number of credible applications if we had excluded corporate.” 
Safeguards: 
11.4 While deposing before the Committee, t he G overnor, RBI submitted  
further that the counsel of the Committee during the earlier meeting has been noted well 
for compliance and the following safeguards are put in place: 
“ First, the guidelines stipulate that the promoter or promoter group 
should be financially sound, have sound credentials and integrity, and 
a successful track record for at least ten years. RBI will conduct due 
diligence on these aspects and where considere d necessary seek 
feedback from other regulators and enforcement and investigative 
agencies.  
 Second, we require that the promoter or promoter group‟s 
business model and business culture should not be misaligned with the 
banking model and that their busine ss interests should not potentially 
put the bank and the banking system at risk on account of group 
activities which might be speculative in nature or subject to high asset 
price liability/volatility. 
 If permitted to go ahead, the promoter or promoter gro up is 
required to first set up a wholly owned non -operative financial holding 
company (NOFHC) which will hold the new bank as well as other 
regulated financial service entities of the group.  
 The objective of this holding company structure is two -fold, partly 
in response to your question, first to ring fence the regulated financial 
service entities of the group, including the bank, from other 
commercial, industrial and financial activities of the group which are 
not regulated by financial sector regulators . Second, to ring fence the 
bank from other regulated financial activities of the group. 
 The fourth safeguard is that the NOFHC will be required to be 
registered with the Reserve Bank, that is, the holding company, as an 
NBFC. It will be regulated by the Reserve Bank and will be required to 
comply with the corporate governance guidelines and prudential norms 
issued from time to time.  
 Fifth, the guidelines require that the bank should be widely held. 
Accordingly, it is prescribed that the shareholding of the NOFHC, the 
holding company, in the bank should be diluted to 15 per cent over 12 

32 
 
years. Further, no single entity or group of related entities, other than 
the holding company, will be allowed to have shareholding or control 
directly or indirectly in ex cess of ten per cent of the paid up capital of 
the bank.  Any acquisition of shares which takes the aggregate holding 
of an individual or an entity or group to the equivalent of five per cent 
or more of the paid up share capital of the bank will require th e 
Reserve Bank‟s prior approval. Additionally, the bank is required to list 
its shares within three years from the commencement of business to 
have diversified ownership and ensure accountability and transparency 
through adequate disclosures. 
 Finally, con sequent to the amendments to the Banking 
Regulation Act, the Reserve Bank is now empowered to call for 
information relating to the business or affairs of any associated 
enterprise of the banking company and also to cause an inspection of 
its books of accou nt. The amendments also empower the Reserve 
Bank to supersede the boards of banks‟ to secure proper 
management.” 
Fit and Proper 
 11.5 In reply to a query as to how “fit and proper” be evaluated and whether 
this criteria is too ambiguous and subjective, RBI gave the following oral reply: 
“Sir, the other broad -ranging questions have been: How will 
you evaluate fit and proper? Can it be objective? Or, is it, by definition, 
subjective? Will it not be ambiguous? One hon. Member also said that 
there is virtually no corporate in the country and   that there is no 
record with Prosecution and the Enforcement Agencies. 
We were aware of that.   We thought about it before we put the 
English in those guidelines. 
On the first question, Sir, we will try and make them as ob jective 
as possible. But it is not possible to be completely objective; it is not 
possible to come out with the manual and say that these are the fit and 
proper criteria, and inherently if there is some subjectivity in this. 
............. if there is some subjectivity, the test for us, the 
challenge for us will be: “Are you transparent? Are you open? Is your 
decision contestable?” Those are the three criteria, we have to fulfil.    
We again discussed internally and we are trying to make the 
process such tha t it passes these tests of being transparent, 
contestable and open. “ 
11.6 On the issue RBI further submitted the following in their post 
evidence reply as stated under: 

33 
 
 “The requirements spelt out in the guidelines for assessing „fit and 
proper‟ criteria are: 
(a) Promoters/ Promoter Groups should have a past record of sound 
credentials and integrity; 
(b) Promoters/ Promoter Groups should be financially sound and 
have a successful track record of running their business for at least 10 
years. 
(c) Promoter / Promoter Groups‟ business model and business 
culture should not be misaligned with the banking model and their 
business should not potentially put the bank and the banking system at 
risk.  
These are indicative criteria and overall qualitative judgment on „Fit 
and Proper‟ criteria for the applicants would be made based on the 
feedback on applicant Groups from other regulators, and enforcement 
and investigative agencies like Income Tax, CBI, Enforcement 
Directorate, etc. as deemed appropriate, and RBI‟s own expertise.  
The applications will also be subjected to a multi -layer scrutiny by 
RBI‟s own internal department and which will screen the applications 
for prima facie eligibility of the applicants. Thereafter, the application s 
will be referred to a High Level Advisory Committee, comprising of 
eminent persons with experience in banking, financial sector and other 
relevant areas, which will submit its recommendations to RBI for 
consideration. Thereafter, the decision to issue an in-principle approval 
for setting up of a bank will be taken by RBI.” * 
11.7 The important parameters for the proposed new bank license are as 
under: 
(i) Eligible Promoters : Entities / groups in the private sector, entities in 
public sector and Non-Banking Fi nancial Companies  (NBFCs) shall be 

34 
 
eligible to set up a bank through a wholly -owned Non-Operative Financial 
Holding Company (NOFHC).  
 
(ii) „Fit and Proper‟ criteria : Entities / groups should have a past record of 
sound credentials and integrity, be financially sound with a successful 
track record of 10 years. For this purpose, RBI may seek feedback from 
other regulators and enforcement and investigative agencies. 
(iii) Corporate structure of the NOFHC : The NOFHC shall be wholly owned 
by the Promoter / Promoter Group. The NOFHC shall hold the bank as 
well as all the other financial services entities of the group. 
 
(iv) Minimum voting equity capital  requirements for banks and shareholding 
by NOFHC: The initial min imum paid-up voting equity capital for a bank 
shall be `5 billion. The NOFHC shall initially hold a minimum of 40 per cent 
of the paid-up voting equity capital of the bank which shall be locked in for 
a period of  five years and which shall be brought down to 15 per cent 
within 12 years. The bank shall get its shares listed on the stock 
exchanges within three years of the commencement of business by the 
bank. 
 
(v) Regulatory framework : The bank will be governed by the provisions of 
the relevant Acts, relevant Statutes and the Directives, Prudential 
regulations and other Guidelines/Instructions issued by RBI and other 
regulators. The NOFHC shall be registered as a non-banking finance 
company (NBFC) with the RBI and will be governed by a separate set of 
directions issued by RBI. 
 
(vi) Foreign shareholding in the bank : The aggregate non -resident 
shareholding in the new bank shall not exceed 49 percent for the first 5 
years after which it will be as per the extant policy.  
 

35 
 
(vii) Corporate governance of NOFHC : At least 50 percent of the Directors of 
the NOFHC should be independent directors. The corporate structure 
should not impede effective supervision of the bank and the NOFHC on a 
consolidated basis by RBI. 
 
(viii) Prudential norms for the NOFHC : The prudential norms will be applied 
to NOFHC both on stand-alone as well as on a consolidated basis and the 
norms would be on similar lines as that of the bank. 
 
(ix) Exposure norms: The NOFHC and the bank shall not have any exposure 
to the Promoter Group. The bank shall not invest in the equity / debt 
capital instruments of any financial entities held by the NOFHC.  
 
(x) Business Plan for the bank : The business plan should be realistic an d 
viable and should address how the bank proposes to achieve financial 
inclusion. 
 
(xi)    Other conditions for the bank :   
 The Board of the bank should have a majority of independent 
Directors. 
 The bank shall open at least 25 per cent of its branches in 
unbanked rural centres (population upto 9,999 as per the latest 
census) 
 The bank shall comply with the priority sector lending targets 
and sub-targets as applicable to the existing domestic banks. 
 Banks promoted by groups having 40 per cent or more assets / 
income from non -financial business will require RBI‟s prior 
approval for raising paid -up voting equity capital beyond `10 
billion for every block of `5 billion.  

36 
 
 Any non -compliance of terms and c onditions will attract penal 
measures including cancellation of licence of the bank. 
(xii) Additional conditions for NBFCs promoting / converting into a bank : 
Existing NBFCs, if considered eligible, may be permitted to promote a new 
bank or convert themselves into banks. 
  (xiii) Procedure for RBI decisions: 
 At the first stage, the applications will be screened by RBI. Thereafter, 
the applications will be referred to a High Level Advisory Committee, 
the constitution of which will be announced shortly. 
 The Committee will submit its recommendations to RBI. The decision to 
issue an in -principle approval for setting up of a bank will be taken by 
RBI.  
 The validity of the in-principle approval issued by RBI will be one year.  
 In order to ensure transparency, the names of the applicants will be 
placed on the RBI website after the last date of receipt of the 
applications.” 
 11.8 The Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of Finance submitted the  
same and identical written reply as above. 
 
Capital Requirement: 
  
 11.9 The minimum capital requirement for the new banks prescribed under the 
2013  guidelines is  Rs.500 crore  vis-a-avis Rs.200 crore ( to be increased to RS 300 
core in three years) prescribed in 2001 and Rs 100 crore prescribed in 1993 .  On being 
asked if RBI should raise the amount of capital requirement and make it more stringent 
so that only serious and people willing to commit large amount should have come 
forward to set up new banks, RBI inter alia submitted the following in their post evidence 
reply: 
“The guidelines issued in 1993 for licensing of new banks in the private 
sector had prescribed Rs. 100 crore as minimum capital and the 2001 
guidelines raised this to Rs. 200 crore to be increased to Rs.300 crore 

37 
 
over three years from commencement of busine ss. Taking into account 
the lapse of time since the last guidelines issued in January 2001 and 
inflation since then, it was thought to have the minimum capital 
requirement at more than Rs. 300 crore.  
 
Though having a higher minimum capital requirement for  new banks 
would ensure that the banks operate on a strong capital base, and only 
serious parties with sufficient financial backing would evince interest in 
setting up new banks, such banks should also be required to play a 
more meaningful role in financia l inclusion. However, with too high 
minimum capital requirements, it is more likely that some serious 
promoters with financial inclusion in mind would not have the 
wherewithal to set up a bank and those promoters who would have 
higher capital would focus o n more profitable large ticket size 
commercial banking than seriously committing to financial inclusion. To 
strike a balance between the twin objectives of adequate capital and 
financial inclusion, based on deliberations, discussion with bankers, 
consultants and other experts, it was decided to have a minimum 
capital of Rs.500 crore.”* 
 
XII  RECOMMENDATION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON POLICY    
 ON NEW BANKING LICENCE 
 
12.1 The 43rd report of the SCF (page 27 para 32) contains recommendation as under  
        „While broadly endorsing the proposals contained in the Bill as measures 
to facilitate growth with regulation in banking sector, the Committee would 
like to emphasise that the recent failures of some major private banks 
internationally and the lessons learn t from them should not be lost sight of, 
while formulating the new policy on banking licences as per the mandate 
proposed in the Bill. The Committee would like the stability of the banking 
system to be preserved, while nurturing growth and development of t he 
banking sector as a whole. Key issues and concerns such as banking 

38 
 
penetration, coverage and financial inclusion should remain paramount and 
the entire banking industry including banks in the private sector should be 
clearly mandated to achieve the desired objectives in this regard.‟ 
12.2 The Ministry of Finance (DFS) has furnished their comments as follows: 
 In the above recommendation the SCF has laid emphasis that the 
recent failures of some major private banks internationally and the lessons 
learnt f rom them should not be lost sight of, while formulating the new 
policy on banking licences.  
  The following safeguards and prudential regulations applicable to 
the new banks, the parent NOFHC and the consolidated bank built -in the 
new bank licensing polic y guidelines would serve as adequate 
safeguards to deal with conflict of interest situations.   
(i)  „Fit and Proper‟ criteria :  
 
   Entities / groups are required to comply with the „fit and proper‟ 
criteria, to be eligible to promote banks. It has been stipulated that 
entities / groups should have a past record of sound credentials and 
integrity, be financially sound with a successful  track record of 10 years. 
For ascertaining these aspects, RBI may seek feedback from other 
regulators and enforcement and investigative agencies.  
 
   Further, it has been mentioned in the guidelines that Promoter / 
Promoter Groups‟ business model and bus iness culture should not be 
misaligned with the banking model and their business should not 
potentially put the bank and the banking system at risk on account of 
group activities such as those which are speculative in nature or subject 
to high asset price volatility. 
 
The above criteria ensure that there are stringent „fit and proper‟ norms for 
entry into the banking sector.  
 
(ii)  Corporate structure of the NOFHC :  
  RBI will have to be satisfied that the corporate structure does not 
impede the financial services entities held by the NOFHC from being ring 
fenced, that it would be able to supervise the bank, the NOFHC, and its 
Subsidiaries / Joint Ventures / Associates on a consolidated basis, and 
that, it will be able to obtain all required information relevant for this 
purpose, smoothly and promptly. However, the primary supervision of the 
entities held by the NOFHC will be by the sectoral regulators. The newly 
inserted Section 29A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 empowers the 

39 
 
Reserve Bank of India to call for information from the associate 
companies and also cause inspection of their books of account. 
   The NOFHC shall not be permitted to set up any new financial 
services entity for at least three years from the date of commencement of 
business of the NOFHC. Since setting up a bank is challenging, this has 
been stipulated from the prospective of stability so that the new bank 
become stable before the Promoters/Promo ter Groups diversify into new 
businesses.  
   The guidelines require the corporate structure of the Promoter 
Group to be such that the NOFHC will be wholly owned by the Promoter / 
Promoter Group and that all the other financial services entities of the 
group are brought under the NOFHC.  The companies forming part of the 
Promoter Group whereof companies in which the public hold not less 
than 51 per cent of the voting equity shares, shall hold not less than 51 
per cent of the total voting equity shares of the NOFHC. 
  
  The objective for the above corporate structure is to ring fence the 
regulated financial services entities of the Group, including the bank from 
other activities of the Group i.e., commercial, industrial and financial 
activities not regulated by financial sector regulators and also that the 
bank should be ring fenced from other regulated financial activities of the 
Group. 
 
(iii) Corporate Governance of HOFHC 
 
   The capital holding pattern prescribed for the NOFHC is to ensure 
that the majority holdi ng (51 percent or more) in the NOFHC by the 
Promoter / Promoter Group is through the Promoter Group companies in 
which the public holding is a minimum of 51 percent. This stipulation is 
from the prospective of ensuring better corporate governance of the 
NOFHC. 
 
   Specific corporate governance standards have also been laid down 
for the NOFHC, with requirements like having a minimum of 50 percent of 
independent directors, „fit and proper‟ criteria for Directors, as applicable 
to the Directors of banks, requirement of special knowledge or practical 
experience, etc. 
 
(iv) Exposure norms :  
 
   In order to address the risk of self dealing by promoters, it has been 
stipulated under the exposure norms that the NOFHC and the bank and 
any other regulated financial s ector entity held under the NOFHC shall 
not have any exposure to the Promoter Group.  
 

40 
 
 These norms have been stipulated to obviate the chances of self dealing. 
 
(v) Capital requirements for banks and shareholding by NOFHC :  
   The requirements under this sti pulation is that although the 
promoters (through the NOFHC) will be allowed to initially hold a 
minimum of 40 per cent of the paid -up voting equity capital of the bank, 
the shareholding of the NOFHC is required to be brought down to 15 per 
cent within 12 years.  
 
   This has been stipulated to ensure that the promoters do not have 
substantial stake in the bank in the long run and the shareholding in the 
bank is well diversified. 
 
   Further, the bank has been required to get its shares listed on the 
stock e xchanges within three years of commencement of business to 
ensure that they follow SEBI norms on disclosure and transparency. 
 
(vi) Other conditions for the bank :   
 
  In order to ensure that the banks are professionally run with 
adequate corporate governance standards, certain other stipulations 
have been prescribed some of them are as specified below: 
 The Board of the bank should have a majority of independent 
Directors. 
 Banks promoted by groups having 40 per cent or more assets / 
income from non-financial business will require RBI‟s prior approval 
for raising paid -up voting equity capital beyond Rs.10 billion for 
every block of Rs.5 billion.  
 RBI while examining such proposals would primarily look into 
whether the corporate governance standards are adequate, 
whether information from Promoter Group has been forthcoming to 
facilitate consolidated supervision and whether the Board members 
remain „fit and proper‟.  
  The bank should operate on Core Banking Solutions (CBS) from 
the beginning with all modern infrastructural facilities.  
  It has been also stated in the guidelines that any non -compliance of 
terms and conditions will attract penal measures including cancellation of 
licence of the bank. 
  Further, the amendments to the BR Act, 1949 that have been 
carried out give RBI the power to supersede the Boards of the banks in 
public interest or for preventing the affairs of any banking company being 

41 
 
conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest o f the depositors or the 
banking company or for securing proper management of the banking 
company.” 
XIII  SOCIAL OBLIGATION 
13.1 In reply to a specific query as to w hether adequate social obligations 
including financial inclusion  have been mandated upon the new licencees, the Ministry 
inter-alia furnished the following reply as stated below: 
 
“The SCF  has observed that while nurturing growth and development of 
banking sector as a whole, key issues and concerns such as penetration, 
coverage and financial inclusion should remain paramount and the entire 
banking industry including banks in the private sector should be mandated to 
achieve the desired objectives in this regard.  
 
Accordingly, RBI has proposed in the new bank licensing guidelines,  norms 
relating to issues such as business plan orientation towards financial 
inclusion,  compliance with priority sector targets, minimum 25 per cent 
branch presence at rural unbanked centers etc,  as detailed below: 
 
(i) RBI has mandated that the applicants  for new bank licencees should 
furnish their business plans for the banks along with their applications 
and that business plan will have to address how the bank proposes to 
achieve financial inclusion. This will be a vital input in deciding about 
grant of bank licence i n case many applicants meet the eligibility and 
„fit and proper‟ criteria. 
 
(ii) RBI will have to comply with the priority sector lending targets and 
sub-targets as applicable to the existing domestic banks. For this 
purpose, RBI is required to build its priority sector lending portfolio 
from the commencement of its operations.  
 
  RBI is required to open at least 25 percent of its branches in 
unbanked rural centers (population up to 9,999 as per the latest census) to 
avoid over c oncentration of their branches in metropolitan areas and cities 
which are already having adequate banking presence.” 
 13.2 While deposing before the Committee RBI Governor made the following 
oral submission on the issue of social obligation: 
“Sir, on financial inclusion, both the Government and the Reserve Bank has 
been pursuing this as a major priority programme.  It is, of course, at the first 
level.  It is a target -driven programme.  But at the second level, we are also 
trying to emphasise t he quality of financial inclusion. Opening of a bank 
branch is just a beginning of financial inclusion. After that, accounts have to 

42 
 
be opened and those accounts have to be put operational. This is not just 
the supply problem.  Our experience has been that  we can force banks to go 
and open a branch and they will.  We can force banks to open accounts for 
all the households in the villages.  They have indeed done that.  But even 
then, the households have not being using those accounts actively.”  
13.3 On the viability issue of implementation of  25% branches in rural 
unbanked areas RBI has made the following written submission: 
“  Viability of branches depends upon both volume and value of 
business and sound business strategies of the bank. Setting up a brick 
and mortar branch in villages to the extent of 25% of the total branches 
may not threaten the viability of the banks.  
 
It is necessary to ensure that the objective of financial inclusion is 
achieved without affecting the viability of the banks as they dea l with 
huge public funds. RBI has also instructed the existing scheduled 
commercial banks to open at least 25% of their branches in unbanked 
rural centres. In order to ensure that the new banks have a level 
playing field with the existing banks which is ne cessary for surviving 
the competition amongst banks, the same prescription of 25% 
branches in unbanked rural centres has been mandated for the new 
banks through the guidelines. Apart from the requirements relating to 
the branch network, the guidelines also  stipulate that the new banks 
will also be required to fulfill priority sector lending commitments. The 
new banks can achieve economies of scale through better technology, 
innovative modes of delivering credit, engagement of business 
correspondents while adhering to the above prescriptions.” 
13.4 RBI has said that new banks are being licensed to achieve the objective of 
financial inclusion. When the Committee pointed out that the existing banks including 
public sector and more so the private sector banks have not been able to achieve 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) target of 40% and opening of branches in unbanked 
rural centres,  RBI inter alia submitted the following  
 
 
“As on March 31, 2012, lending to the priority sector by public 
sector banks was to the extent of 37.2% of adjusted net bank credit 
(ANBC) whereas in the case of private sector banks, it was higher at 
39.4%. 
Regarding opening of branches in unbanked rural centres, in 
compliance with the Monetary Policy 2011 -2012, domestic Scheduled 

43 
 
Commercial banks have been advised in July 2011 that while 
preparing their Annual Branch Expansion Plan (ABEP), the banks 
should a llocate at least 25 percent of the total number of branches 
proposed to be opened during a year in unbanked rural (Tier 5 and 
Tier 6) centres with population of less than 10000.   These instructions 
were issued as Branch expansion in rural areas is essentia l to address 
the existing asymmetries in achieving financial inclusion ……., there is 
adequate monitoring mechanism to ensure that the existing banks 
open at least 25 percent of the total number of branches in unbanked 
rural centres.  
 
In the guidelines for new banks, conditions have been stipulated for 
opening of at least 25 per cent of the bank branches in unbanked rural 
centres (population up to 9,999 as per the latest census) and that the 
bank shall comply with the priority sector lending targets and sub -
targets as applicable to the existing domestic banks. Further, t he 
guidelines indicate that compliance of terms and conditions laid down 
by RBI is an essential condition of grant of licence and any non -
compliance will attract penal measures including cancellation of licence 
of the bank. Therefore, RBI will be able to take penal action in case of 
non-compliance with the terms and conditions laid down.” * 
 
13.5 Statements showing snapshots of the progress made by the public sector banks 
and private sector banks, under certain key parameters, for the years ended March 
2010, March 2011, March 2012 and March 2013, are given below.  
 
 
Public Sector Banks  
     
SR Particulars 
Year ended  
Mar 10 
 Year 
ended Mar 
11 
 Year 
ended 
Mar 12  
 Year 
ended 
March 13 
Progress 
April 10 - 
March 13 
1 Total No. of Branches 59785 63422 68748 73578 13793 

44 
 
2 No. of Rural Branches 20091 21050 22816 24671 4580 
3 
Total number of correspondents 
deployed 19448 48581 78057 99127 79679 
4 Banking Outlets >2000 -Total 22043 48816 73244 76445 54402 
5 Banking Outlets <2000- Total 22036 37749 47126 77583 55547 
6 Banking Outlets - Branches 20036 21050 22816 24671 4635 
7 Banking Outlets - BCs 23958 65174 96895 126626 102668 
8 Banking Outlets - Other Modes 85 341 659 2731 2646 
9 Banking Outlets -TOTAL 44079 86565 120370 154028 109949 
10 
Urban Locations covered through 
BCs 416 2701 4588 6609 6193 
11 BSBDA Total  463.84 642.45 875.02 1162.45 698.60 
12 BSBDA Total Amt.  3654.28 4981.20 8255.56 12176.95 8522.67 
13 
OD facility availed in Basic Savings 
Bank Deposit A/c (No. in lakh) 1.26 4.80 15.08 24.98 23.72 
14 
OD facility availed in Basic Savings 
Bank Deposit A/c (Amt. in crores) 7.84 21.45 53.31 96.21 88.37 
15 KCCs-Total-No. in Lakh 156.28 177.68 195.43 200.86 44.58 
16 KCCs-Total-Amt In ` Crores 88416.93 113016.78 146395.81 179990.62 91573.69 
17 GCC-Total-No. in Lakh 8.96 9.92 12.13 22.37 13.41 
18 GCC-Total-Amt In ` Crores 2568.75 2184.11 2698.14 2633.65 64.90 
19 
ICT A/Cs-BC-Total Transaction -No. 
in lakhs  175.87 586.45 938.13 1522.13 3046.70 
20 
ICT A/Cs-BC-Total Transactions -
Amt in crores 542.59 5143.51 7862.33 17775.69 30781.53 
 
 
 
PrivateSector Banks 
     
SR Particulars 
Year ended  
Mar 10 
 Year 
ended Mar 
11 
 Year 
ended 
Mar 12  
 Year 
ended 
March 13 
Progress 
April 10 - 
March 13 
1 Total No. of Branches 10161 11699 13558 15630 5469 
2 No. of Rural Branches 1439 1612 1885 2699 1260 
3 Total number of CSPs deployed 13594 8748 17710 73920 60326 
4 Banking Outlets >2000 -Total 5310 5430 9056 14552 9242 
5 Banking Outlets <2000- Total 4869 8188 18108 60830 55961 
6 Banking Outlets - Branches 1439 1612 1885 2699 1260 
7 Banking Outlets - BCs 8726 11964 23460 68544 59818 
8 Banking Outlets - Other Modes 14 42 1819 4139 4125 
9 Banking Outlets -TOTAL 10179 13618 27164 75382 65203 
10 Urban Locations covered through BCs 17 1056 1287 20484 20467 
11 BSBDA Total  39.57 111.36 180.10 267.91 228.34 
12 BSBDA Total Amt.  602.86 721.94 1073.58 1470.26 867.40 
13 
OD facility availed in Basic Savings Bank 
Deposit A/c (No. in lakh) 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.09 0.09 

45 
 
14 
OD facility availed in Basic Savings Bank 
Deposit A/c (Amt. in crores) 0.02 0.03 2.08 7.00 6.98 
15 KCCs-Total-No. in Lakh 2.31 4.17 7.34 14.98 12.67 
16 KCCs-Total-Amt In ` Crores 5592.66 10721.09 18755.00 30448.45 24855.80 
17 GCC-Total-No. in Lakh 0.04 0.22 0.54 5.64 5.59 
18 GCC-Total-Amt In ` Crores 8.09 9.05 33.70 3455.90 3447.82 
19 
ICT A/Cs-BC-Total Transaction -No. in 
lakhs  11.55 59.60 254.52 697.38 1011.50 
20 
ICT A/Cs-BC-Total Transactions -Amt in 
crores 64.66 379.67 883.22 4580.24 5843.13 
 
XIV  TIME LIMIT AND TRANSPARENCY 
 
14.1 Regarding time limit by which the licenses  are proposed to be issued, the 
Govern submitted the following: 
 
    “ RBI has released the final guidelines for issue of licences on February 22, 
2013, indicating that applications for setting up of banks shall reach on or before 
July 1, 2013.    
 
(i) At the first stage, the applications will be screened by RBI to ensure 
prima facie eligibility of the applicants. Thereafter, the applications will 
be referred to a High Level Advisory Committee (HLAC) to be set up 
by RBI. The HLAC will comprise eminent persons with experience in 
banking, financial sector and other relevant a reas. The HLAC will set 
up its own procedures for screening the applications and will reserve 
the right to call for more information as well as have discussions with 
any applicant/s and seek clarification on any issue as may be required 
by it. The HLAC wil l submit its recommendations to RBI for 
consideration. The decision to issue an in -principle approval for setting 
up of a bank will be taken by RBI.  
 
(ii) Further, extensive due diligence exercise will have to be undertaken on 
the applicants including seeking feedback on applicants / Groups from 
other regulators, and enforcement and investigative agencies like 
Income Tax, CB I, Enforcement Directorate, etc;  as deemed 
appropriate. 
 Therefore, the time limit by which licens es will granted will depend on the 
number of applications received and the recommendations of the HLAC. RBI has 
indicated that is that if the number of applications is reasonable (say around 30 or 
so), RBI should be able to grant „in principle‟ approval in the first quarter of 2014.” 
 
14.2 It has been pointed out during the sitting of the Committee held on 09.04.2013 
that almost 93 applications for  banking license were kept pending from 1993 till 2001 

46 
 
when thy lapsed with the issue fresh guidelines. Again when only 2 out of 10 
applications were g ranted license 8 were kept pending. On being asked why whether 
applications were kept pending for long period and whether response will be given to 
applicants who are not awarded the license, the Governor RBI inter alia stated as 
below: 
 “I believe  that we will give a response.  Last time, I think, they were kept 
pending because it was never closed.” 
 
14.3 RBI further submitted the following on the modality as to how it has intended to 
select  entities for granting banking licenses and maintain transparency: 
 
(i)  Banking being a highly leveraged business, licences shall be issued 
on a very selective basis to those who conform to the requirements set out in 
the guidelines dated February 22, 2013, who have an impeccable track 
record and who are li kely to conform to the best international and domestic 
standards of customer service and efficiency.  
(ii)  At the first stage, the applications will be screened by RBI to ensure 
prima facie  eligibility of the applicants. RBI may apply additional criteria to 
determine the suitability of applications, in addition to the ‟fit and proper‟ 
criteria prescribed in the guidelines. Thereafter, the applications will be 
referred to a High Level Advisory Committee to be set up by RBI.  
(iii) The High Level Advisory Committe e will comprise eminent persons 
with experience in banking, financial sector and other relevant areas.  
(iv) The High Level Advisory Committee will set up its own procedures for 
screening the applications. The Committee will reserve the right to call for 
more information as well as have discussions with any applicant/s and seek 
clarification on any issue as may be required by it. The Committee will submit 
its recommendations to RBI for consideration. The decision to issue an in -
principle approval for setting up of a bank will be taken by RBI.  
(v) In order to ensure transparency, the names of the applicants for bank 
licences will be placed on the RBI website after the last date of receipt of the 
applications. 
 The names of applicants who have been granted in -principle approval 
will be listed in the RBI website.” 
 
 
 

47 
 
CLARIFICATIONS TO QUERIES 
15.1   Clarifications to queries received on the guidelines have been placed in 
the RBI website, http://rbi.org.in. 
    A good number of queries have brought out issues relating to the 
provisions in the guidelines on the eligible promoters, „fit and proper‟ criteria, 
corporate structure of the Non -Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC), 
foreign shareholding and on transition time to the new structure. 
  As per the guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector 
issued vide RBI Press Release dated February 22, 2013, the validity of the in -
principle approval for setting up of the NOFHC / bank was one year from the date 
of issue and would lapse automatically, thereafter.   One being asked to clarify as 
to whether it would provide more time for a smooth transition from the existing 
structures to that prescribed in the guidelines as also for meeting the regulatory 
requirements, RBI has de cided to extend the validity period of the in -principle 
approval from one year to 18 months. Accordingly, the provisions at para 4(K) 
(vi) of the guidelines stand modified. 
  The queries received from intending applicants brought out several 
complex issues pertaining to re -organisation of the existing corporate structure, 
restructuring of businesses and meeting the regulatory requirements. Some of 
the provisions in the guidelines relate to Non -operative Financial Holding 
Company (NOFHC) structure which envi sages holding of the bank and other 
regulated financial services entities of the Promoters/Promoter Group under the 
NOFHC and prudential exposure norms for the regulated entities. These 
requirements overlap with regulatory norms prescribed by other sectora l 
regulators like SEBI and IRDA. In this regard queries were raised on adherence 
to different sector specific requirements.  In this regard RBI has stated that “such 
issues were examined in consultation with SEBI and IRDA. It has been decided 
that while the structure prescribed in the guidelines is the preferred structure, the 
intending applicants should approach the other financial sector regulators for 

48 
 
bringing the entities regulated by them under the NOFHC. Their decision in this 
regard would prevail”.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
More Banks 
1. The Committee note that with a view to injecting competitiveness and 
improving efficiency and productivity in the banking sector, the Narsimhan 
Committee(1991) had recommended that the RBI should permit establishment 
of new banks in the private sector.  Following th is, guidelines for licensing of 
new banks in the private sector were issued by RBI in January, 1993 and 10 
new banks were set up in the private sector. Almost a decade later r evised 
guidelines were issued in January 2001, which have begotten two more banks. 
Subsequent to the announcement made by the Finance Minister in the Budget 
Speech in 2010-11, RBI has issued fresh/revised guidelines for issuing banking 
licenses on 22 February, 2013.  
2.  Out of t he 12 new banks set up after 1993 and 2001 guidelines,  four were 
promoted by financial institutions  (Axis Bank, ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank, IDBI 
Bank), one each by conversion of co -operative bank (DCB) and NBFC (Kotak 
Mahindra) into commercial banks, five by individual banking professionals (GTB 
Ltd., Bank of Punjab, Centurion, Yes Bank, Indusland Bank) and the remaining 
one by an established media house  (Times Bank). Out of the banks promoted by 
individuals in 1993, only one has survived with muted growth. One bank has been 
compulsorily merged with a nationalized bank due to erosion of networth on 
account of large capital market exposure. The other two banks have voluntarily 
amalgamated with other private sector banks due to the decisions of the majority 
shareholders arising out of poor governance and lack of financial strength . The 
Committee observe that mere  issuing of new banking license s by itself at this 
juncture cannot guarantee growth in the banking sector , and ipso facto l ead to  
financial inclusion . The Committee are more incline d to assume that 
criteria/parameters set out in the 1993 guidelines and monitoring thereof may not 

50 
 
have been adequate enough to prevent floundering of some banks in a short 
period and mergers and muted growth in some.  
 
Banking Licences to large industrial houses 
3. The RBI Governor, while deposing before the Committee ha d explained 
the factors that has prompted for revision of the 2001 guidelines. He stated that 
“In India and around the world, the  financial sector has changed, the corporate 
sector has changed, our understanding of regulation is changed, our 
regulatory capability has improved in certain respects, we are aware of our 
deficiencies in certain respects.  So, taking into account the chan ged 
circumstances, we revise the guidelines to reflect the changed circumstances ”. 
One of the major changes in the current guidelines from the earlier one is that  
the 2013 guidelines for banking license have allowed large industrial houses to 
apply for banking license, contrary to the guidelines issued in 2001 which had 
clearly spelt out that large industrial houses were not allowed to apply for 
banking license. According to RBI , the main reasons for allowing large 
industrial/business houses to promote banks under 2013 guidelines are that  
capital requirement can be easily provided by large industrial houses;  
industrial and business houses have already been allowed entry into other 
financial service sec tors and are competing with banks on both asset and 
liability sides; industrial and business houses have a long and credible history 
of building and nurturing new businesses in highly regulated sectors like 
telecom, power, airports, highways and ports etc.  However, the Committee are 
not convinced with the rationale advanced by RBI . Banking being a highly 
leveraged business involving public money and public welfare, the Committee 
are of the considered opinion that it will be more in the fitness of things to keep 
industry and banking separate. The Committee note that as on March 2013, out 
of 15630 existing private sector bank branches, only 2699 branches are located 
in the rural areas i.e. to say only about 17% of the total branches are in the rural 
areas. Given such a background , the Committee are apprehensive that 

51 
 
industrial/business houses may not be geared to achieve the national 
objectives of financial inclusion, priority sector lending etc. The Committee are 
not sure whether the “safeguards” put in place by RBI such as “Fit and Proper” 
criteria, “Exposur e Norms” etc. would be effective enough  to prevent banks 
promoted by industrial houses from  “cosying up”  to their industrial -owners. 
The Committee , therefore,  urge the Government /RBI to ensure that no 
recurrence of the pre-nationalised situation happens, when the management of 
private banks deployed their funds to extend  undue favour  to their own 
industrial owners without regard to social priorities determined by 
Government.  As post -nationalisation, great strides have been made in social 
banking by public sector banks, the Committee desire that this momentum 
nurtured thus far should be carried forward to extend the geographic coverage 
of banks and improve access to banking services through the new licens es to 
be awarded under the 2013 guidelines.  This goal of reaching banking services 
to unbanked areas should thus not be lost sight of  while granting licenses to 
new entities.  
Fit and Proper 
4. Under „Fit and Proper‟ criteria it has been stated that entities/gr oups 
applying for banking licens e should have a past record of sound credentials and 
integrity and be financially sound with a s uccessful track record of 10 years. The 
Committee feel that this criteria is too ambiguous and too much scope  has been 
left for  subjective discretion  of RBI . Having such subjective, ambiguous and 
open-ended criteria may leave the doors open for arbitrariness and invite charges 
of favouritism.  The Committee , would therefore, suggest that a more precise, a 
coherent and objective yardstick/criteria may be formulated to assess the 
credentials  of divergent entities from different sectors in a uniform manner.  
 
Paid Up Capital 
5. The 1993 guidelines stipulate a threshold of Rs.100 crore capital while 
the 2001 guidelines stipulate Rs.200 crore , which was to be made Rs.300 crore 

52 
 
in three years; and the 2013 guidelines stipulate  the same of  Rs.500 crore.   
Considering the expanse of geographical India, the vast unbanked population, 
the costs of core banking technology, real estate and manpower services, the 
Committee believe that starting a bank with around Rs.500 crore as capital will 
limit the operations of the bank and render them vulnerable to under-achieve 
its mandate. Raising the bar for Capital requirement will also serve the purpose 
of screening out the less serious players in the sector.  Further, the mandated 
rural branches may  also not necessarily bring forth profits immediately .  
Therefore, in view of the stipulated mandate and the need for sustainability,  the 
banks must equip themselves with adequate capital.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend for raising the minimum capital requireme nt for the new bank s to 
Rs.1000 crore. 
Lending Norms  
6.  The Committee note that t he Reserve Bank of India mandates that the new 
banks also have to provide 40% of the total advances towards priority sector 
lending like any other existing private and public sectors banks. The latest 
guidelines also contain certain exposure norms including t he Intra -Group 
Transactions & Exposures (ITEs) norms. However, the Committee are surprised 
to note that there is no lending norms prescribed in the guidelines, particularly 
with regard to lending to entity/entities belonging to or associated with the 
Promoter or the Promoter Group  or even lending within the proposed Non -
Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC).  These norms need to be spelt 
out clearly so that there is no appropriation of funds to serve the interests of 
the promoter group.  The Committee  desire that the pitfalls of appropriation of 
banking resources for partisan gains should be scrupulously avoided. 
Financial Inclusion 
7. The Committee note that in respect of business plan it has been stated in 
the guidelines that “ Applicants for new bank  licenses will be required to 
furnish their business plans for the banks along with their applications. The 

53 
 
business plan will have to address how the bank proposes to achieve financial 
inclusion”.  It has been further stated in the guidelines that “ The bank shall 
open at least 25 per cent of its branches in unbanked rural centres (population 
up to 9,999 as per the latest census) to avoid over concentration of their 
branches in metropolitan areas and cities which are already having adequate 
banking presen ce.”  When the  existing private sector banks are not able to 
have even 20% of their b ank branches in the rural areas  (Kotak Mahindra Bank 
had a mere 10.91% while Yes Bank had nil) , the Committee cannot understand 
as to how the new banks  will be persuaded to achieve the mandate of opening 
25% of their branches in the rural areas.  The Committee would therefore like 
the Reserve Bank of India to have a mechanism of incentive/dis -incentive in 
place so that this mandate/stipulation can be strictly enforced and it  does not 
remain only on paper, as is the case now.   Thus, for every three branches in 
urban areas, there must be a branch in rural area.  Permiss ion to open bank 
branches could be given in lots of four at a time.  T his would enable the 
Reserve Bank of India to properly enforce this norm. 
Time Limit And Transparency 
8. From the reply furnished by RBI, the Committee understand that though 
there is no time limit  by which the licenses are to be issued, RBI is hopeful of 
granting licenses “in principle” in the first quarter of 2014.  The Committee find it 
pertinent to point out here that to keep applications pending indefinitely without 
assigning any reason, as was  done earlier, is unjust and unfair.  The Committee 
would thus expect the RBI to promptly respon d to those applications for banking 
licenses which are not accepted and to intimate the reasons for the same to the 
applicant within a stipulated period.  The Committee would also urge the RBI to 
execute the process of screening and evaluation of applications received for 
banking license in a wel l-defined and transparent manner  without leaving any 
room for speculation or conjecture.  
 

54 
 
Contestability of Decision of RBI 
9. The Governor of RBI, while deposing before the Committee stated on the 
issue of “Fit and Proper” criteria “…if there is some subjectivity, the test for us, 
the challenge for us will be …Is your decision contestable?” The Committee are 
surprised that in spite of the above submission made by the RBI Governor, and 
also considering the extent of subjective discretion available with  RBI in the 
criteria/guidelines, there is no mechanism provided to facilitate contesting or 
reviewing RBI decisions.  With a view to ensuring fairplay and justice in the 
licensing process, the Committee recommend that a suitable mechanism may be 
instituted to enable aggrieved applicants to seek review of decisions.   
Conclusion  
10. Banking being a highly leveraged business involving public money and 
public welfare, the Committee are of the considered opinion that it will be more in 
the fitness of things to keep industry and banking separate.  The Committee , 
therefore desire the Government/Reserve Bank of India to review the licencing 
guidelines accordingly.   
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                     YASHWANT SINHA 
 27 September, 2013                                                                                   Chairman, 
05 Asvina, 1935 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Finance. 
  

55 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
January 22, 1993 
GUIDELINES ON ENTRY OF NEW PRIVATE SECTOR BANKS  
For well over two decades, after the nationalization of 14 larger banks in 1969, no banks 
have been allowed to be set up in the private sector. Progressively, over this period, public 
sector banks have expanded their branch network considerably and catered  to the socio -
economic needs of large masses of the population, especially the weaker section and those 
in the rural areas. The public sector banks now have 91 per cent of the total bank branches 
and handle 85 per cent of the total banking business in the country. While recognising the 
importance and the role of public sector banks, there is increasing recognition of the need to 
introduce greater competition which can lead to higher productivity and efficiency of the 
banking system. A stage has now been rea ched when new private sector banks may be 
allowed to be set up.  
It is necessary that while permitting the entry of new private sector banks the following 
considerations have to be kept in view:  
(a) they sub-serve the underlying goals of financial sector reforms which are to provide 
competitive, efficient and low cost financial intermediation services for the society at 
large;  
(b) they are financially viable;  
I they should result in upgradation of technology in the banking sector;  
(d) they avoid the sho rtcomings, such as, unfair preemption and concentration of credit, 
55uthorized55tio of economic power, corss holdings with industrial groups, etc., 
which beset the private sector banks prior to 55uthorized55tion;  
(e) freedom of entry in the banking sector may  have to be managed carefully and 
judiciously.  
 
Based on these considerations, the Reserve Bank has formulated the following 
guidelines for establishment of new banks in the private sector :-  
(a) Such a bank shall be registered as a public limited compan y under the Companies 
Act, 1956.  
(b) The RBI may, on merits, grant a licence under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 for 
such a bank. The bank may also be included in the Second Schedule  
2  

56 
 
 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 at the appropriate time. The decision of the RBI 
in these matters shall be final.  
I The bank will be governed by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 in 
regard to its 56uthorized, subscribed and paid -up capital. The minimum paid -up 
capital for such a bank shall be Rs .100 crores. The promoters ‟ contribution for such 
a bank shall be determined by the RBI and will also be subject to other applicable 
regulations.  
(d) The shares of the bank should be listed on stock exchanges.  
(e) To avoid concentration of the headquarte rs of new banks in metropolitan cities and 
other overbanked areas, while granting a licence, preference may be given to those, 
the headquarters of which, are proposed to be located in a centre which does not 
have the headquarters of any other bank.  
(f) Voting rights of an individual shareholder shall be governed by the ceiling of 1 per 
cent of the total voting rights as stipulated by Section 12 (2) of the Banking 
Regulation Act. However, expemption from this ceiling may be granted under 
Section 53 of the said Act, to public financial institutions.  
(g) The new bank shall not be allowed to have as a director any person who is a director 
of any other banking company, or of companies which among themselves are 
entitled to exercise voting rights in excess of twenty per cent of the total voting rights 
of all the shareholders of the banking company, as laid down in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949.  
(h) The bank will be governed by the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and other relevant statues, in regard t o its 
management, set -up, liquidity requirements and the scope of its activities. The 
directives, instructions, guidelines and advices given by the RBI, shall be applicable 
to such a bank as in the case of other banks. It would be ensured that a new bank 
would concentrate on core banking activities initially.  
(i) Such a bank shall be subject to prudential norms in respect of banking operations, 
accounting policies and other policies as are laid down by RBI. The bank will have to 
achieve capital adequacy of  8 per cent of the risk weighted assets from the very 
beginning. Similarly, norms for income recognition, asset classification and 
provisioning will also be applicable to it from the beginning. So will be the single 
borrower and group borrowers exposure limits that will be in force from time to time.  
(j) The bank shall have to observe priority sector lending targets as applicable to other 
domestic banks. However, in recognition of the fact that new entrants may require 
some time to lend to all categories o f the priority sector, some modifications in the 
composition of the priority sector lending may be considered by RBI for the initial 
period of three years.  

57 
 
(k) Such a bank will also have to comply with such directions of the RBI as are 
applicable to exist ing banks in the matter or export credit. As a facilitation of this it 
may be issued an 57uthorized dealer‟s licence to deal in foreign exchange, when 
applied for.  
(l) A new bank shall not be allowed to set up a subsidiary or mutual fund for at least 
three years after its establishment. The holding of such a bank in the  
 
equity of other companies shall be governed by the existing provisions applicable to 
other banks, viz. –  
(V) 30 per cent of the bank ‟s or the investee company ‟s capital funds, whichever 
is less, as set out under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, and  
(ii) 1.5 per cent of the bank ‟s incremental deposits during a year as per RBI 
guidelines.  
The aggregate of such investments in the subsidiaries and Mutual Fund (if and when 
set up) and portfolio investments in other companies shall not exceed 20 per cent of 
the bank‟s own paid-up capital and reserves.  
(m) In regard to branch opening, it shall be governed by the existing policy that banks 
are free to open branches at various centres including urba n/metropolitan centres 
without the prior approval of the RBI once they satisfy the capital adequacy and 
prudential accounting norms. However, to avoid over-concentration of their branches 
in metropolitan areas and cities, a new bank will be required to ope n rural and semi-
urban branches also, as may be laid down by RBI.  
(n) Such a bank shall have to lay down its loan policy within the overall policy guidelines 
of RBI. While doing so, it shall specifically provide prudential norms covering related 
party transactions.  
(o) Such a bank shall make full use of modern infrastructural facilities in office 
equipments, computer, telecommunications, etc. in order to provide good customer 
service. The bank should have a high powered customer grievances cell to handle 
customer complaints.  
(p) Such other conditions as RBI may prescribe from time to time.  
 
                                                                        (V.L.Patil)  
                                                                                                  Relations Officer 
 
  

58 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
Guidelines on entry of new banks in the private sector 
January 3, 2001 
 
The guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector were issued by the Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) on January 22, 1993. Out of various applications received, RBI had granted 
licences to 10 banks. After a review of the experience gained on the f unctioning of the new 
banks in the private sector, in consultation with the Government, it has now been decided to 
revise the licensing guidelines.  
The revised guidelines for entry of new banks in private sector are given below. The guidelines 
are indicat ive and any other relevant factor or circumstances would be kept in view while 
considering an application. With the issue of revised guidelines, applications pending with RBI 
would be treated as lapsed. 
2. Guidelines 
 
(i)  The initial minimum paid -up capital for a new bank shall be Rs.200 crore. The initial 
capital will be raised to Rs.300 crore within three years of commencement of business. 
The overall capital structure of the proposed bank including the authorised capital shall 
be approved by the RBI. 
(ii)  The promoters’ contribution shall be a minimum of 40 per cent of the paid -up capital of 
the bank at any point of time. The initial capital, other than the promoters’ contribution, 
could be raised through public issue or private placement. In case the promoters’ 
contribution to the initial capital is in excess of the minimum proportion of 40 per cent, 
they shall dilute their excess stake after one year of the bank’s operations. (In case 
divestment after one year is proposed to be spread over a perio d of time, this would 
require specific approval of the RBI). Promoters’ contribution of 40% of the initial 
capital shall be locked in for a period of five years from the date of licensing of the bank. 
(iii)  While augmenting capital to Rs.300 crore within three years of commencement of 
business, the promoters will have to bring in additional capital, which would be at least 
40 per cent of the fresh capital raised. The remaining portion could be raised through 
public issue or private placement. The promoters ’ contribution of a minimum of 40% of 
additional capital will also be locked in for a minimum period of 5 years from the date of 
receipt of capital by the bank. 
(iv)  NRI participation in the primary equity of a new bank shall be to the maximum extent of 
40 per cent. In the case of a foreign banking company or finance company (including 
multilateral institutions) as a technical collaborator or a copromoter, equity participation 
shall be restricted to 20 per cent within the above ceiling of 40 per cent. In cases of 
shortfall in foreign equity contributions by NRIs, designated multilateral institutions 
would be allowed to contribute foreign equity to the extent of the shortfall in NRI 
contribution to the equity. The proposed bank shall obtain necessary approv al of Foreign 
Investment Promotion Board of the Government of India and Exchange Control 
Department of RBI. 
 (v)  The new bank should not be promoted by a large industrial house. However, individual 
companies, directly or indirectly connected with large industrial houses may be permitted 
to participate in the equity of a new private sector bank up to a maximum of 10 per cent 

59 
 
but will not have controlling interest in the bank.  The 10 per cent limit would apply to all 
inter- connected companies belonging to the concerned large industrial houses. In taking 
a view on whether the companies, either as promoters or investors, belong to a large 
industrial house or to a company connected to a large industrial house, the decision of the 
RBI will be final. 
(vi)  The proposed bank shall maintain an arms length relationship with business entities in the 
promoter group and the individual company/ies investing upto 10% of the equity as 
stipulated above. It shall not extend any credit facilities to the promoters and company/ies 
investing up to 10 per cent of the equity. The relationship between business entities in the 
promoter group and the proposed bank shall be of a similar nature as between two 
independent and unconnected entities. In taking view on whether a company bel ongs to a 
particular Promoter Group or not, the decision of RBI shall be final. 
(vii)  Conversion of NBFCs into private sector banks  
 An NBFC with a good track record  desiring conversion into a bank should satisfy the 
 following criteria : 
The NBFC should have a minimum net worth of Rs.200 crore in its latest balance  
  sheet which will stand increased to Rs.300 crore within three years from the date  
  of conversion. 
The NBFC should not have been promoted by a large Industrial House or  
owned/controlled by public authorities, including Local, State or Central  
Governments. 
The NBFC should have acquired a credit rating of not less than AAA rating (or its 
equivalent) in the previous year. 
The NBFC should have an impeccable track record in complia nce with RBI  
regulations/directions and in repayment of public deposits and no default  should 
have been reported. 
The NBFC desiring conversion into bank should have capital adequacy of not less 
than 12 per cent and net NPAs of not more than 5 per cent. 
The NBFC on conversion to a bank will have to comply with Capital  Adequacy 
Ratio and all other requirements such as lending to priority sector,  promoters’ 
contribution, lock -in period for promoters’ stake, dilution of  promoters’ stake 
beyond the minimum, NRI and foreign equity participation, 
arms length relationship, etc. as applicable to banks. 
 
3. Other Requirements 
 
 (i)  The bank shall be required to maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10  per cent 
 on a continuous basis from the commencement of its operations.  
(ii)  In order to ensure level playing field, 
 a)  the new bank will have to observe priority sector lending target of 40 per cent of  
  net bank credit as applicable to other domestic banks, and 
b)  the new bank will be re quired to open 25 per cent of its branches in rural  and 
semi-urban areas to avoid over concentration of their branches in  metropolitan 
areas and cities on the same lines as new private sector  banks established under 
guidelines laid down by RBI in January 1993, 

60 
 
(iii)  The promoters, their group companies and the proposed bank shall accept the  system of 
 consolidated supervision by the Reserve Bank of India. 
(iv)  The new bank shall not be allowed to set up a subsidiary or mutual fund for at  least three 
 years from the date of commencement of business. 
(v)  The headquarters of the proposed new bank could be in any location in India as  decided 
 by the promoters. 
(vi)  The new bank shall make full use of modern infrastructural facilities in office  
 equipments, c omputer, telecommunications etc. in order to provide cost  effective 
 customer service. It should have a high powered Customer Grievances  Cell to handle 
 customer complaints. 
(vii)  The new bank will be governed by the provisions of the Banking Regulation A ct, 1949, 
 Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, other relevant Statutes and the  Directives, Prudential 
 regulations and other Guidelines/Instructions issued by  RBI and the regulations of SEBI 
 regarding public issues and other guidelines applicable to listed banking companies. 
 
4. Procedure for Applications 
 
i)  In terms of Rule 11 of the Banking Regulation (Companies) Rules, 1949  applications 
shall be submitted in the prescribed form (Form III). In addition,   the applications should 
furnish a project report covering business potential and viability of the proposed bank, the 
business focus, the product lines, proposed  regional or locational spread, level of 
information technology capability and any  other information that they consider relevant. 
The project repo rt should give as  much concrete details as feasible, based on adequate 
ground level information  and avoid unrealistic or unduly ambitious projections. 
Applications should also  be supported by detailed information on the background of 
promoters, their  expertise, track record of business and financial worth, details of 
promoters’ direct and indirect interests in various companies/industries, details of  
credit/other facilities availed by the promoters/ promoter company(ies)/other  Group 
company(ies) with banks/ financial institutions, and details of proposed  participation by 
foreign banks/NRI/OCBs. 
 
ii)  Applications for setting up new banks in the private sector, along with other  details as 
 mentioned above, should reach the following address before March 31, 2001. 
 The Chief General Manager-in-Charge, 
 Department of Banking Operations and Development, 
 Reserve Bank of India, 
 World Trade Centre, Centre I, 
 Cuffe Parade, Colaba, 
 Mumbai 400 005. 
 
5. Procedure for RBI decisions 
 
i)  In view of the increasing emphasis on stringent prudential norms, transparency,  
disclosure requirements and modern technology, the new banks need to have strength and 
efficiency to work profitably in a highly competitive environment.  As a number of banks 
are already functioning, li cences will be issued on a very  selective basis to those who 

61 
 
conform to the above requirements and who are likely to conform to the best international 
and domestic standards of customer  service and efficiency. Preference will however be 
given to promoters with expertise of financing priority areas and in setting up banks 
specialising in the financing of rural and agro based industries. The number of licences to 
be issued in the next three years may be restricted to two or three of the best acceptable  
proposals. This number would also include permission granted to any NBFC for  
conversion into bank. {If the number of acceptable proposals of the highest  standards are 
more than three, this limit may be relaxed on recommendation of  the Advisory 
Committee (see below). In that case the period for issuing new  licences may be stretched 
to four or five years}. 
ii)  At the first stage, the applications will be screened by RBI to ensure prima facie  
 eligibility of the applicants. Thereafter, the applications will be refe rred to a  high-level 
 Advisory Committee to be set up by RBI comprising  
  
 Dr. I.G. Patel, former Governor of 
 Reserve Bank of India .. Chairman 
 Shri C.G. Somiah, former Comptroller and 
 Auditor General of India .. Member 
 Shri Dipankar Basu, former Chairman of 
 State Bank of India .. Member 
 Chief General Manager of the Department of Banking Operations and Development of 
 RBI will be the Secretary of the Advisory Committee. 
 
(iii)  The Committee will set up its own procedures for screening the applic ations. The  
Committee will reserve the right to call for more information as well as have1 discussions 
with any applicant/s and seek clarification on any issue as required by  it. The Committee 
will submit its recommendations to RBI for consideration  within three months after the 
last date of receipt of applications by RBI (i.e. 30 June 2001). The decision to issue an in-
principle approval for setting up of a  bank will be taken by RBI. RBI’s decision will be 
final. 
iv)  The validity of the in -principle approval issued by RBI will be one year from  the date of 
 granting in-principle approval and would thereafter lapse automatically. 
v)  After issue of the in -principle approval for setting up of a bank in the private  sector, if 
any adverse features are noticed s ubsequently regarding the promoters  or the 
companies/firms with which the promoters are associated and the group in  which they 
have interest, the Reserve Bank of India may impose additional  conditions and if 
warranted, it may withdraw the in-principle approval. 
 
 
Alpana Killawala 
        General Manager 
  

62 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th April, 2013 from 1130 hrs to 1500 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
          Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
6.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
9.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
10.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
11.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
12.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
13.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
15.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri A.K. Singh      – Joint Secretary 
2.    Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  –  Additional Director  
3.    Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Deputy Secretary  
4.    Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   – Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)  
1. Dr. D. Subbaroa, Governor 
2. Shri Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor 
3. Shri B. Mahapatra, Executive Director 
4. Shri G.S. Hegde, Principal Legal Adviser  
5.      Shri S.S. Barik, General Manager 
 

63 
 
-2- 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) in connection with the examination of the subject „Policy on New Licences in the 
Banking Sector‟.  The major issues discussed broadly related to need to expand existing 
public sector banks; failure of banks to discharge thei r responsibilities of financial 
inclusion/priority sector lending; necessity to revise guidelines to grant banking licence; 
reasons/justification for allowing large industrial houses/public sector entities into banking 
sector; subjectivity of the guideline s to decide parameters such as „impeccable record‟, „fit 
and proper‟, „sound credentials and integrity‟ of applicants; possibility of cross financing by 
the banks; ensuring opening of 25% of branches in unbanked rural areas; careful scrutiny of 
applications of large corporate/industrial houses; need to make eligibility criteria objective 
and stringent; sending response to those whose applications are rejected; ensuring no entity 
granted new banking licence fails; status /performance of the 12 new private ba nks issued 
banking licence as per 1993 and 2001 guidelines, etc. The Chairman directed the 
representatives of Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to furnish written replies to the points raised 
by the Members during the discussion. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
     The Committee then adjourned.

64 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th September, 2013 from 1100 hrs to 1310 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.      Dr. Baliram  
3.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
4.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
5.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
7.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Subodh Kant Sahai 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
   
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13. Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
16.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
17.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri A.K. Singh    – Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   –  Additional Director  
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi     –  Deputy Secretary   
4.     Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary 
 

65 
 
   2.     At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Subodh Kant Sahai and congratulated him 
on his nomination to the Committee for the year 2013 -14.  The Committee thereafter took up 
the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption :-  
 
(i)  XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(ii)    XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(iii)   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(iv)   XX   XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
(v)    Draft Report on the subject „Policy on New Licences in the Banking Sector‟. 
 
   
3.     The Committee adopted the above draft reports with minor modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of the modifications 
suggested and present these Reports to Hon‟ble Speaker/Parliament. 
             The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 