 
55 55    
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
     Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
 
 
Demands for Grants 
(2009-10)  
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 


 
 
 
2
 
FIFTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
     Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
Demands for Grants 
(2009-10)  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02 December, 2009 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02 December, 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 
        


 
 
 
3
 
 
CONTENTS  
 
PAGE.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………….. (iv) 
 
                       PART –I 
 
 
                    Background Analysis 
 
Page Nos.  
 
I. Budgetary Allocation 
 
1 
II. Investors Education and Protection Fund (IEPF)  
 
6 
III. Competition Commission of India  
 
9 
IV. Shortage of Manpower 
 
10 
V. IPO Proceeds 
 
13 
VI. 
 
 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO).  
 
16 
VII. Follow up on Satyam episode.  
 
19 
VIII.  Registrars of Companies (ROCs) 
 
21 
IX. Automation of Offices of Official Liquidators ( OLs) 
 
 
23 
 
PART –II 
 
 
 
 
 Recommendations/Observations 
 
27 
 
Appendices 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 15 September, 2009 and 26 November, 
2009  

 
 
 
4
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010     
 
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
   
MEMBERS  
 
     LOK SABHA  
 
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri C.M. Chang 
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8. Shri Khagen Das 
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
10. Smt. Jayaprada 
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
13. Shri Gopinath Munde 
14. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
15. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy 
16. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy 
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
18. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
19. Shri Manicka Tagore 
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Shri Raashid Alvi 
23. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
26. Shri Moinul Hassan 
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
28. Shri S. Anbalagan 
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30. Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
 
      SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Additional Director 
            4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy S ecretary 
 

 
 
 
5
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Finance (200 9-10), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report o n their behalf, present this Fifth 
Report (15 th  Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance (2 009-10) on the 
‘Demands for Grants (2009-10)’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
2.   The Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Minist ry of Corporate Affairs were 
laid on the Table of the House on 9 July, 2009.   U nder Rule 331E of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the  Standing Committee on Finance 
are required to consider the Demands for Grants of the Ministries/Departments under 
their jurisdiction and make Reports on the same to both the Houses of Parliament.   
Thereafter, the Demands are considered by the House  in the light of the reports of the 
Committee.   However, this year, the Demands for Gr ants (2009-10) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs were passed by Lok Sabha on 23 Ju ly, 2009 prior to their 
consideration by the Standing Committee on Finance.    Nonetheless, in pursuance of 
the observation made by the Chair, the Committee ex amined the Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and issues arising out of these.   
3.    The Committee took oral evidence of the repre sentatives of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs on 15 September, 2009. 
4.   The Committee considered and adopted this Repo rt at their sitting held on 
26 November, 2009.    
5.    The Committee wish to express their thanks to  the representatives of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
material and information which the Committee desire d in connection with the 
examination of the Demands for Grants (2009-10). 
 
       New Delhi;                         Dr  Murli Man ohar Joshi, 
    18 November, 2009 
                                   Chairman, 
    27  Kartika, 1931 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Finance 

 
 
 
6
 
REPORT 
 
 
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
    
 1.1  The Ministry of Corporate Affairs is primaril y concerned with the 
regulation of the corporate sector. In that process , the Ministry administers specific 
statutes, the key among them being ‘The Companies A ct, 1956’. The other statutes 
administered are as follows:  
i) The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 
ii) The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 
iii) The Company Secretaries Act, 1980 
iv) The Partnership Act, 1932 
v) The Societies Registration Act, 1860 
vi) The Companies (Donation to National Fund) Act, 1951 
vii) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  (MRTP) Act, 1969; and  
viii) The Competition Act, 2002 
ix) The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 
 
 
1.2  The total Budget Demand of the Ministry for th e year 2009-10 amounts to 
Rs.229.62 crore, out of which 196.62 crore is under  the Revenue Expenditure and 
Rs.33.00 crore under the Capital Expenditure. Detai ls of budgetary provisions for 
various appropriation units are given in the following table:-         
 (Rs. in crores)    
Section S.No Office  Budget Estimates 
2009-10 
Plan/Non-Plan 
Revenue 
  Plan Non 
Plan 
 1 Headquarters  100.10  
 2. Regional Directors  9.72  
 3. Registrar of Companies  38.42  
 4. Official Liquidators  17.19  
 5. Monopolies & Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission 
 6.51  
 6. Director General of Investigation and 
Registration 
 1.68  
 7. Company Law Board   3.32  
 8. Serious Fraud Investigation Office  5.18  
 9. National Company Law Tribunal  .37  
 10. Competition Appellate Tribunal  4.12  
 11. Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) 3 .00 .00  
Capital 12. Purchase of Land/building/construction of office 
premises/Residential accommodation for staff 
30.00 10.00  
Total:   33.00 196.62  
 

 
 
 
7
 
1.3  The object head-wise details are  as under:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
 
 
1.4  The budget of the Ministry  of Corporate Affairs provides for the 
expenditure on the Secretariat of the Ministry of C orporate Affairs, four Offices of 
Regional Directors, twenty Offices of the Registrar s of Companies, sixteen 
Offices of Official Liquidators and also for expend iture on attached offices of 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commissi on, Director General of 
Investigation & Registration, Company Law Board, Co mpetition Commission of 
India, Serious Fraud Investigation Office, the Nati onal Company Law Tribunal & 
Section S. No. Sub-Head 
 
 
Budget Estimates 
2008-2009 
 
Plan/Non-
Plan 
Revenue 
  Plan Non Plan 
 
 1 Salaries  70.41  
 2. Wages  .12  
 3 Overtime Allowance   .15  
 4 Medical Treatment   1.07  
 5. Domestic Travel Expenses  1.86  
 6. Foreign Travel Expenses  .51  
 7. Office Expenses  15.55  
 8. Rent, Rates & Taxes   5.42  
 9 Publication  .08  
 10. Other Administrative Expenses  1.02  
 11. Advertising & Publicity   3.19  
 12. Professional Services  2.55  
 13. Grants-in-aid    .004  
 14. Contributions  .01  
 
 
15. Investors Education & Protection Fund  5.00 
 
 
 
16. Grants-in-Aid (Competition Commission 
of India) 
 20.00 
 
 17. Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)  2.50  
 18. Competition Appellate Tribunal  4.12  
 19. Modernisation, Computerisation and 
Networking of Department of Company 
Affairs and its field offices 
 52.99 
 
 20. Secret Service Expenditure  .04  
 21. Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) 3 .00 .00  
Capital 22. Purchase of land/building/construction of 
office premises/ residential 
accommodation for staff 
30.00 10.00 
 
Total   33.00 196.62  

 
 
 
8
Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs.  Briefly, th e Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual Expenditure of the Ministry fo r 2006-07, 2007-8 and 2008-
09 are as under:- 
             (Rs. in Crore) 
 Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Annual Expenditu re ( - ) Savings 
( + ) Excess 
 
 Plan Non-
Plan 
Total Plan Non-
Plan 
Total Plan Non-
Plan 
Total Plan Non-
Plan 
Total 
 
 
2006-07 0 145.00 145.00 0 145.00 145.00 0 122.58 12 2.58 0 -22.42 -22.42 
 
2007-08 47.00 154.00 201.00 47.00 138.10 185.00 0 1 13.66 113.66 -47.00 -40.34 -87.34 
 
2008-09 33.00 170.00 203.00 63.00 160.00 223.00 63. 00 143.26 206.26 +30.00 -26.74 +03.26 
 
 
1.5  As regards the reasons for not achieving the t argets in respect of 
allocation of Non-Plan Funds, the Ministry of Corpo rate Affairs submitted their 
explanation for different heads as follows: 
 
“Office Expenses 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Savings 
2006-07 13.00 13.00 11.07 (-) 1.93 
2007-08 13.00 12.36 11.04 (-) 1.96 
2008-09 12.40 11.22 10.32 (-) 2.08 
 
 The savings under Office Expenses was on account of  the Ministry 
strictly enforcing the austerity measures of the Mi nistry of Finance, 
following the prescribed ceilings on expenditure. 
 
 
 
 
 
Rents, Rates & Taxes 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Savings 
2006-07 5.00 6.65 5.00 0.00 
2007-08 5.69 4.35 3.87 (-) 1.82 
2008-09 4.34 5.13 4.39 (+) 0.05 
 
The savings under Rents, Rates & Taxes during  the year 2007-08 
was due to the fact that the National Company Law T ribunal (NCLT) was 

 
 
 
9
to become operational but the same could not materi alize due to litigation.  
The matter is still sub-judice.  Under the circumst ances, the budget 
provision of Rs. 2.00 crore for NCLT could not be fully utilized. 
 
MCA 21 e-Governance Project: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Savings 
2006-07 70.84 39.15 29.26 (-) 41.58 
2007-08 64.28 55.57 48.36 (-) 15.92 
2008-09 72.31 60.00 54.07 (-) 18.24 
 
The MCA21 is one of the Mission Mode Projects under the National 
e-governance plan aimed at enhancing the efficiency  and speedy delivery 
of services. The project has been rolled out at all  Registrars of Companies 
(ROCs) locations.  All registries related services are being delivered online 
in a 24X7X365 time frame to the corporate sector si nce September 16, 
2006.  Since then filings are accepted in paper-les s electronic form with 
the exception of stamp duty related documents. 
During the FY, an amount of Rs. 72.31 crore was pro vided in the 
BE for meeting the expenditure requirements of the MCA21 project.  The 
provision was made on the basis of anticipated comp letion of the project 
and the outflow of funds following the implementati on completion and 
clearance of some balance payments due to the opera tor (i.e. amount 
withheld on account of non-completion of some deliv erables by the 
operator).  At the RE stage, the completion of deli verables was reviewed 
and the BE provision was revised and reduced to Rs. 60.00 crore.” 
 
 
1.6   On the issue of non-utilisation on the plan s ide, the Ministry furnished 
their clarification as under: 
 
“The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has only one Pla n Scheme 
viz. Indian Institute of Corporate affairs (IICA).  The Scheme aims at 
establishment of a state-of-the-art knowledge manag ement, capacity 
building and service delivery center for assisting the Ministry in 

 
 
 
10 
providing a dynamic regulatory response to the chan ging business 
environment in line with the expectations of the co rporate sector and 
other stakeholders.  IICA was approved as a Plan Sc heme by the 
Planning Commission in November 2006.  In all, Rs. 211 crores were 
approved as the total Plan Outlay.  Out of this, Rs . 171.36 crores were 
sanctioned under the Capital Outlay and Rs. 39.64 c rores under the 
Revenue Outlay.  The plan allocation of Rs. 47.00 c rore for this 
scheme was made during 2007-08 for the first time.  No amount could 
be spent during 2007-08 as the approval of competen t authority could 
be obtained only on 1 
st  May, 2008.” 
 

 
 
 
11 
  
II   INVESTORS EDUCATION AND PROTECTION FUND (IEPF)   
 
 
2.1  As per the information furnished by the Minist ry of Corporate Affairs 
the following activities are taken up in the area o f investor education and 
awareness under the IEPF: 
 
i) Organising workshops and seminars for investor e ducation 
through Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) & Vol untary 
Organizations (VOs) across the country; 
ii) Organising interactive workshops with professio nals and experts 
through the Institute of Chartered Accountants of I ndia (ICAI) 
and Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI); 
iii) Broadcasting of audio and video spots on inves tor awareness 
through radio & TV; 
iv) Publishing investor awareness messages in newsp apers and 
other print media; 
v) Maintenance of website – ‘Investor Helpline’ thr ough an NGO – 
MIDAS, which provides an online system for lodging of investors 
grievances; 
vi) Maintenance of website ‘Watchoutinvestors.com’ by a Section 
25 Company – PIPAL. The website is a registry of al l such 
entities and persons indicted for economic offences; 
vii) Maintenance of another website on Investors Ed ucation and 
Protection Fund (IEPF) ( www.iepf.gov.in ) which is a knowledge 
sharing platform on issues related to investors. 
 
 2.2   The yearly allocation for undertaking the activitie s under IEPF is Rs 
5.00 crore. The yearly grant has been utilised for the above mentioned activities 
during the last three years as per the details mentioned below: - 
    Non Plan             (Rs. in Crore)  
Year BE RE Actuals 
2006-07 5.00 5.00 2.55 
2007-08 5.00 5.00 3.10 
2008-09 5.00 4.68 3.57 
2009-10 5.00   
 
2.3  Asked to furnish the reasons for gross under u tilization of the budget 
allocation under this Head year after year, the Min istry, in a written reply stated 
as follows: 

 
 
 
12 
  
“The main reason for not fully utilizing the budget  allocation for the 
last three years is non-receipt of quality proposal s from the NGOs/ 
VOs for organising and conducting workshops/ progra mmes on 
investor education and awareness. It would be seen from the 
activities listed out in the previous para, which a re taken up under 
the aegis of IEPF, that the utilization of the budg et allocation is 
mainly dependent upon the proposals received from N GOs/ VOs. 
Numerous proposals are received every year from var ious NGOs/ 
VOs asking for financial grant. However, the vettin g of these 
proposals indicated that most of the proposals were  lacking in 
capability and clarity of purpose and therefore, fi nancial grant to 
such applicants had to be rejected.  
The Committee on IEPF which administers the Fund an d its 
utilization felt it prudent to observe the cannons of propriety by 
disbursing the financial grants out of the budget a llocation only to 
such NGOs/ VOs which had submitted quality proposals.” 
 
 2.4  Questioned whether the poor utilization of th e grants in the preceding 
years did not amount to diluting the efficacy of th e investor education 
programmes and also asked to detail the measures in itiated or proposed for 
undertaking meaningful investor awareness programme s, the Ministry, inter-alia 
submitted as follows: 
 
“…With a view to enabling the NGOs/ VOs to understand the subject, 
the Ministry provides a free training by finance pr ofessionals to the 
members of the NGOs/ VOs who seek registration with the Fund. It is 
expected that over a period of time, this would def initely help in 
increasing the response as well as the quality of their proposals.”   
2.5  In pursuance of the recommendation made in the  71 st  report (14 th  Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the Demands for Grants ( 2008-09) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs on undertaking an enquiry into th e funds allocation to 
NGOs/VOs under IEPF, the Ministry constituted a Gro up to look into related 
issues.  The Group, in their report made the following recommendations: 
“(i)   The existing procedures have been well laid out which 
ensure evaluation of the applications on the basis of 
technical expertise of the institute engaged for th e purpose.  
However, the institute may be asked to assist such new 
NGOs/VOs who were approved for registration but wer e not 
granted any financial assistance in view of inappro priate 
proposals framed by them or lack of infrastructure to take up 
the scale of operations/programmes which were propo sed 
by them,  to frame smaller programmes so as to ensu re 
increased participation and awareness; 

 
 
 
13 
(ii) The IICM was having 114 number of 
proposals pending with it, as on May 17, 2008.  The  institute 
may be asked to expedite the vetting of proposals a nd send 
their recommendations on such reports at the earliest; 
(iii) The IICM may be asked to focus on such NGOs/V Os  whose 
applications have been recommended for rejection fo r 
reasons other than ‘not having the capability for 
implementing the programmes’ and arrange for repeat ed 
trainings to the office bearers as well as arrange for a panel 
of speakers and experts for such organizations to e nable 
them to successfully implement the proposed program mes 
on investor education and awareness; 
(iv) The Ministry of Corporate Affairs to play a pr oactive role in 
involving larger number of NGOs/VOs through Media 
Campaigns so as to encourage them to participate an d 
contribute in increasing investor awareness and education. 
 
2.6  Questioned on the measures for ensuring that i nvestor awareness 
campaigns/activities are undertaken evenly in all r egions of the country and in 
regional languages as well, a representative of the  Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
while tendering evidence before the Committee stated: 
“….what we are planning to do is that we start thre e-four 
programmes in every State on the education of the i nvestors.  
That will be done mostly in the regional languages.” 
 
2.7  When pointed out that for ensuring effectiveness, it would be essential 
to highlight investor education literature with pro minence, particularly in the print 
media, a representative of the Ministry, stated:  
“We will take your instructions.  We will see that if it is in our 
power, we will instruct them; and if it is in the p owers of the SEBI, 
we will instruct SEBI to do it.” 
 
 
 

 
 
 
14 
 
III   COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA   
 
3.1  The Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Ac tuals for the years 
2006 to 2008 and the Budget Estimates for 2009-10 u nder the Budget Head- 
Competition Commission of India-Grants-aid are as follow: 
Non-Plan                                                                             (Rs. in Crore)  
Year BE RE Actuals 
 
2005-06 - - 1.33 
2006-07 3.00 3.00 2.40 
2007-08 5.00 5.00 2.78 
2008-09 10.00 3.49 3.49 
2009-10 20.00   
 
 3.2  When asked to furnish the reasons for the con tinued mismatch between 
the Budget Estimates and Actual Expenditure witness ed  under this head of 
account year after year, the Ministry inter-alia stated as follows: 
“The Competition Commission of India was established in October, 2003 
and since then grants-in-aid to the Commission was being released to 
run the affairs of the Commission. However, the Com mission could not 
pick up activities as certain provisions of the Com petition Act and rules 
framed thereunder were challenged in the Supreme Co urt of India. The 
decision of the Supreme Court was available in Janu ary, 2005 which 
necessitated amendments to the Competition Act. Ame ndments were 
moved by the government, which were finally approve d by the 
Parliament in Monsoon Session, 2007. Thereafter, action was initiated to 
frame the rules under the revised amended Act and t o recruit 
Chairperson, Members and other staff of the Commiss ion. In the 
absence of fully constituted Commission, the Commis sion was 
undertaking only administrative and competition advocacy activities. Due 
to all these the position about the activities of t he Commission were little 
bit uncertain which is the reason for mismatch betw een Budget 
Estimates and actuals.” 
 
 3.3  Asked to furnish the reasons for the steep do wnward revision of the 
budget allocation from Rs. 10.00 crore to Rs. 3.49 crore at the stage of Revised 
Estimates in 2008-09, the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
 
“After the Act was amended and relevant rules were framed, one post of 
Chairperson and five posts of Members in the Commis sion were 
advertised in May, 2008. After receipt of applicati ons, obtaining 
recommendations of the Selection Committee and requ isite approvals in 
the government, the Chairman and Members could be a ppointed only at 
the fag end of the year (February/March, 2009). Apa rt from this the 
requisite manpower could be sanctioned only in January, 2009, after due 
deliberation with various concerned. The appointmen ts of Chairperson 
and Members took longer time than expected. As such the grants-in-aids 
had to be revised at the RE stage.” 
 

 
 
 
15 
IV. SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER 
 
 
4.1  On the issue of manpower requirements, the Min istry of Corporate 
Affairs had, in the previous year, 2008-09, informed the Committee as follows: 
 
“The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has been experie ncing acute 
shortage of manpower resources especially for its e nforcement and 
inspection functions. This is evident from the fact  that over the last 
fifteen years, the number of companies  registered in India has 
increased from 2,50,361 as on 01.01.1992 to 8,78,77 7 as on 31 
st  
January 2008 whereas there has been decrease in san ctioned 
strength from 2122 as on 01.01.1992 to 1529 as on 3 1.12.2007. 
This includes officials in the Headquarters and all the field offices. 
 
4.2  The steps taken, for addressing the problem of  shortage of 
manpower, as informed by the Ministry, are as under: 
 
(i) Filling up the vacant posts; 
 
(ii) The Cadre Review  proposal of the ICLS officer s, including 
creation of additional posts, has been submitted to the Ministry 
of Finance with a view to provide impetus to the en forcement  
and regulatory functions; 
 
(iii) Cadre Review proposal in respect of Group ‘B’  and ‘C’ posts is 
under preparation; 
 
(iv) Capacity Building measures to increase efficie ncy. 
. 
 
4.3    Asked whether the cadre review proposal pert aining to ICLS officers 
as well as the proposal made by the Ministry for cr eating additional posts have 
since been approved, the Ministry of Corporate Affa irs, inter-alia, submitted as 
under:- 
 
“Ministry of Finance, D/o Expenditure has increased  the strength of 
ICLS to 291 involving creation of 67 additional pos ts and abolition of 
7 posts as per following details: 

 
 
 
16 
 
Grade & Scale of pay  
(pre-revised) 
Pre-
revised 
cadre 
structure 
No. of 
posts 
created 
No. of 
posts 
abolished 
 
Revised 
Cadre 
structure 
 
Higher Adm. Grade 
(HAG) 
(Rs. 22,400-24500/-) 
- 1 - 1 
Senior Adm. Grade 
(SAG) 
(Rs. 18,400-22,400/-) 
6 4 - 10 
Junior Adm. Grade 
(JAG) 
(Rs. 12000-16500/-) 
38 27 2 63 
Senior Time Scale(STS) 
(Rs. 10,000-15200/-) 
66 15 1 80 
Junior Time Scale (JTS) 
(Rs. 8000-13500/-) 
121 20 4 137 
Total 231 67 7 291 
 
4.4   Questioned whether steps were taken for attra cting and roping in 
professionally qualified persons in the Indian Corp orate Law Service (ICLS), the 
Ministry, inter-alia, submitted as follows in reply: 
 
“The Recruitment Rules for ICLS have been revised a nd notified on 
5.11.2008. The revised ICLS Rules, 2008 have the fo llowing salient 
features: 
 
i. The recruitment shall be made only at Junior Tim e Scale 
level through the Civil Service Examination, 2009 f or which 
the educational qualification is Graduation.   
 
ii. Two years extensive induction training will be provided to the 
officers at JTS level on the lines of other organised Group ‘A’ 
central services.  
 
iii. All lateral entry to ICLS has been stopped. 
 
iv. The Accounts and Legal branches of the ICLS hav e been 
merged. 
 
It is presumed that the recruitment for ICLS throug h Civil Service 
Examination of UPSC coupled with better career prog ression 
avenues will lead to regular recruitment of quality  persons in the 
Service.” 
 
 

 
 
 
17 
4.5   On the current status of the vacancies at off icer level grade in 
Indian Corporate Law Service and the steps taken to  fill up the vacancies, the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs informed as under:- 
“There are 291 Group ‘A’ ICLS posts, which include 60 posts newly 
created on 5-11-2008. Out of these, 170 posts are p resently filled 
up and 33 candidates have been recommended by UPSC who will 
be joining shortly. Moreover, proposals for filling  up of 38 posts are 
with UPSC. For the remaining vacancies, the proposa l for filling up 
posts in the promotion quota will be submitted to t he UPSC shortly 
and for the vacancies in the direct recruitment quo ta, the same will 
be filled up in a phased manner to avoid stagnation  at the higher 
level and from the point of view of better cadre management.” 
 
4.6   On the issue of problems encountered in filli ng up vacancies in 
various grades of ICLS, the Ministry of Corporate A ffairs, had, in the previous 
year, 2008-09, informed the Committee as under:- 
“Problems have been faced on account of the guideli nes contained 
in OM No.2/8/2001-PIC dated 16 
th  May, 2001 issued by the DOP&T 
on Optimization of Direct Recruitments whereby not more than 1/3 rd  
of the direct recruitment vacancies are allowed to be filled up. The 
Ministry has prepared a proposal for seeking exempt ion from the 
purview of these guidelines. Similarly, a proposal for creation of 142 
additional posts in various Grades of the ICLS has been submitted 
to the Department of Expenditure which is under exa mination with 
them”.    
 
4.7  Asked about the latest status in regard to the  proposal seeking 
exemption from the purview of the guidelines issued  by DOPT vide OM 
No.2/8/2001-IC, dated 16 th  May, 2001, the Ministry, inter-alia, submitted as 
under: 
“This proposal was returned by the Cabinet Secretar iat as in the 
meantime, the Government constituted a Screening Co mmittee 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DOPT to consid er proposals 
for exemption from the preview of Optimization of D irect 
Recruitment to Civilian Posts. The proposal was, th erefore, 
submitted for consideration to the newly Constitute d Committee. 
However, the proposal has been returned by the DOPT  to 
reconsider and submit a revised proposal with obser vations to 
identify Statutory/Constitutional/Technical, Operat ional and Safety 
related posts and seek exemption for these posts. T his exercise 
has now been completed and a revised proposal has b een 
formulated which is being resubmitted to the DOPT.” 
 

 
 
 
18 
 
 
V. IPO PROCEEDS 
 
 
 
5.1  On the mechanism available for ensuring that I PO proceeds raised by 
companies are used for the purposes as listed in th e offer document/prospectus 
of the companies concerned, the Ministry of Corpora te Affairs informed the 
Committee inter-alia : 
 
“….. By scrutinizing the Balance Sheets of the issu er companies 
and conducting inspection of the books of accounts and other 
books and papers of those companies u/s 209A of the  Companies 
Act, 1956, utilization of the IPO proceeds are exam ined. Besides 
this, Companies (Auditor’s Report) Order, 2003 prov ides in Clause 
No.(XX) that the Auditors shall, in his report and confirm as to 
whether the company has utilized the IPO amount in the project 
envisaged in the prospectus.” 
 
5.2  On the existing stipulations/regulations relat ing to monitoring 
utilisation of IPO proceeds, the Ministry, in a written note informed inter-alia :  
“For monitoring of issue proceeds, every issuer maki ng an 
issue of more than Rs.500 crore is required to appo int a 
monitoring agency which is required to file the mon itoring 
report with the issuer company so as to enable the company 
to place the report before its Audit Committee . Further, every 
issuer company shall be required to inform material  deviation 
in the utilisation of issue proceeds to the Stock E xchange and 
shall also be required to simultaneously make the m aterial 
deviation / adverse comments of the Audit Committee  / 
Monitoring Agency public through advertisement in 
Newspapers.” 
 
5.3  By way of specifying the role of Registrar of Companies (ROCs) in 
monitoring utilisation of IPO proceeds, and informi ng of the outcome of technical 
scrutiny of balance sheets of companies undertaken by the ROCs, the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs informed as under:  
 
“As far as Ministry of Corporate Affairs is concern ed, there are 
administrative directions to RoCs to scrutinise the  balance 
sheet of all those companies which have raised fund s through 
IPO regardless of the issue size and action is take n in respect 
of prima-facie violation of Companies Act observed during 
such scrutiny.   

 
 
 
19 
The technical scrutiny by RoCs has not thrown 
up any case of diversion / mis-utilisation of funds  mobilised by 
the companies raising more than Rs. 500 crores from  the 
market through IPOs during the last five years.” 
 
5.4  Asked about the mechanism of ensuring complian ce by companies in 
filing their balance sheets and ensuring their scru tiny by the Registrars of 
Companies (ROCs), a representative of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, while 
deposing before the Committee, inter-alia stated as under: 
“We have obtained this input from the SEBI for plac ing before the 
Committee. What the Ministry is doing or what it pr oposes to do is 
given here.  The Ministry has, way back in 2006, al ready ordered 
that in all cases of IPOs, there should be technica l scrutiny of the 
balance sheets.”   
 
5.5   On the same issue he further added: 
 
“We are examining the balance sheets.  Recently, af ter receiving 
the questionnaire from the Committee, we have instr ucted the 
ROCs to obtain the quarterly statements from the SE BI and to 
examine them.” 
 
5.6   The Committee, in their 71 
st  report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (14 th  Lok Sabha) recommend setting up an 
Expert Group in consultation with SEBI for evolving  a detailed mechanism to 
effectively evaluate and monitor the utilization of  IPO proceeds so as to identify 
and take remedial steps against the fraudulent comp anies.  In their action taken 
note on the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry, submitted as follow: 
 
“Keeping in view of the framework for investor prot ection under 
SEBI Act, 1992, SEBI was requested to constitute an  Expert Group 
in which nominee of Ministry of Corporate Affairs m ay be included. 
However, SEBI requested MCA to set up the Expert Gr oup.  
Accordingly, an Expert Group was set up vide order No.1/3/2008-
Spl.Cell dated 30.07.2008. The Group consists of me mbers from 
MCA, SEBI, BSE and NSE to study and examine the ins titutional 
mechanism of various Regulators to monitor the util ization of IPO 
proceeds, identify the gaps in effective regulation  and suggest 
remedial steps. The Group has already held three me etings and it 
is expected to submit its report shortly.” 
 
5.7  While taking evidence of the representatives o f the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in connection with examination of  Demands for Grants (2009-

 
 
 
20 
10) of the Ministry, the Committee expressed  the n eed for under taking 
investigating whether ‘tainted’ or ‘terror money’ w as also invested in IPOs of 
companies.  In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs stated: 
 
“What you have said is a very serious issue.  I wil l look with this 
thing.  I will also look into what is the present m echanism 
available.  There are other bodies working on the s ame lines and 
we coordinate with them.” 
 
 5.8   The Secretary also added as under:  
“There are other authorities also, who are looking into this like 
SEBI etc.  I will coordinate with them and come back.” 
 
 5.9   When pointed out that it would be essential to build a proper system 
of coordination between the ROCs and SEBI; and the exercise of technical 
scrutiny of balance sheets undertaken by the ROCs w as neither regular nor 
periodic, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affa irs, stated as follows in 
response: 
“That is why the advice that you have given is very  important.  We 
will look into that.  We can come to know whether t here is any 
diversion or whether that has been used only after looking into 
balance-sheet.  That is what my colleague has said.   The Finance 
Ministry has certain agencies, but we will coordinate with them.” 
 
 

 
 
 
21 
 
 
VI. SERIOUS FRAUD INVESTIGATION OFFICE (SFIO) 
 
 
 
  6.1    The Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) was s et up by a 
Cabinet decision on 9 January, 2003. SFIO was set up by Government of India in 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs by way of a resol ution dated 02.07. 2003. The 
administrative order issued by the Ministry of Corp orate Affairs on July 2, 2003 in 
regard to SFIO states as under: 
  
 “The SFIO will only take up investigation of fraud s characterized by: 
(a) complexity, and having inter-departmental and m ulti-disciplinary 
ramifications: (b) Substantial involvement of publi c interest to be 
judged by size, either in terms of monetary misappr opriation, or in 
terms of the persons affected; and (c) the possibil ity of 
investigations leading to, or contributing towards,  a clear 
improvement in system, laws or procedures.” 
 
 6.2   As a result of one of the recommendations of  the Naresh Chandra 
Committee, a Committee headed by Shri Vepa Kamesam known as Vepa 
Kamesam Committee was constituted in 2006, to make recommendations to the 
Government on: 
 
(a) Assessment of the need for and details of a sep arate statute to 
govern the constitution and functioning of SFIO; 
 
(b) The nature and details of the legislative chang es as may be 
required in existing laws, to enable effectively fu nctioning of SFIO 
including prosecution of offences detected by it; 
 
(c) The mechanism for referral of cases to SFIO and  coordination of 
activities of SFIO with other agencies/organization s of the Central 
and State Governments, including investigating; 
 
(d) Powers of SFIO and its investigation officers; 
 
(e) Specification of offences and penalties to enab le effective conduct 
of investigation agencies and need for Special Cour ts for trial of 
corporate fraud cases; and 
  
(f) Other matters consequential to or in pursuance of the above. 
 
 
6.3   The major recommendations of Vepa Committee a s furnished by the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs are as below: 

 
 
 
22 
 
/xrhombus A comprehensive, inclusive definition, defining the  offence of fraud 
with regard to the affairs of a company, may be inc luded in the 
Companies Act, 1956 irrespective of whether it has features of an 
offence under the Indian Penal Code or not. 
 
/xrhombus There is a need to review the compliance requiremen ts and 
corporate governance regime in the Companies Act, 1 956 to 
enforce transparency and accountability at all leve ls and provide 
adequate statutory means to address situations resu lting from 
corporate fraud through an appropriate investigativ e, enforcement 
and penalty structure. 
 
/xrhombus The Government should consider strengthening the in vestigative 
powers of SFIO and to accord statutory recognition to the SFIO in 
the Companies Act itself with the statutory obligat ion for other 
entities to cooperate with it. 
 
/xrhombus Government may consider making amendments to the Co mpanies 
Act so as to streamline the procedures and strength en the powers 
of the inspectors appointed under the Companies Act  for being 
more effective in dealing with frauds in relation t o affairs of 
companies. 
 
/xrhombus Government should consider in the long term, a spec ial legislation, 
to deal with the subject of fraud in a broader sens e and provide for 
the constitution, setting up, functions and powers of an agency to 
investigate fraud that enables it to function effectively. 
 
/xrhombus SFIO being a specialized organization intended to b ring together 
multidisciplinary expertise to unravel fraud, shoul d not be burdened 
with routine investigations or inquiries into vario us complaints. It 
would be appropriate for the Central Government to strengthen its 
arrangements for inspections and inquiries to be ca rried out by field 
organization of the Ministry to handle such work wi thout imposing 
the burden on SFIO. 
 
/xrhombus The seriousness of an investigation may be assessed  in terms of 
amount of exposure to public funds, the number of s takeholders or 
complexity involved. The assessment of seriousness would have to 
be based on the particular circumstances of each case. 
 
/xrhombus Enhanced level punishments be provided. For instanc e, 
imprisonment for (a) non furnishing information to the investigating 
inspector without reasonable cause may be enhanced to a 
maximum of three years from the present level of si x months and 
(b) furnishing false information or withholding rel evant information 
from the current two years to seven years.  Many of fences should 
not be compoundable so that the punishment acts as deterrent. 
 

 
 
 
23 
/xrhombus The inspector should have powers to seize books 
and papers of company under investigation for a period of 180 days 
and may retain the same for further period of 180 d ays with the 
permission of the Court.  
 
/xrhombus A separate offence may be defined to deal with acti ons resulting in 
unauthorized removal, concealment, destruction or t ampering with 
company records for a company under investigation o r a related 
party. 
 
/xrhombus SFIO should be able to collect evidence by way of s ending letters 
rogatory (letter of request) from outside India and for examination of 
a person residing outside India, by inserting suita ble provision in 
the Companies Act and authorizing a suitable author ity to issue the 
same. 
 
/xrhombus A high Powered Committee on a pattern similar to Co rporate Fraud 
Task Force (CFTF) of USA be constituted by the Cent ral 
Government having senior level officers of proven i ntegrity, 
experience and expertise in matters of financial tr ansactions, 
investigations and economic offences as members, to  clear cases 
referable to SFIO. 
 
/xrhombus The Companies Act may be suitably amended so as to provide for 
establishing of special courts, vested with requisi te civil and 
criminal jurisdiction, to deal with company matters  including cases 
involving fraud. 
 
6.4   Asked whether the Government has accepted all the recommendations 
of the Vepa Kamesam Committee Report, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs inter 
alia submitted a written reply as stated under: 
“The report submitted by Vepa Kamesam Committee is under 
consideration of the Ministry…….”. 
 

 
 
 
24 
 
VII. FOLLOW-UP ON SATYAM EPISODE 
 
 
 7.1   Asked to detail the steps initiated for ensu ring non-recurrence of M/s 
Satyam Computer Services Ltd., like scandals in the  country, the Ministry, in a 
written reply stated inter alia:  
 
“An elaborate regulatory framework is already in pla ce to deal with 
such incidents. This framework provides for statuto ry disclosures 
about the affairs of companies intended to inform t he stakeholder 
the truth about the state of affairs of companies. To facilitate 
making of such disclosures by companies, and for st akeholders 
and regulatory agencies to easily access and view t hem, 
Government has set up an electronic registry with r ound the clock 
access through internet. The Government has powers of inspection 
of the books of accounts of companies and also to i nvestigate their 
affairs, if need be, under the Companies Act, 1956.   In addition, the 
Act provides for appointment of independent, statut ory auditors to 
audit the accounts and report to the shareholders. Such audited 
accounts are also displayed on the electronic regis try for general 
viewing. While the reporting requirements are regul ated under the 
Companies Act, 1956, the conduct of auditors is reg ulated under 
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. In addition, f or listed 
companies, compliance with these statutory requirem ents is 
required to be certified by a company secretary in practice, who in 
turn is regulated under the Company Secretaries Act , 1980. 
Government has amended the Chartered Accountants Ac t, 1949 
and the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 in 2006 to pr ovide for a 
more effective disciplinary mechanism  to deal with  cases of 
misconduct by Chartered Accountants, Company Secret aries 
respectively. In 2006, the Government has notified Accounting 
Standards to enable accounts of companies to be dra wn up and 
disclosed on the basis of fair, transparent and int ernationally 
accepted principles”.   
 
  
 7.2   Asked further to provide an update on the in vestigation/follow-up 
initiated in the matter of M/s. Satyam Computer Ser vices Ltd., the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs inter-alia informed as follows: 
“The Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) subm itted its 
investigation report in April, 2009 and after exami nation of report, 
interim instructions were issued to the SFIO for co ordination with 
CBI to work out strategy and modalities for filing of prosecutions 
and trial. SFIO was also directed to find out and r econcile 
discrepancies, relating to facts and figures, if an y, in the 
investigation of CBI as compared to findings report ed in the 

 
 
 
25 
investigation report of SFIO.  Solicitor General of  India has 
been asked to taking forward the prosecution proces s on the SFIO 
report and future course of action is being worked out in 
coordination with CBI”.   
 
 7.3  Emphasising on evolving a system of early ale rts for identifying 
potential fraudulent activities, the Outcome Budget Document 2009-10 of Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, states as under:- 
“….an important item on the agenda of the Ministry is to evolve a 
system of early alerts to ensure that there is no recurrence of cases 
like that of Satyam.” 
 
 7.4   Questioned on the measures proposed or initi ated for strengthening 
the regulatory framework and thereby prevent corpor ate frauds, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as follows: 
“In this context, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs  has constituted a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of the Additional Secretary for 
developing the framework for an Early Warning Syste m that can 
generate alerts on serious non-compliance and insuf ficiency of 
disclosures by companies. Such a system will help t he Ministry to 
enhance its regulatory capacity in preventing corporate frauds”. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
26 
 
 
VIII. REGISTRARS OF COMPANIES (ROCs) 
 
 8.1   Registrars of Companies (ROCs) appointed und er Section 609 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 covering various States and Uni on Territories are vested 
with the primary duty of registering companies floa ted in the respective States 
and the Union Territories and ensuring that such co mpanies comply with 
statutory requirements under the Act. These offices  function as registry of 
records, relating to the companies registered with them, which are available for 
inspection by members of the public on payment of t he prescribed fee.  The 
Central Government exercises administrative control  over these offices through 
the respective Regional Directors. 
  
8.2   Following are the functions of Registrars of Companies (ROCs): 
 
Registration of Companies  -  Incorporation of company and matters 
incidental thereto as provided under Part II of the  Companies Act, 
1956.  Availability of name, incorporation of compa ny and issue of 
certificate of Incorporation, Commencement of Busin ess Certificate as 
provided under sections 20, 32, 33, 34 of the Act.  ROC is also 
authorized to register the documents in respect of opening of Branch 
Office or liaison office by Foreign Companies. 
 
Registration of documents -   ROCs are registering (i)  statutory 
documents as provided under section 159, 220, 303, 97 and other 
provisions of the Act such as Annual Return, Balanc e Sheets, Profits 
and Loss Accounts, documents effecting change in au thorized capital 
of the companies change in directorship, registrati on of agreements 
and special resolutions etc;  (ii)  non-statutory d ocuments such as 
court/Company Law Board orders etc.  Apart from the se, ROCs are 
registering documents relating to creation, modification and satisfaction 
of charge on the assets of the company. 
 
Inspection and Investigation into the affairs of th e company   - 
Section 209A of the Act empowers the Roc to inspect  the records of 
the company and furnish his report to the Central G overnment for 
orders before filing prosecution.  He is also autho rized to undertake 
investigation as provided under section 235-247 of the Act after calling 
for the information under section 234 of the Act. 
 
Filing of prosecutions -   Under the provisions of section 621 of the 
Act ROCs are authorized for filing of complaint aga inst the companies 
and its officers in default for violation of provis ions of the Act in the 
appropriate court of law. 

 
 
 
27 
 
Striking off names of defunct companies  -  Section 560 of the Act 
empowers the ROCs to strike off names of companies where a 
company is not carrying on business  or in operatio n after following the 
procedure. 
 
Filing of petition before the Court -   ROC is also authorized to file 
petition before the Hon’ble High Court for winding up of a company on 
just and equitable ground under sub section (f) of section 433 and 439 
of the Act. 
 
Other functions -   ROCs is empowered to grant extension under 
section 166 and 210 of the Act, revalidation of Sha re Transfer Deeds, 
allow inspection of documents under public domain a nd issue certified 
copies thereof on demand to the public under section 610 of the Act. 
 
 
 8.3    On the power of Registrar (of companies) to call fo r information on 
explanation from a company, Section 234(1) of the C ompanies Act, 1956 
stipulates as below: 
“Where, on perusing any document which a company is  required to 
submit to him under this Act, the Registrar is of o pinion that any 
information or explanation is necessary with respec t to any matter 
to which such document purports to relate, he may, by a written 
order, call on the company submitting the document to furnish in 
writing such information or explanation, within suc h time as he may 
specify in the order.” 
 
 8.4   In regard to the issue of seizure of documents by t he Registrar, the 
provision under Section 234 A, of the Companies Act, 1956 stipulates as follows: 
 “Where, upon information in his possession or other wise, the 
Registrar has reasonable ground to believe that boo ks and papers 
of, or relating to, any company or other body corporate or managing 
director or manager of such company or other body c orporate, may 
be destroyed, mutilated, altered, falsified or secr eted, the Registrar 
may make an application to the Magistrate of the Fi rst Class or as 
the case may be, the Presidency Magistrate having j urisdiction for 
an order for the seizure of such books and papers.” 

 
 
 
28 
 
 
IX. AUTOMATION OF OFFICES OF OFFICIAL LIQUIDATORS ( OLs) 
 
 
9.1   On the measures initiated for improving the f unctioning of the offices 
of Official Liquidator (OLs) the Ministry of Corpor ate Affairs in a written note 
submitted as follows before the Committee: 
 
“The Ministry has drawn up a scheme for improving t he functioning 
of the offices of Official Liquidators and extensio n of e-Governance 
to the process of liquidation and winding up of companies.” 
 
 
9.2   On the e-governance model assigned for facili tating the process of 
liquidation and winding up of companies, the Minist ry of Corporate Affairs in a 
written note, submitted as under:- 
 
“In order to improve the efficiency of staff and to  manage with a 
smaller number of staff, the day to day work and th e functions OL 
offices need to be computerized. E-Governance would , however, 
be a more complex process which will have to take i n its ambit the 
interface between the stakeholder, the Official Liq uidator and the 
adjudicatory forum. Therefore, e-Governance will al so be taken up 
as a distinct project separate from other legislati ve and 
administrative measures.  However, computerization would 
facilitate introduction of e-Governance.    
 
The total number of the cases of liquidation of com panies in 
the country is estimated to be about 6,000. Even a small sized OL 
office handles a few hundred cases of liquidation. The staffing 
pattern to handle such a large volume of work consi sts of both OL’s 
own officials and staff hired to assist the managem ent of the affairs 
of the Companies under liquidation. As regards the work related to 
the Companies, there is also an increasing trend to  outsource the 
work related to Administration of Company matters a nd 
guardianship of assets. Staff needed for matters su pporting 
Company administration (or functions outsourced in lieu of this) are 
being paid out of the finances of the Company while  OL’s own 
functions are carried out by employees of OL. This model of staffing 
has been adopted as it would be necessary for OL to administer the 
matters of the Companies besides carrying out the c ore tasks 
related to liquidation as described above. Besides,  OL would also 
need to manage the functions related to their own e stablishment 
(i.e. office management, payroll, accounts, human resources, etc.).” 
 
 
9.3    In this regard the Ministry also added as follows: 

 
 
 
29 
 
“Considering the needs of automation, a holistic ap proach to OL 
computerization would cover four distinct aspects: 
 
i. Administration and guardianship of assets pertai ning to 
companies under liquidation 
 
ii. Conduct of the process of Company Liquidation 
 
iii. Meeting with statutory obligations – primarily  related to 
Courts and ROC 
 
iv. Establishment functions related to the OL offic es.” 
 
 
9.4    As per the Ministry, the proposed automation  of offices of official 
Liquidators would effectively address the needs of the following stakeholders: 
 
a) Creditors 
b) Employees and other associates of the Company 
c) Other Government / Statutory Agencies 
d) Courts & Statutory Bodies (including NCLT/NCLAT as and when 
they  become operational) 
e) Share holders of the company 
 
 
9.5   By way of pointing out the limitations of the  current system of the 
operation of OLs and the need for automation, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
“It is also useful to note that at the present, OL administers each 
company under liquidation as independent entities d isconnected 
from one another. This ‘ a la carte  approach’ seems to be adopted 
with regard to the administration of company matter s due to the 
sheer lack of automated systems that can provide th e much 
needed ‘integrated view’ which can enhance efficien cy in OL 
operations. The limitations of the current system i s a constraint to 
providing visibility in terms of gross value of ass ets, their carrying 
costs or the rate of depreciation for the OL to mak e well informed 
decisions related to value maximization. In additio n, there are no 
mechanisms that allow for effective utilization of available staff and 
other resources that are at the disposal of the OL which could 
directly impact reduction of processing cycle times”. 
 
 
 
 
 
9.6   As informed by the Ministry automation of OL operations would involve, 
inter alia , the mitigation or elimination of the following problems that are generally 
observed: 

 
 
 
30 
 
a) Inconsistencies and redundancies inherent in the  OL 
operations due to legacy processes; 
 
b) Lack of efficient coordination and communication  amongst 
various stakeholders; 
 
c) Fragmented activities on performance of core tas ks such as 
inviting claims, Asset classification, Inventory Ma nagement, 
Auctioning, General Accounting and Registration; 
 
d) Difficulty in accessing data and records, includ ing their 
consistency; 
 
e) Ineffective management of the movable and immova ble assets 
of the company under liquidation; 
 
f) Non-optimal paper forms (about 20 in number) tha t are being 
used at various stages during the company dissolution; 
 
g) Lack of responsiveness in follow-up action after  the High Court 
has passed orders for dissolution; 
 
h) No close monitoring and follow through on all ju dicial matters; 
 
i) Difficulty and lack of efficiency in compliance of statutory 
requirements; 
 
j) Unproductive end-to-end process for adjudicating  claims; and 
 
k) Delayed turnaround in the settlement of claims t o creditors 
and employees, including the interface with the Banks.”  
 
9.7   On the time presently taken for liquidation/w inding up of companies 
in High Courts, the Ministry inter-alia stated:  
 
“Liquidation/winding up of companies are Court driv en processes 
where there are no time limits specified for windin g up in the 
Companies (Court) Rules, 1059. The time taken for w inding up 
varies from one year to three decades. As per the W orld Bank 
report on ‘Doing Business – 2008, the average time for winding up 
process in India is 10 years”. 
 
9.8   Asked to specify whether the scheme for impro ving the functioning of 
the offices of Official Liquidators and extension of e-governance to the process of 
liquidation and winding up of companies would subst antially reduce the time 
taken to wind up a company, the Ministry in reply inter alia  stated as follow:  

 
 
 
31 
 
“The Ministry has decided to take multipronged acti on for reducing 
the time taken to wind up a company. This includes (i) legislative 
measures which includes the Companies (Second) Amen dment 
Act, 2002 for setting up of National Company Law Tr ibunal/ 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal. However, d ue to legal 
challenge the provisions of this amendment Act coul d not be 
implemented.  The proposed Companies Bill, 2009 int roduced in 
this session of the Parliament also has provisions to address 
Insolvency issues. (ii) improvement in infrastructu re in OL offices 
(iii) training and capacity building of the officer s and staff of OL 
offices (iv) review of Companies (Court) Rules and (v) introduction 
of e-governance in the process of winding up which would include 
computerization of OL offices, automation of busine ss processes 
and interlinking with concern High Courts and offic es of the ROCs. 
Action in respect of legislative measures has alrea dy been 
initiated.” 

 
 
 
32 
 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
 
 
Budget Allocation  
 
 
 1.    The Committee, in the course of their examin ation of Demands for 
Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Corporate Affai rs have found persistent 
mismatch between the Budget Estimates (BE) and Actu al Expenditure (AE) in the 
Non Plan outlay.  The shortfall in the Actual Expen diture were to the tune of 
Rs.22.42 crore, Rs.40.34 crore and Rs.26.74 crore f or the years 2006-07, 2007-08 
and 2008-09 respectively.  As regards the Plan outl ay, Rs. 47 crore was allocated 
by the Ministry as Budget Estimates in 2007-08, but the Actual Expenditure for the 
year turned out to be Nil. As a stark contrast, in the subsequent year, i.e. 2008-09, 
Actual Expenditure almost doubled to Rs.63 crore. T he Committee do not find 
tenable the explanation furnished by the Ministry r egarding non-availability of 
approvals etc. for not utilizing the funds.  Such p ersistent shortfall in the 
utilization of the Non Plan Budget outlay coupled w ith consistent mismatch in the 
Plan outlay, clearly indicates fiscal indiscipline and laxity on the part of the 
Ministry.  The Committee would, therefore, expect the Ministry to be more prudent 
in their budget formulation and make their estimate s only after proper 
assessment and planning.  Specific issues concernin g the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs are discussed in the subsequent paras of the report. 
 
Investors Education and Protection Fund (IEPF)  
 
2. The shortfall has also been noticed in the utili zation of Investors’ Education 
and Protection Fund (IEPF) administered by the Mini stry of Corporate Affairs.  
According to the Ministry, the main reason for the shortfall in the utilization of the 

 
 
 
33 
Budget allocations under this head was the non-rece ipt of quality proposals 
from Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) for cond ucting workshops/ 
programmes on investor education and awareness.  Th e Committee are not 
inclined to accept the reasons adduced by the Minis try, as the shortfall in the 
utilization of the Budget allocations has been undu ly large and a regular feature 
year after year.  It is apparent that the same amou nt i.e., Rs.5 crore is being 
allocated under this head by the Ministry every yea r in a routine manner without 
applying any financial yardstick.  The Committee ar e dismayed that Budget 
formulation has thus been reduced to a ritualistic exercise without application of 
mind.  It is obvious that the Ministry has not mana ged the IEPF with due 
seriousness, thus defeating the very purpose for wh ich the Fund was set up.   
This is also amply reflected by the findings of the  Internal Group showing large 
pendency of proposals awaiting disposal. The Commit tee note with disapproval 
that the Ministry have not implemented so far the s uggestions of this Internal 
Group for better management of IEPF, although it wa s constituted in pursuance 
of the Committee’s recommendations to enquire into the process of funds 
allocation to NGOs etc. The Committee, while deprec ating the Ministry for their 
indifference in managing the IEPF, would expect tha t at least from this year 
onwards, the funds would be administered in a more diligent manner, making 
investor education and protection a more meaningful  exercise.   The Ministry 
should also implement forthwith the suggestions of the Internal Group set up to 
enquire into funds allocation under IEPF in order t o ensure optimum utilization 
thereof. The Ministry is expected to become more pr o-active with regard to 
capacity building of NGOs for undertaking investor education activities. Further, 
financial assistance under the IEPF should not be c onfined to northern region 

 
 
 
34 
alone but well-dispersed across different regions o f the country.  Similarly, 
investor awareness campaign should also be conducte d not merely in English 
but also in Hindi and all the regional languages of the country.  
 
Competition Commission of India 
 
 3. The Budget Estimates and the Actual Expenditure with regard to the head  - 
Competition Commission of India – Grants-in-aid hav e shown yawning gap in the 
year 2008-09.  The Ministry’s explanation for this mismatch refers to the 
unexpected delay in the appointment of the Chairman  and Members of the 
Competition Commission of India.  Having delayed it s constitution for about two 
years the Committee desire that the Commission shou ld be made fully functional 
without any further delay.  The Committee would lik e to be apprised about the 
performance of the Competition Commission in due course. 
 
 
Manpower Shortage  
 
 
 
4. The Committee note that the manpower requirement  of the Ministry and its 
field Offices does not correspond with the huge inc rease in the number of 
companies registered in India.  It is observed that  while the number of companies 
increased from 2,50,361 in 1992 to 8,78,777 on 31 st  January, 2008, the manpower 
strength surprisingly decreased to 1529 from 2122 d uring the corresponding 
period.  Considering the expanding volume of work, the Committee would urge 
the Ministry to immediately fill up all the vacant posts and then, if required, also 
enhance the sanctioned strength of requisite posts,  while also roping in 
professionally qualified persons at the lateral lev el on short term contract, 
wherever necessary. 

 
 
 
35 
 
Monitoring of IPO Proceeds 
 
 
 
5. The Committee note that presently, there is a se lf-regulatory mechanism 
available in the companies for monitoring the end u se of IPO proceeds.  There is 
also a provision in the Companies Act for scrutiniz ing the Balance Sheet of the 
issuer-Companies and for conducting inspection of t he Books of Accounts 
regarding the utilization of the IPO proceeds as pe r the objects stated in the 
prospectus.  The Committee hope that the statutory monitoring mechanism 
presently provided under the Companies Act and the powers vested in the 
Registrars of Companies (ROCs)  is fully invoked an d it is ensured that the IPO 
proceeds are utilized for the stated purpose and wi thin the stipulated time period. 
The ROCs must also effectively coordinate in this r egard with SEBI for better 
compliance.   Any deviation in utilization or non-u tilisation should be strictly 
monitored and the deviant companies duly penalized for the same.  In this regard, 
the Committee may be apprised of the findings of th e Expert Group constituted 
as a follow-up of the recommendations made by this Committee (71 
st  Report – 
2008-09) to review the framework and institutional mechanism for investor 
protection and specifically to monitor utilization of IPO proceeds.  
 
Statutory Status to Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO)  
 
 
6. The Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) wa s set up in the year 2003 
as a multi-disciplinary organisation for unraveling  corporate frauds.  
Subsequently, in the year 2006, a Committee headed by Shri Vepa Kamesam was 
constituted to make recommendations to the Governme nt on the role and 
functioning of the SFIO.    In their report, it was  suggested that the investigative 

 
 
 
36 
powers of SFIO should be strengthened and statutory  recognition 
should be accorded to SFIO with the obligation for other entities to cooperate 
with SFIO.  Further, it was also suggested that a s eparate offence may be defined 
to deal with instances of unauthorized removal, con cealment, destruction, 
tampering with company records for a company under investigation or a related 
party.  The Committee strongly deprecate the non-se rious approach of the 
Ministry towards strengthening SFIO to effectively unearth and prevent corporate 
frauds.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take 
steps to implement the recommendations of the Vepa Kamesam Committee and 
also consider granting statutory status to SFIO, co ntaining  inter alia provisions 
empowering the SFIO to effectively investigate corporate offences. 
 
Follow-up on Satyam episode  
 
 
7. As a consequence of the Satyam Computer Services  episode wherein acts 
of corporate fraud were committed, the Committee ha d expressed their concern 
about having a fool proof system whereby such fraud s could be pre-empted.  In 
this context, the Ministry have informed that they have constituted a Committee 
under the chairmanship of the Additional Secretary for developing the framework 
for an Early Warning System.  The Committee would e xpect the Ministry to 
conclude their findings on this issue expeditiously  and would also recommend 
that the proposed system should be able to generate  timely alerts through 
institutionalised checks/scrutiny on serious non-co mpliance and insufficiency of 
disclosures by companies.  Such a system will help the Ministry to enhance its 
regulatory capacity in preventing corporate frauds. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
37 
 
Functioning of Registrar of Companies (ROCs) 
 
 
 
8. The Registrar of Companies (ROCs) appointed unde r Section 609 of the 
Companies Act, 1956, covering various States and Un ion Territories are vested 
with the duties of registering companies floated in  the respective States/Union 
Territories and more significantly ensuring that su ch companies comply with the 
statutory requirements  under the Act.  As per thei r mandate provided under 
Sections 234 and 234A of the Act, the Registrar of Companies are also required to 
scrutinize the Balance Sheets of Companies filed be fore them. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to  
take necessary measures to strengthen and streamlin e the offices of the 
Registrar of Companies, as they are the only instru ment available with the 
Ministry to monitor statutory compliance at the cut ting edge level.  In this regard, 
the Committee would also like to emphasise that proper coordination between the 
Registrar of Companies and SEBI is also called for,  particularly in regard to 
technical scrutiny of Balance Sheets.  
 
Automation of Liquidation Process  
 
 
9. The Ministry is stated to have drawn up a scheme  for improving the 
functioning of the offices of Official Liquidators and extension of  
e-governance to the process of liquidation and wind ing up of companies.  The 
Committee hope that automation in liquidation proce ss would facilitate a holistic 
approach to winding up of companies, while enhancin g the efficiency in the 
Official Liquidator’s operations and speed up the w inding up process.  In this 
connection, the Committee desire that the interests  of key stakeholders, 
particularly employees of the company apart from cr editors and shareholders 
should be adequately addressed.  As the winding up process in this country has 
become an extremely long drawn affair, it is expect ed that the e-governance 

 
 
 
38 
project initiated in the Official Liquidator’s offi ce will bring down 
drastically the average time required for winding u p of companies.  This also 
warrants that the rules and procedures associated w ith liquidation and winding-
up be rationalised in a manner compatible with the automation processes.  The 
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the pro gress of the automation and 
e-governance projects initiated by the Ministry. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                (Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi)  
18 November, 2009 
                             Chairman, 
27 Kartika, 1931 (Saka)            Standing Committ ee on Finance 

 
 
 
39 
 
Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15 
th  September, 2009 from 1015 hrs. to 1415 hrs. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi     -      Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri C.M. Chang 
3.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
4.  Shri Khagen Das 
1. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
3. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
4. Shri Rayapati Sambasava Rao 
5. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy 
6. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Shri Raashid Alvi 
8. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
9. Shri Mahendra Mohan 
10. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
11. Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
 
 
     SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.C. Ahuja  - Additional Secretary 
      2.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Director 
4.   Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Additional Director 
 
 
Part I 
                                                   (1015 to 1130 hours) 
 
2.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  
 

 
 
 
40 
 
Part II 
                                                   (1130 to 1230 hours) 
 
 
3.   XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  
 
Part III 
(1230 to 1415 hours) 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (Headquarters) 
 
1. Shri R. Bandyopadhyay, Secretary 
2. Shri P.D. Sudhakar, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Saurabh Chandra, Additional Secretary and F inancial Advisor 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Renuka Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 
Attached/subordinates Officers 
 
1. Shri Jitesh Khosla, OSD, IICA, New Delhi 
2. Shri Rajesh Sharma, Additional Director, SFIO, N ew Delhi 
 
4.  The Committee heard the representatives of Mini stry of Corporate 
Affairs in connection with the examination of the D emands for Grants (2009-10) 
of the Ministry. The Secretary, Ministry of Corpora te Affairs made a power point 
presentation on the Budget Grants and programmes an d schemes of the 
Ministry.  Members posed queries to the witnesses, which included, restructuring 
of the Indian Corporate Law Services (ICLS), functi oning of the Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO) and the proposal to acc ord statutory status to SFIO, 
E-governance for functioning of Official Liquidator  (OL) offices, monitoring 
utilization of IPO proceeds, operation of Investor Protection and Education Fund 
(IEPF), convergence with International Financial Re porting Standards for 
companies etc.  The Chairman directed the witnesses  to send written replies in 
response to the questions for which information was not readily available. 
 
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept. 
    
 
    The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
 
41 
 
Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26 
th  November, 2009 from 1530 hrs. to  1700 hrs. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Mahendra Mohan -  Acting Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2.     Shri C.M. Chang 
3.     Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
4.     Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
5.     Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
6.     Shri Gopinath Munde 
7.     Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
8.     Shri M. Srrenivasulu Reddy 
9.     Shri Manicka Tagore 
 
    
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
11.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
12.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
13.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
   
   SECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Additional Director 
3.   Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan - Deputy Secretary 
      4.     Smt  B. Visala  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Part I 
(1530  hours to 1630 hours) 
    2.           In the absence of the Chairman, th e Committee chose Dr. 
Mahendra Mohan to chair the sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure. 
3.  XX        XX    XX  XX 
  XX       XX    XX  XX 
 

 
 
 
42 
 
Part II 
(1630 hours to 1700 hours) 
 
  4. The Committee, took up the following draft Rep orts for consideration 
and adopted the same without any amendment/modification:- 
(i) XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(ii) XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(iii) XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(iv) XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
(v) Draft report on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of  the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to pr esent the afore-
mentioned reports to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee adjourned at 1700 hours. 

 
 
 
43 
 