25
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/ Bhadra, 1932 ( Saka)


TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 August, 2010
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 31 August, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Bhadra, 1932 (Saka)


COF No. 25
Price : Rs. 38.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art
India,  New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
I. Introductory ................................................................................. 1
II. Proposed change of name of the Institute ........................ 2
III. Recommendations ...................................................................... 10
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
7 July, 2010, 4 August, 2010 and 26 August, 2010 ......... 12
II. The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill,
2010 ............................................................................................... 18
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCE (2009-2010)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara*
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 9.3.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP .

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Raashid Alvi
23. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
24. Vacant**
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan
28. Vacant***
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Shri Y. P . Trivedi
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T. Mathivanan — Senior Executive Assistant
(iv)
 **Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, MP retired on 4 July, 2010
***Shri S. Anbalagan, MP retired on 29 June, 2010

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Fifth Report
on “The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010”.
2. The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010,
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010, was referred to the
Committee on 4 May, 2010 for examination and report thereon, by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha in consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha
under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background note and written
information on various provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
4. Written views/memorandum was received from the Institute of
Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI).
5. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
ICWAI on 7 July, 2010. The Committee also took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 4 August, 2010.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 26 August, 2010.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing the material and information
which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Institute
of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) for furnishing written
views/memorandum and appearing before the Committee for placing
their views.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the
Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August, 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and
their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in ’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above.

REPORT
I. INTRODUCTORY
 The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) is
a statutory professional body established on May 28, 1959 under the
Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 enacted by the Parliament of
India to regulate the profession of Cost Accountants in India.
(i) The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959
2. The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 governs the
profession of Cost and Works Accountants. The said Act was amended
in 2006 by the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2006,
inter alia, to enable the members of the Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India to form multi-disciplinary firms and offer multi-
professional services in a competitive and commercial manner.
(ii) Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010
 3. The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010, was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010 and referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4 May,
2010 for examination and report thereon. The Bill inter alia , proposes
to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 to:
“(i) apply certain provisions of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008 to the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 in
order to allow the members of the professional institute
governed by the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 to
form the limited liability partnership and insert new
definitions of “firm”, “partner”, “partnership” and “sole
proprietorship” for the said purpose;
(ii) amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 on lines
similar with the provisions of the Company Secretaries Act,
1980 so as to allow the professionals of the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India to form partnership with
members of such other recognised professions;
(iii) change the name of the “Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India” to the “Institute of Cost and
Management Accountants of India” and change the “Cost
Accountants” to “Cost and Management Accountants”.

2
4. Clause 3 and clause 8 of the Bill seek to extend the benefits of
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of Cost and
Works Accountants under the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959
and clauses 4,5,6,7 and 9 of the Bill seek to change the name of the
“Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India” to “Institute of
Cost and Management Accountants of India”.
5. The Committee, apart from taking evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in connection with
the examination of the Bill, also heard the views of the representatives
of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) on
the provisions of the Bill. The Institute also furnished their written
views/suggestions thereon for consideration of the Committee.
6. The background note on the amendment proposals of the Bill
furnished to the Committee by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
inter alia states:
“Consultations with the institute have been held which have
revealed that if definition of the firm is added to the CWA Act, it
will enable the members of the CWA Institute to form LLPs and
take benefits of the provisions of the LLP Act. This will enlarge
the spectrum of the services provided by the Members of the CWA
Institute. It will also ensure the competitiveness of the members of
the professions. Apart from the inclusion of the definition of the
firm, some allied definitions like partner, partnership and sole
proprietorship would also be required in the Act and as such have
been included in the proposed Bill.”
7. While expressing their agreement with the proposed
amendments in the Bill, the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants
of India, in their written memorandum and in the course of personal
hearing before the Committee, inter alia emphasized on considering
the amendments without any change.
II. PROPOSED CHANGE OF NAME OF THE INSTITUTE
8. The Committee have been informed that the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India has been requesting for change of
name of the institute to Institute of Cost and Management Accountants
of India in view of its work developing as a specialized discipline
and due to the fact that over the years the teaching standards and
syllabus of the Institute have achieved the global/international
standards to qualify as Management Accountants and similar Institutes
in many other countries are named as Institute of Cost and
Management Accountants.

3
Definition of Cost Accountant
 9. Section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 relates
to Definitions and interpretation.
 10. Section 2(1)(b) of the Act, reads as under :—
“Cost Accountant means a person who is a member of the
Institute”.
 11. Clause 2(zb) of the Companies Bill, 2009 relating to definition
of cost accountant reads as under:—
“Cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants
Act, 1959 and who holds a valid certificate of practice under
sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act.”
12. Further, Section 2(2) of the Act, which prescribes the role and
functions of cost accountants reads as under:
“Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the Institute
shall be deemed ‘to be in practice’ when, individually or in
partnership with one or more members of the Institute in practice,
he, in consideration of remuneration received or to be received,—
(i) engages himself in the practice of cost and works
accountancy; or
(ii) offers to perform or performs services involving the costing
or pricing of goods or services or the preparation,
verification or certification of cost accounting and related
statements or holds himself out to the public as a cost
accountant in practice; or
(iii) r enders professional services or assistance in or about
matters of principle or detail relating to cost accounting
procedure or the recording, presentation or certification of
costing facts or data; or
(iv) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council,
are or may be rendered by a cost accountant in practice,
and the words ‘to be in practice’, with their grammatical
variations and cognate expressions, shall be construed
accordingly.
Explanation: A member of the Institute who is a whole-time salaried
employee of any person shall not be deemed to be in practice
within the meaning of this sub-section.”

4
 13. As per the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI),
the term ‘cost accountant’ is defined as follows:—
 “A cost accountant is a person who offers to perform or performs
services involving the costing or pricing of goods and services or
the preparation, verification or certification of cost accounting and
related statements.”
 14. In the Companies Bill, 2009, wherever the words ‘Cost and
Works Accountant’ have been used with reference to the profession,
it has been proposed by the Ministry to replace these words with
‘cost accountant’. In this regard, when pointed out that the term ‘Cost
and Management Accountant’ was not used in the Companies Bill,
2009, the Ministry, in a written reply, stated as under:—
 “As per section 2(1)(b) of the CWA Act, ‘Cost Accountant’ means
a person who is a member of the Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India. Therefore, the same word ‘cost accountant‘
has been used in the Companies Bill, 2009.”
15. Asked to provide the reasoning and the justification for
changing the name of the Institute and that of the profession, the
Ministry, in written reply thereto, submitted as under:—
“The Cost and Works Accountants Act was enacted in the year
1959. Though the name of the Act is Cost and Works Accountants
Act, the word ‘Works’ has not been defined in the Act. In terms
of section 2(1)(b) of the Act, the members of the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India are known as ‘Cost Accountants’
and not the Cost and Works Accountants. Apart from India no
other country has nomenclature as Cost and Works Accountants.
Initially the Cost and Works Accountancy was related to the area
of cost calculation and cost reduction in factories. In the past few
decades the service sector has undergone major changes. Cost and
Works Accountancy is increasingly being used as a prudent
management tool for cost reduction of inputs and thereby increasing
the overall organizational efficiency . Though the area of work
expertise is the same, nevertheless because of different nomenclature
outside the country, the companies and organizations feel that Cost
and Works Accountants are different from that of Cost and
Management Accountants and hence have tough time in first
explaining to the foreign organizations about their area of
competence and then competing with their counterparts. Further,
the word ‘works’ has changed globally by the word ‘management’.”

5
 16. Asked also whether the change in the nomenclature attached
to the Institute would be appropriate to be carried out when there
was no change in the mandate in terms of the provisions of the Act
governing the Institute, the Ministry, in their post-evidence replies
stated as under:
 “The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI)
was established in 1959. In the meantime the structure and method
of conducting business has changed a lot. Their function now
emphasizes areas of analysis and predictions instead of mere
determination of product costs. Internationally, the nomenclature
of ‘cost accounting’ has changed to be known as ‘cost and
management accounting’. The Cost Accountants have started using
new techniques for analyzing and giving feedback to the
management for taking final decision. Various techniques are
adopted by the Cost Accountants some of which are Activity Based
Costing, Lean Costing, Process Costing Systems, Resource
Consumption Accounting, Kaizen (Continuous Improvement)
Costing etc. Role and function of the members of the Institute will
remain the same. However, this will help in better job opportunities
globally. If the services provided by the Cost Accountants are not
understood globally, they would lag behind professionally as in
present day scenario outsourcing of services is becoming more
and more prevalent.”
17. Queried about the countries where the profession, ‘Cost and
Management Accountants’ was governed under statutes passed of
Parliaments, the Ministry, inter-alia, informed that while in United
Kingdom, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Nigeria, the Management
Accountants were working under the Acts of Parliament, in Canada
and USA, the Institutes function as societies.
18. Asked to specify instances where the ICWAI could not
negotiate or enter into agreements with sister organisations outside
the country in view of the term ‘works’ in the name of the Institute,
the ministry in reply, informed as under :—
“….It has been informed that the Institute could not enter into a
Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA) with CIMA UK, CMA
Canada, ICMA Bangladesh, ICMA Pakistan or ICMA Sri Lanka
due to the existing name of ICWAI. CMA Canada has MoU with
ICMA Sri Lanka and also have arrangement with ICMA Bangladesh
and ICMA Pakistan. ICWAI has been able to enter into MRA with
only IMA USA till date, which is a body set up as a Society and
is not under any Act of Parliament.

6
Countries like Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri Lanka belonging to
SAFA have expressed their reservations on the plea that their
agreement or talks with Institutes like CMA Canada or CIMA may
be jeopardized if they enter into MRA with a body which is not
known as Cost and Management Accountants.”
19. The ICAI while opposing the proposal for change of name of
ICWAI to ICMAI have, inter-alia , submitted in their written
memorandum that: “Management Accounting is one such area which
is common to all ( i.e. ICAI, ICSI & ICWAI) and is not exclusive to
any of the three professions. It is a position in an organization and
not a function or discipline. It cannot be chartered or regulated through
a legislation like a public accounting function. The members of one
Institute cannot be allowed to use the designation of Management
Accountants.” Asked to respond to the view expressed by ICAI
opposing the change of name, the Ministry in reply , inter-alia stated
as under:—
“.….There are several countries such as Canada, USA, UK,
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri Lanka where the dual model of
accounting institutes exists. In none of these countries confusion
has been created by the existence of two titles and both CMAs
and CAs co-exist in harmony rendering service to the society. The
objections of ICAI to name change do not seem to carry
conviction.”
20. Questioned whether the reasons for ICAI opposing the change
in the name of ICWAI could be owing to the potential infringement
of the interests of their members and whether measures have been
taken by the Ministry to ensure that there was no consequential
overlap of roles between the members of the two Institutes—ICAI
and ICWAI, the Ministry, in this regard furnished the following
reply:—
“There does not seem to be infringement between the interests of
the members of ICAI and ICWAI. The syllabus of all the three
Institutes have law papers but they do not practice in courts. Many
of the papers in the three Institutes are common but Company
Secretaries and Cost Accountants cannot practice the profession of
financial auditing unless they become member of ICAI. Financial
Accountants world over are known as ‘Chartered Accountants’ or
‘Certified Public Accountants’. The title ‘Chartered Accountant’ is
on the lines of nomenclature in UK just before independence or
passage of bill in 1949. Similarly, professionals of ICWAI could
also use the nomenclature prevalent internationally.”

7
 21. Questioned about the difference between the functions
performed by a Chartered Accountant, Financial Accountant and Cost
and Management Accountant, a representative of ICWAI made the
following oral submission:—
 “Coming to the fundamental differences between cost and
management accounting and financial accounting, financial
accounting is all about recording the historical transactions,
applying certain standards, compiling the financial statement of
profit and loss account and balance sheet out of it and any
interpretation arising out of it. It is more of historic in nature
whereas the cost and management accounting does not focus that
much on the historical areas, but it is more predictive. If you take
the case of business, it relates that business whether it is
competitive; what steps we need to take in terms of future strategy
to sustain; how one should be seeking profit goals; and how one
should be seeking goals of satisfying the society. So, all these
futuristic way of sustaining oneself with a business strategy with
the governance requirements of what has been laid down in the
law, that is, a futuristic approach is a part of the management
accounting process. This is in simple terms the fundamental
difference between financial accounting in which the Chartered
Accountants are supposed to specialize and the cost and
management accounting in which our body is supposed to
specialize. This is the basic difference.”
22. On an earlier occasion, on the issue of change of name of the
Institute, the Standing Committee on Finance in their 12th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2003 made the following observation:—
“The Committee take note of the suggestion of ICWAI regarding
the change in nomenclature of Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India to the Institute of Cost and Management
Accountants of India. The Committee are apprised with the
following justification in favour of change in nomenclature:—
• Positive Average in Mutual Recognition Agreements (MRAs)
in GATS.
•P reserving national interest in anti-dumping cases.
• Image building of Institute in international platform
strengthening prospects of professional members.
•T o promote the case of national interest in having the due
share in trade of Management Accountancy services in the
world in open competition.

8
The Committee also considered the Government’s reply in this
regard wherein they have stated that another sister organisation,
ICAI is opposed to change of nomenclature as the use of word
‘Management’ would create confusion. However, the Committee
note the Government are not averse to change in nomenclature.
The Committee therefore, recommend that the nomenclature of
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India should be changed
to the Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of India.”
23. While hearing the views of ICWAI on the provisions of the
Bill, the Committee questioned whether there was any definition of
‘Management Accounting’ in any legislation, statutes or books. In this
regard, a representative of the Institute, inter alia , made the following
oral submission:—
 “It is not legally defined, if you want a straight answer on that
aspect. It is not legally defined. Globally, it is not legally defined.
That is also there. I will submit to you that we brought out a
study of the cost and management accounting practices globally
comparing ten countries as to what is the education, what is the
framework, what is the competencies, and we published that as a
part of our global summit.”
24. On being asked, how the Ministry of Corporate Affairs would
define ‘Management Accounting’ and the role of ‘Management
Accountants’, in reply, the Committee has been informed as follows:—
“In the Acts of the three Professional Institutes Chartered
Accountants, Cost Accountants and Company Secretaries have been
defined as the members of the respective Institutes. In the Acts of
the three Professional Institutes Chartered Accountancy, Cost
Accountancy and Company Secretaryship have not been defined.
Perhaps there is no need to define the management accounting
and the role of management accountants.”
 25. On the definition of ‘Management Accountant‘ and scope of
the profession in terms of Chartered Institute of Management
Accountants (CIMA), London, the ICAI, in a written note stated as
under:—
• “Management Accounting is the practical science of value
creation within organizations in both the private and public
sectors.
•I t is the process of identification, measurement, accumulation,
analysis, preparation, interpretation and communication of

9
information is used by management to plan, evaluate and
control within an entity and to assure appropriate use of
and accountability for its resources.
• It combines accounting, finance and management with the
leading edge techniques needed to dive successful
businesses. Management accountants operate in financial and
non-financial roles throughout organizations and carry out
all their training and experience requirements within
business itself, providing them with a unique insight into
how their organizations operate.
 Scope of Management Accountant
• Design, implement and manage (automated) integrated
systems that combine financial and non-financial data to
provide insightful (electronic) reports to assist in managing
performance and inform decision making.
• Design, implement and manage (automated) transaction
processing activities, including financial accounting, payroll,
purchasing and payments, often carried out in a shared
service center.
• Design, improve, measure and manage end-to-end business
processes and activities, often extending beyond the
organizational boundaries, ensuring delivery of optimum
efficiency and effectiveness in the use of resources.
•W ork as an analyst; consultant; relationship, project and
change manager in support of the business; and as a
business partner integrated into divisional and operational
units and processes throughout the organisation, bringing
commercial and strategic insight, innovative thinking and a
collaborative approach.
•T ake responsibility for formulating and managing
organizational policy, strategy and objectives, producing
business plans, forecasts, scorecards, cost/benefit analysis
and budgeting information as appropriate.
• Design and implement excellence in corporate governance,
including risk management, internal audit and controls,
company secretarial, corporate social responsibility and board
and stakeholder reporting.
• Determine capital structure and acquire and manage funds.
Carry out due diligence in mergers, acquisitions, business
partnership and joint ventures”.

10
 26. While hearing the views of ICWAI, the Committee desired to
know whether any comparative study relating to the curriculum of
the Institute with that of UK and other countries has been made. In
response thereto, a representative of ICWAI inter-alia stated:—
“…. We have done a very extensive mapping with CIMA, UK,
and CMA, Canada. They have given concurrences that our syllabus
favours very favorably in comparison with those management
accounting courses and these letters were, in fact, a part of the
processing requirement of the Government before they came to
the conclusion that the name change could be granted…. Arising
out of this mapping, we have entered into Memorandum of
Understanding with two bodies globally. Like, for example, our
members can automatically become the members of the Institute
of Cost and Management Accounts of USA, no exam, nothing, it
is straight membership.”
III. RECOMMENDATIONS
27. The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010
seeks to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 for
enabling the members of the Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India (ICWAI) to form limited liability partnerships
as defined by the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act, 2008.
The Committee express agreement with the amendment proposals
of the Bill to that extent which inter alia seek to add in the Act,
the definitions of ‘firm’, ‘partner’, ‘partnership’ and ‘sole
proprietorship’ in line with the LLP Act, and recommend the same
for consideration.
28. The Committee agree with the necessity expressed by the
Ministry for ensuring that the existing term attached to the Institute
(Institute of Cost and Works Accountants) does not stymie the
professional growth of the members vis-à-vis their counterparts and
associate professional groups at the international level. However,
while the Committee had, on an earlier occasion in 2004, favoured
the change in the name of the Institute and the designation attached
to the profession, which has now been proposed in the Bill
(re-terming the Institute and re-designating the profession as cost
and management accountants) on the basis of the submissions made
by the Ministry, the vehement opposition expressed by the ICAI to
the proposal in particular, who also detailed the implications thereof
has prompted a detailed rethink on the matter.
29. The term ‘works’ presently attached to the profession and
included in the name of the Institute appears to give a misleading

11
understanding on the role and functions performed by the cost and
works accountants at the international level. Also, the term ‘works’
has not been defined in the Act. However, neither the term
‘management’, nor ‘cost and management accountant’, which are
proposed to replace the term ‘works’ in the name of the Institute
and the designation attached to the profession are defined nor any
concomitant changes proposed in the provisions of the Act pertaining
to the role and functions of the members of the Institute. Upon
considering the matter, the Committee are of the view that as
proposed in the Companies Bill, 2009, it would be preferable to
term the designation attached to the profession to ‘cost accountant’;
and re-name the Institute as the ‘Institute of Cost Accountants’.
   N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August, 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

12
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th July, 2010 from
1100 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
9. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri N. Dharam Singh
12. Shri Manicka Tagore
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Raashid Alvi
15. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
17. Shri Mahendra Mohan
18. Shri Y.P . Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary

13
Part I
(1100 to 1230 hrs.)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
Part II
(1415 to 1430 hrs.)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
Part III
(1430 to 1500 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI)
1. Shri G.N. Venkataraman, President, ICWAI
2. Shri B. M. Sharma, Vice-President, ICWAI
3. Shri Chandra Wadhwa, Past President, ICWAI
4. Shri A.N. Raman, Central Council Member, ICWAI
The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) in
connection with examination of the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. The major issues discussed with the
representatives included, transformation of ‘Cost Accounting‘ to
‘Cost and Management Accounting‘, distinction of the roles of a Chartered
Accountant and a Cost and Management Accountant, the rationale of
the proposal for the change of name of Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India to Institute of Cost and Management Accountants
of India etc. The Chairman directed the representatives to furnish
written replies to the queries raised by Members at an early date.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
Part IV
(1500 to 1530 hrs.)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

14
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4th August, 2010 from
1600 hrs. to 1900 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri N. Dharam Singh
10. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
11.D r. M. Thambidurai
12. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
16. Shri Mahendra Mohan
17. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
18. Shri Y.P . Trivedi
19. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T. G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary

15
Part I
(1600 to 1640 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1. Shri R. Bandyopadhyay — Secretary
2. Shri P . D. Sudhakar — Special Secretary
3. Smt. Renuka Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2010, the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill,
2010 and the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010.
3. The major issues discussed with the representatives included,
necessity of the proposed amendment Bills, change proposed in the
name of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India to the
Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of India, and
consequent change of name of members of the Institute to ‘Cost and
Management Accountants‘, distinction in the roles of a Cost and Works
Accountant and a Cost and Management Accountant, nomenclature
of ‘Cost and Works Accountants‘ in other countries etc. The Chairman
directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the queries
raised by Members within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
Part II
(1645 to 1900 hrs.)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.

16
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th August, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri G. M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
10. Shri N. Dharam Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
12. Shri S. S. Ahluwalia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
 2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:-
(i) Draft Report on the Companies Bill, 2009;
(ii) Draft Report on the Coinage Bill, 2009;

17
(iii) Draft Report on the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill,
2010;
(iv) Draft Report on the Chartered Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010; and
(v) Draft Report on the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i) with the
modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure* and (ii) and
(iv) above with minor modifications. The Committee adopted the
remaining draft reports without any change.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of the modifications suggested and present all the reports
to Parliament in the current session.
The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours.
*Does not pertain to this Report.

18
APPENDIX II
As Introduced in the Rajya Sabha
Bill No. XXVI of 2010
THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act,  1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cost and
Works Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Cost and Works Accountants Act,
1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), throughout the Act and in the First
Schedule and the Second Schedule to the said
Act, for the words ‘‘cost accountant’’, ‘‘cost
accountants’’ and ‘‘cost accountancy’’ with their
grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
wherever they occur, the words ‘‘cost and
management accountant’’, ‘‘cost and
management accountants’’ and ‘‘cost and
management accountancy’’ shall respectively be
substituted;
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (I),—
(I) after clause (e), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) ‘‘firm’’ shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932, and includes,—
Short title
and
commen-
cement.
Substitution
of
references
to certain
expressions
by certain
other
expressions.
Amendment
of section 2.
23 of 1959.
9 of 1932.

19
(i) the limited liability partnership as
defined in clause (n) of sub-section (I) of
section 2 of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008; or
(ii) the sole proprietorship, registered
with the Institute;’;
(II) in clause (f), for the words
‘‘Institute of Cost and Works Accountants
of India’’, the words ‘‘Institute of Cost and
Management Accountants of India’’ shall
be substituted;
(III) after clause (fa), the following
clauses, shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(fb) ‘‘partner’’ shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 or in clause (q) of
sub-section (I) of section 2 of the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008, as the case
may be;
(fc) ‘‘partnership’’ means—
(A) a partnership as defined in
section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act,
1932; or
(B) a limited liability partnership which
has no company as its Partner’;
(IV) after clause (ia), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(iaa) ‘‘sole proprietorship’’ means an
individual who engages himself in the
practice of cost and management
accountancy or offers to perform services
referred to in clauses (ii) to (iv) of
sub-section (2);’
(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) after the words “in partnership with
one or more members of the Institute in
practice’’, the words ‘‘or in partnership
with members of such other recognised
professions as may be prescribed’’ shall be
inserted;
6 of 2009.
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
9 of 1932.

20
(b) in clause (i), for the words ‘‘cost
and works accountancy’’, the words ‘‘cost
and management accountancy’’ shall be
substituted;
(c) in clause (ii), for the words
‘‘certification of cost accounting and related
statements or holds himself out to the
public as a cost accountant in practice’’,
the words ‘‘certification or auditing of cost
and management accounting and related
statements or holds himself out to the
public as a cost and management
accountant in practice’’ shall be substituted;
(d) in clause (iii), for the words ‘‘cost
accounting’’, the words ‘‘cost and
management accounting’’ shall be
substituted.
4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (I), for the words ‘‘Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India’’, the words
‘‘Institute of Cost and Management
Accountants of India’’ shall be substituted.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the letters ‘‘AICWA’’, the letters
‘‘ACMA’’ shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words ‘‘Institute of Cost and
Works Accountants’’, the words ‘‘Institute
of Cost and Management Accountants of
lndia’’ shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (5),—
(i) for the letters ‘‘FICWA’’, the letters
‘‘FCMA’’ shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words ‘‘Institute of Cost and
Works Accountants’’, the words ‘‘Institute
of Cost and Management Accountants of
India’’ shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 5.

21
6. In section 22A of the principal Act, for
the words ‘‘Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India’’, the words ‘‘Institute of
Cost and Management Accountants of India’’
shall be substituted.
7. In section 25 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), in clause (iii), for the words
‘‘cost and works accountants’’, the words ‘‘cost
and management accountants’’ shall be
substituted.
8. In section 26 of the principal Act, in
sub-section (1), the following Explanation shall
be inserted, namely,—
‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts,
it is hereby declared that the ‘‘company’’ shall
include any limited liability partnership which
has company as its partner for the purposes
of this section.’
9. In the First Schedule to the principal
Act, in Part I, in item (7), for the words
‘‘Institute of Cost Accountants of India’’, the
words ‘‘Institute of Cost and Management
Accountants of India’’ shall be substituted.
10. In the Second Schedule to the principal
Act, in Part I, in item (2), for the words ‘‘cost
accounting’’, the words ‘‘cost and management
accounting’’ shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
22A.
Amendment
of section
25.
Amendment
of section
26.
Amendment
of First
Schedule.
Amendment
of Second
Schedule.

22
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 has been enacted to
make provision for the regulation of the profession of the cost and
works accountants. The said Act was amended in 2006 by the Cost
and Works Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2006, inter alia , to enable
the members of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India
to form multi-disciplinary firms and offer multi-professional services
in a competitive and commercial manner.
2. Subsequently, the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 has
been enacted to make provisions for the formation and regulation of
limited liability partnerships and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. The limited liability partnership will be a separate
legal entity, liable to the full extent of its assets, with the liability of
the partners being limited to their agreed contribution in the limited
liability partnership which may be of tangible or intangible nature or
both tangible and intangible in nature.
3. It is proposed to extend the benefits of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of cost and works accountants
under the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 and to amend the
provisions of that Act.
4. The Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Bill, 2010,
inter alia , proposes to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act,
1959 to,—
(i) apply certain provisions of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008 to the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 in
order to allow the members of the professional institute
governed by the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 to
form the limited liability partnership and insert new
definitions of ‘‘firm’’, ‘‘partner’’, ‘‘partnership’’ and ‘‘sole
proprietorship’’ for the said purpose;
(ii) amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 on lines
similar with the provisions of the Company Secretaries Act,
1980 so as to allow the professionals of the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India to form partnership with
members of such other recognised professions;

23
(iii) change the name of the ‘‘Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India’’ to the ‘‘Institute of Cost and
Management Accountants of India’’ and change the ‘‘cost
accountants’’ to ‘‘cost and management accountants’’.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
   New Delhi; SALMAN KHURSHID
The 15th April, 2010.

24
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 and clause 8 of the Bill seeks to extend the benefits of
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of Cost and
Works Accountants under the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959
and clauses 4, 5, 6 and 9 of the Bill seek to change the name of the
‘‘Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India’’ to ‘‘Institute of
Cost and Management Accountants of India’’. The provisions of the
Bill will not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.

25
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 2 of
the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 to empower the Council
of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India to make
regulations for recognition of other professions with whom members
of the Institute can enter into partnership.
2. The matters in respect of which the said regulations may be
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and it is
not practicable to provide for them in the proposed Bill itself.
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

26
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE C OST AND W ORKS A CCOUNTANTS A CT, 1959
(23 OF 1959)
* * * * *
2. (I) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(f) ‘‘Institute’’ means the Institute of Cost
and Works Accountants of India constituted
under this Act;
* * * * *
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
a member of the Institute shall be deemed ‘‘to
be in practice’’ when, individually or in
partnership with one or more members of the
Institute in practice, he, in consideration of
remuneration received or to be received,—
(i) engages himself in the practice of
cost and works accountancy; or
(ii) offers to perform or performs
services involving the costing or pricing of
goods or services or the preparation,
verification or certification of cost
accounting and related statements or holds
himself out to the public as a cost
accountant in practice; or
(iii) renders professional services or
assistance in or about matters of principle
or detail relating to cost accounting
procedure or the recording, presentation or
certification of costing facts or data; or
* * * * *
Definitions
and
interpre-
tations.

27
CHAPTER II
THE I NSTITUTE OF C OST AND
WORKS A CCOUNTANTS
3. (1) All persons whose names are entered
in the Register at the commencement of this
Act, and all persons who may hereafter have
their names entered in the Register under the
provisions of this Act, so long as they continue
to have their names borne on the said Register,
are hereby constituted a body corporate by the
name of the Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants of India, and all such persons
shall be known as members of the Institute.
Incorporation of the Institute.
* * * * *
5. (1) * * * * *
(2) Any person other than a person to
whom the provisions of sub-section (3) apply
shall, on his name being entered in the
Register, be deemed to have become an
associate member of the Institute and so long
as his name remains so entered, shall be
entitled to use the letters AICWA after his
name to indicate that he is an associate
member of the Institute of Cost and Works
Accountants.
* * * * *
(5) Any person whose name is entered in
the Register as fellow of the institute and so
long as his name remains so entered, shall be
entitled to use the letters FICWA after his name
to indicate that he is a fellow of the Institute
of Cost and Works Accountants.
* * * * *
22A. The Appellate Authority constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 22A of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, shall be
deemed to be the Appellate Authority for the
Incorporation
of the
Institute.
Fellows
and
Associates.
Constitution
of
Appellate
Authority.38 of 1949.

28
purposes of this Act subject to the modification
that for clause (b) of said sub-section (1), the
following clause had been substituted,
namely:—
(b) The Central Government shall, by
notification appoint two part-time members
from amongst the persons who have been
members of the Council of the Institute of
Cost and Works Accountants of India for
at least one full term and who is not a
sitting member of the Council;
* * * * *
25. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, no person shall—
* * * * *
(iii) seek to regulate in any manner
whatsoever the profession of cost and works
accountants.
* * * * *
26. (1) No company, whether incorporated
in India or elsewhere, shall practise as cost
accountants.
* * * * *
Penalty for
using name
of the
Council,
awarding
degrees of
cost
accountancy,
etc.
Companies
not to
engage in
cost
accountancy.

29
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 21(3), 21A (3) and 22]
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to cost accountants in practice
A cost accountant in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
* * * * *
(7) advertises his professional attainments or services, or uses any
designation or expressions other than cost accountant or professional
documents, visiting cards, letter heads or sign boards, unless it be a
degree of a University established by law in India or recognised by
the Central Government or a title indicating membership of the
Institute of Cost Accountants of India or of any other institution that
has been recognised by the Central Government or may be recognised
by the Council:
Provided that a member in practice may advertise through a write
up, setting out the services provided by him or his firm and particulars
of his firm subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the Council;
* * * * *
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 21(3), 21B (3) and 22]
PART I
Professional misconduct in relation to cost accountants in practice
A cost accountant in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of
professional misconduct, if he—
* * * * *
(2) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his firm,
a report of an examination of cost accounting and related statements
unless the examination of such statement has been made by him or
by a partner or an employee in his firm or by another cost accountant
in practice;
* * * * *

30
RAJYA SABHA
—————
A
BlLL
further to amend the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959.
—————
(Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of Corporate Affairs )