 1 
64 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifty Fifth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs]  
 
 
 
SIXTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


 2 
 
SIXTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifty Fifth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Corporate Affairs]  
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 6 December, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


 3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………    1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29 November, 2012.............         31 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations                   33 
Contained in the Fifty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs………………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2012-13) 
 
  
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
9.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
10.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
11.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
12.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
13.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
14.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
15.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
16.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Vacant* 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -  Additional Director 
____________________________________________________ 
* Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f 28.10.2012 consequent upon 
his induction to the Union Council of Ministers 
 

 5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, h aving been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Sixty Fourth Report on action taken by Government on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifty Fifth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
 2. The Fifty Fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2012.  Replies indicating action taken on all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 24 
July, 2012.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 
29 November, 2012. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fifth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              YASHWANT SINHA 
 4 December, 2012                                                            Chairman, 
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                 Standing Committee on Finance  
 

 6 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action 
taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the ir 
Fifty-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 24 
April, 2012 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.   Action taken notes have been r eceived from the Government in 
respect of all the 14 recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been analysed and categorized as follows: 
  
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5,  7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12  and 14                     
                                                                                              (Total: 9) 
            (Chapter II)   
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
Nil 
                                  (Total : Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1,2, 6 and 13  
                                      (Total: 5) 
 (Chapter IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 Nil 
                                 (Total : Nil) 
  (Chapter V)  
 
 
3.    The Committee desire that the replies to the 
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter I may be furnished to 
them expeditiously. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 

 7 
 
 
A.   Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
 
5.         The scrutiny of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
revealed substantial and persistent underutilization of the total expenditure in the 
Non Plan outlay.  For instance, the provisions of Rs.196.62 crore at the BE stage 
in the year 2009 -10 was increased to Rs.206.05 crore at the RE stage, while the 
actual expenditure was to the tune of Rs.190.15 crore only. Though, the provision 
of Rs.209.01 crore at the BE stage in the year 2 010-11 was reduced to Rs.198.89 
crore at the RE stage, the actual expenditure turned out to be Rs.183.09 crore, 
which was even less than the RE. Further, in the year 2011 -12, provision of 
Rs.210.94 crore at the BE stage remained unchanged during the RE sta ge, still, 
the actual expenditure was Rs.172.56 crore only till February, 2012. This trend 
reflected that the formulation of Budget of Ministry of Corporate Affairs had been 
reduced to an exercise of unrealistic estimates projection coupled with 
underutilization of funds. The Committee in their earlier reports had commented 
upon the Ministry‟s failure in regard to appropriate projection of fund requirements 
while formulating budget estimates. However, recurrent and substantial 
underutilization of allocated funds indicated that the budgetary mechanism in 
place had been ineffective. The Committee, therefore, expected the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs to exercise greater care in formulating their budget estimates 
and are of the view that periodic/quarterly meet ings should be held to review and 
constantly monitor the trend and progress of expenditure.  
 
6.     In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
 “The budget grant of this Ministry provides for the expenditure o n the 
Secretariat of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and its field & 
attached/subordinates offices all over India under the Non -Plan Heads i.e. 
Modernization, Computerisation and Networking of Corporate Affairs and its 
field offices (MCA21), Investor Edu cation & Protection Fund (IEPF), 
infrastructure activities. It also includes Grants -in-aid-General to the 
Competition Commission of India (CCI). The Budget Estimates and Revised 
Estimates are projected on the basis of anticipated expenditure proposed by 
each budgetary unit of the Ministry. Shortfall in utilisation of the budgeted 
funds is on account of non -filling up many posts in the Competition 
Commission of India, Attached/Subordinate offices. Also, savings under the 

 8 
various object heads were on account of strictly enforcing the austerity 
measures and following the prescribed ceilings on expenditure. The Ministry 
exercises diligence while formulating its budget estimates and the process of 
expenditure is periodically monitored.” 
     
 
7.     The Committee  observe from the reply submitted by the Ministry that 
the underutilization of allocated funds to the Ministry is on account of non -
filling up of many posts in Competition Commission of India, 
Attached/subordinate offices of the Ministry.  Further savings under 
various object heads were stated to be on account of strictly enforcing the 
austerity measures and following the prescribed ceilings on expenditure.  
While the Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry in enforcing 
austerity measures, the fail ure to fill up vacant posts in Competition 
Commission of India, Attached/Subordinate Offices and the consequent 
underutilization of funds is a matter of concern.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that the issue of non -filing of vacant posts has been 
seriously affecting the functioning of almost all important offices under the 
purview of Ministry viz. RoC, CCI, SFIO.  The Committee are of the view that 
immediate steps be undertaken to ensure filing of vacant posts and if 
considered necessary the Ministry should review its recruitment policy and 
of its attached/subordinate offices in a time bound manner so that the 
mismatch arising between the projected and available manpower 
requirements is addressed at the earliest.  Whenever there is an urgent 
requirement in the above offices, personnel should be appointed on 
deputation / contract on a fast-track basis by the Ministry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 9 
B. Registrar of Companies (ROCs)  
               and Competition Commission of India (CCI 
 
  Recommendation Serial No. 2  
 
8.     The  Committee noted that inspite of the efforts made by the Ministry in trying 
to beef up the regulatory and enforcement machinery in its field offices, the 
situation at the ground level is rather disappointing with 52,201 cases pending as 
on 31.12.2011. The Committee in its 37 th Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -
12) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs had recommended that the Ministry should 
augment the cadre strength of the services manning the field posts and also if 
required, engage qualified personnel on de putation or short -term contracts. The 
Committee felt that to clear the technical backlog of work the Ministry should 
consider engaging professionals like practicing Chartered Accountants, Company 
Secretaries, etc. as consultants who being peer group are be tter equipped to 
scrutinize statements and other documents prepared on behalf of companies. 
Since the experience of the Ministry in engaging trainees (semi -qualified 
professionals of ICSI and ICWAI) for 6 months and on continuous basis in the field 
offices and Headquarters to assist the staff members in routine work enabling 
them to follow up more critical activities had been found to be satisfactory, the 
Committee expected the Ministry to increase the scale of such engagement. To 
make this system work effi ciently, the Committee desired the Ministry to clearly 
define the duties and accountability of these hired professionals in their terms of 
engagement.  
 
9.    In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
“The recommendation of the Committee to increase the scale of engagement 
of trainees (semi-qualified professionals of ICSI and ICWAI) has been noted.  
The number of such trainees will be suitably increased keeping in view the 
requirement of the field offices and H eadquarters.  The present requirement 
of trainees has been worked out on the basis of quantum of work, pendency, 
backlog etc. in those offices.  These trainees will help the regular staff of 
ROCs in routine work and the regular staff will follow up the imp ortant 
activities, such as; 
 
(i) Action against companies, which are not submitting returns. 
(ii) Investigations and inspections of defaulting companies. 
(iii) End use of funds of IPOs. 
(iv) Follow up of cases of mergers, acquisitions, demergers, winding up 
in courts. 

 10 
 
2.  It  is brought out that such training is mandatory for these semi -qualified 
professionals for practicing the profession after qualifying the examination.” 
 
 
10.    The Committee note that while the Ministry has agreed to increase the 
scale of engagement of se mi-qualified professionals to assist the staff 
members in routine work, the Ministry has evaded reply over the 
recommendation of engaging professionals like practising Chartered 
Accountants/Company Secretaries, etc. as consultants to scrutinize 
financial s tatements and other documents filed with the Registrar of 
Companies and to clearly define the duties and accountability of these 
professionals in their terms of engagement.  The Committee in its 48 th 
Report on action taken by the Government on the recommen dations 
contained in their 37 th Report on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs had recommended that efforts be made for 
filing of vacancies including selecting professionals on contract/deputation 
basis so as to overcome the st aff crunch immediately.  The Committee 
reiterate their recommendation that the Ministry should consider roping in 
professionally qualified persons on contractual basis to augment the 
existing cadre/personnel manning the field offices as well as the attache d 
offices and clearly define the duties and accountability of these 
professionals in their terms of engagement. 
 
 C      Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
11.      The Committee also urged the Ministry to expedite the inves tigation of 
cartelization in cement and onion sectors and reports its findings to the Committee 
at the earliest. The Committee noted that in case of the aviation sector, the 
Commission had closed the matter as it had found no evidence on record to 
suggest that airlines operators raised the airfares and/or withdrew their 

 11 
promotional fares across all sectors because of some agreement between them. 
While disagreeing with the findings of the commission, the Committee would like 
to have details of the investigation on the basis of which such conclusion has been 
drawn by the Commission. 
12.     In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have 
submitted as follows: 
“With regard to the alleged cartelization in Cement Industry, the 
Competition Commi ssion of India has issued final order on 20.06.2012 in 
case No.29/2010 filed by Builders Association of India against Cement 
Manufacturers Association. The Commission has imposed penalty on 11 
Cement manufacturers at 0.5. times of their profit for the years 2009-10 and 
2010-11. The Commission has also imposed penalty on the Cement 
Manufacturers Association.  
 
 Copy of the final order of the Commission is available on the website of 
the Competition Commission of India i.e. www.cci.gov.in 
 
2. As regards Onion , t he Commission took suo moto notice of 
increase in prices on 06.01.2011 and referred the matter to Director 
General for Investigation. Based on the report submitted by the Director 
General, the Commission closed the matter under section 26 (6) of the Act  
on 10.04.2012. The brief findings of the Commission in this matter are:  
 Price of onions in Delhi had fluctuated due to change in demand -
supply conditions in the wake of untimely and erratic rains in areas of 
Kharif onion producing states which damaged th e crop. Not only in 
Delhi, there were fluctuations in other cities also in onion prices due to 
the supply shocks.  
 No evidence of mass hoarding under an agreement could be found for 
the period under reference. 
 Price of onions in mandis is determined by auc tion. The auction price 
ultimately affects the wholesale and retail prices in the markets. W hen 
the auction price of Onion itself was very high at all places – Delhi, 
Alwar, Lasalgaon, Pimpalgaon, Bhavnagar and at the other mandis of 
Gujarat, Rajasthan and Maharashtra in the second quarter of month of 
December 2010, it was natural for prices to go up further in wholesale 
and retail market absorbing the margins at various levels in supply 
chain.  
 The Commission observes that there is no evidence to suggest t hat 
there was manipulation in the auction prices and while produce was 
auctioned at a higher rate, farmers were paid lower prices. 
 
3.   As desired by the Committee, the details of the investigation on the 
basis of which Commission closed the matter for th e alleged cartelization 
by the airlines operators to raise the air fares and/or withdrawal of 
promotional fares is given hereunder : 
 
4.   The Commission, after going through items published in various 
dailies/weeklies and the details obtained from DGCA (A ir Transport Circular 

 12 
2 of 2010 dated 19 th November, 2010), had taken suo moto notice of the 
issue that there appears to be concerted action by the airlines to increase 
the fares. The said concerted action „prima facie‟ appeared to be in 
pursuance of a tac it collusion between the airlines. Accordingly, the 
Commission formed opinion of existence of prima facie case and, therefore, 
referred the matter to DG for investigation u/s 26 (1) of the Act. 
  
5.   Present position:  The Commission has passed final order in the matter. 
The Commission could not find any violation of provisions of Competition 
Act by the Airlines. The Commission had made following observations in 
the order: 
 
“The Commission notes from the findings of Director General that like 
in any peak s eason, during Diwali of 2010, load factor on airlines had 
increased and in some cases it was about 100%. Keeping with this 
trend, the percentage of tickets sold in the higher buckets of airlines 
had also gone up. To this extent, it may be said that there i s a pattern 
in air fares going upwards together in a sense that during the period of 
high demand, fares of all airlines tend to move together. However, in 
absence of evidence of any organized, express or tacit collusion 
among the airlines, the Commission f eels that it cannot  be concluded 
that the airlines have entered into any anti -competitive agreement in 
violation of section 3 (3) of the Act. 
 
The Commission also observes that in course of investigation, DG has 
not come across any evidence which would su ggest that there was 
any concerted action on part of airlines to reduce the capacities with a 
view to raise the fares in face of high demand during February 2009 
and October -November 2010. Before Director General, Airlines like 
GoAir, IndiGo and SpiceJet h ave denied that there was any reduction 
in number of flights during October -December 2010. In fact, IndiGo 
has submitted that on many sectors to cater to the demand, number of 
flights was increased. There is no evidence which brings out any 
concerted actio n on part of airlines to reduce capacities in February 
2009 either. 
Based upon the foregoing, the Commission finds that no case of 
contravention of any of the provisions of section 3 (3) of the Act is 
made out against the airlines as has been alleged in these two cases. 
Accordingly, the Commission concludes that since there are no 
evidences on record to suggest that the airlines operators raised the 
air fares and /or withdrew their promotional fares across all sectors 
because of some agreement among them du ring the period under 
investigation, the proceedings in matter deserve to be closed 
forthwith.” 
 
6.   The Committee desired to have details of the investigation on the basis 
of which the Commission has decided to close the matter. In this regard 
findings of DG have been reflected in the order of the Commission dated 
10.01.2012 at Annexure.  
 
7.   In another case, the Commission received a reference under Section 
19(1)(b) of the Competition Act from Standing Committee on Finance 

 13 
through Ministry of Corporate  Affairs on the increase in the fares by 
different airlines.  The Committee observed that: 
 
a) Due to strike of Air India, different Airlines are charging exorbitant 
prices for tickets; 
b) In a normal course also, one cannot take tickets on line, even though 
seats are available, and tickets have to be bought at higher prices 
near to the date of departure. 
 
8.    The Commission, after considering the investigation report submitted 
by Director General on the subject, passed final Order on 11 th January, 
2012.  The C ommission could not find any violation of provisions of 
Competition Act by the Airlines.” 
 
13.     The Committee observe that the Commission gave its findings over 
the issue of alleged cartelization in the onion, cement and the airlines 
sectors.  While in case of Onion Sector, the Commission found no evidence 
of cartelization, in the case of cement sector, the Commission had however 
imposed penalty on 11 Cement Manufacturers and on the Cement 
Manufacturers Association as well.  The Committee are of the view  that it 
would have been better if the Ministry had provided a copy of the final order 
of the CCI in the case of cartelisation in cement sector along -with their 
replies instead of simply advising the Committee to check the final order of 
the Commission in its website.  The Committee find the response of the 
Ministry in this regard to be rather casual and would thus expect them to be 
more serious while furnishing replies to the Committee. 
14. The Committee note that in case of the onion sector, the 
Commission took suo motu increase in prices on 06.01.2011 and referred the 
matter to Director General for Investigation.  The Director General submitted 
his report on 10.04.2011 and the matter remained under the consideration of 
the Commission for almost a year bef ore it gave its final order of closing 
down the case. 

 14 
15.     In case of the airline sector, the Commission took suo motu notice of 
the issue of concerted action by the airlines to increase the fares around the 
Diwali season of 2010.  While the Director Ge neral found no evidence of 
cartilization among the airlines, the final order of the Commission was 
passed after more than a year in the month of January, 2012, in which the 
Commission concluded that no case of cartelization was made out against 
the airlines.   
16.    The Committee thus observe that the Competition Commission of India 
(CCI) has been taking unduly long time in arriving at their decisions.  They 
are, therefore, of the view that CCI should be more prompt while deciding 
issues of price-cartelization and price rigging, resulting in faster disposal of 
cases. 
            D.             Corporate Governance 
Recommendation Serial No. 13 
17.   In the light of emerging industrial practices and evolving accounting/financial 
norms and standards, the Commi ttee desire that the Ministry may review the role, 
functions and scope of the two related professions, namely Chartered Accountants 
and Cost Accountants and bring necessary amendments, if required, in their 
respective statutes so that the ambiguities and grey areas are duly addressed.  
18.    In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows: 
“The process of review of the Chartered Accountants Act and Cost 
Accountants Act is on going and grey areas as and when identifie d are 
suitably addressed.” 
 
19.     The Committee would reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
process of reviewing and identifying the grey areas in the functioning of the 
professional bodies governing the related professions, namely Chartered 
Accountants and Cost Accountants be expedited and corrective measures 
initiated by bringing out necessary amendments in the governing statutes of 
these professions.   
 

 15 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3                             Paragraph No. 3 
  
Early Warning System(EWS) 
 
  The Committee observe that the Early Warning System put in place by the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has achieved some results in generating early alerts a bout 
defaulting companies. The Committee, however, desire that this system should be 
made more robust by developing an interdepartmental IT enabled interface in which 
related Government agencies like SEBI, Enforcement Directorate and Income Tax 
Department, etc. are able to share system generated early warning alerts about 
potential corporate defaults so that timely action could be taken by the respective 
Government Departments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Apart from the existing mechanism of Early Warning Sys tem based on statutory 
filings by Companies, additional alerts have been developed based on the financial 
statements filed by a select class of companies in the XBRL (eXtensible Business 
Reporting Language) format from the year 2010-11. 
2. XBRL offers sign ificant enhancement over previously used „pdf based reporting 
of financial statements‟ as it ensures improved data quality and standardization of 
accounting concepts as well as increased compliance of provisions of Companies Act, 
1956 and other laws govern ing the corporate functioning. Adoption of XBRL filing by 
MCA would also be of definite help for other government regulators like RBI, SEBI, 
Enforcement Directorate, Income Tax, IRDA etc. in carrying out and facilitating their 
regulatory roles most efficie ntly. MCA has been in constant interaction with these 
regulators (e.g., RBI, SEBI) for capture of their regulatory disclosures alongwith annual 
statutory filing of financial statement by companies to MCA. MCA has also requested 
other regulators like Enforc ement Directorate, IRDA, CBEC, CBDT, Central Electricity 
Regulatory Commission (CERC), etc to inform about their regulatory requirements from 
companies so that these may also be captured in XBRL filings by companies. Based 
upon regulatory requirements by o ther government regulators, the MCA taxonomy (an 
electronic dictionary or classification of accounting elements used for XBRL filing) 
would be suitably revised.  
3. The financial statements filed by companies in XBRL using such taxonomy could 
be shared and  used by multiple regulators for their purposes. XBRL assures improved 
data quality, viz., consistency, accuracy and standardization of accounting concepts 
that could be gainfully exploited by regulators to arrive at objective conclusions.    
 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 

 16 
Recommendation Serial No. 4                             Paragraph No. 4 
 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
 
  The Competition Commission of India was constituted in the year 2009 with the  
main objective of promoting and sustaining competition and to make markets more 
responsive to consumer preferences. The Committee feel that since CCI is still in its 
formative years, it has to increase its visibility amongst all the stakeholders. This wou ld 
require involving law colleges, professional institutes like ICSI, ICAI etc., and Chambers 
of Commerce for conducting various workshops and seminars.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Commission, in exercise of proviso under Section 49 of the Competition A ct, 
has undertaken following measures for creating awareness amongst various 
stakeholders:- 
 
1. (i) Secretaries of Central Government Ministries/Departments, Chief Secretaries 
of States and Chief Secretaries/Administrators of Union Territories have been 
sensitized about the importance of framing competition coherent policies and the need 
of undertaking competition assessment of existing Government policies.  (ii) Most of the 
Central Government Ministries/ Departments have nominated „Nodal Officers‟ to 
engage with CCI.  The „Nodal Officer‟ would act as an interface between the Ministry/ 
Department and the Competition Commission of India (CCI) for inducing principles of 
competition in various Government policies, rules and regulations so as to make them 
competition coherent. (iii) CCI is in the process of organizing a Roundtable to build 
capacity of the respective Ministries/Departments in conducting the competition impact 
assessment. (iv) Similar exercise will be replicated for State Governments/Union 
Territories which have yet to fully respond in nominating the Nodal Officers.  
2.  To carry forward the outreach programme of competition advocacy and to 
nurture competition culture in the society, CCI has also been using a media campaign 
through both Print and Electronic Media. 
3.  Lectures have been organized at various educational institutions including law 
colleges, professional institutes and senior secondary schools. Moot Court 
Competitions at various Law Universities are being organized regularly National Le vel 
Essay Competition for students of senior secondary schools, undergraduate courses 
and professional courses are being organized annually. 
4. Seminar/workshops have been organized with Central Public Sector 
Undertakings on „Public Procurement & Competiti on Law‟. Workshops/Seminars are 
organized for Industry Associations and Chambers of Commerce. 
5.  Seminars are organized in Training Academies for probationers of Govt. 
Services. 
6.   Workshops have been organized for Consumer Forums. The Commission is 
proposing to organize few Regional Workshops to create awareness among Consumer 
Dispute Redressal Machinery and Consumer Forums. 
7.  Advocacy literature/booklets in simplified language has been designed for 
various stakeholders for creating awareness about the benefits of competition law inter-
alia role & functions of the Commission and distributed in various forums. 

 17 
8. With the objective to familiarize students with the various provisions of 
Competition Law and related issues, the Commission provides internsh ip facility to the 
students pursuing their study on subjects like Economics, Law, Management and 
Finance. 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5                             Paragraph No. 5 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
  The Committee further observe that CCI has also undertaken market studies to 
identify market distortionary activities. Considering the scale and size of the Indian 
economy, these studies have covered very few sectors.  The Committee, therefore, 
expect the Commission to increase the scale and size of its market research studies in 
the coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After enforcement of the Competition Act, the Commission had outsourced three 
market studies viz „ Steel, Paper & Agricultural marketing with special focus on Onion.‟ 
The studies on Steel and Paper have been completed while study on Agricultural 
Marketing commissioned to ISEC, Bangalore is on -going. The Commission also wants 
to expand research and under standing of the informal economy including Agriculture 
markets. With a view to ensure cohesive integration of economic analysis into the 
enforcement of Competition Act, 2002, the Commission is contemplating  having a 
Dedicated Research Unit  within some external agency to carry forward this agenda. 
2. In the current year, studies on sectors like pharmaceutical industries and two 
wheeler automobile industries are in the pipeline and Commission is exploring the 
possibility of outsourcing the studies to some external agencies of repute.  
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7                             Paragraph No. 7 
 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
  The Committee note marginal increas e in the budget allotment of CCI from 
Rs.39.49 crore at the BE stage of 2011 -12 to Rs.44.74 crore at the BE stage of 2012 -
13. According to Committee, such increase in budgetary allocation may be adequate to 
meet the increase in salary, allowances and other  administrative expenses of the 
Commission but to incur additional expenditure in promoting competition advocacy, 
conducting market research studies to identify anti -competitive practices in the 
economy, etc. the Committee suggest to the Ministry to increa se the budgetary support 
to CCI.  
 

 18 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Commission has been provided with Rs.40.42 crore under Budget 
Estimates 2012-13 after mandatory 10% cut imposed under Non-Plan expenditure in all 
Object Heads excluding “Salaries” and Plan ex penditure for the said financial year. 
Additional Budget, if required, would be duly considered at the RE stage.  
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8                             Paragraph No. 8 
 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
 
  The Committee fail to understand as to why the Commission has not filled the 
sanctioned strength of posts both in the CCI and the DG office year after year. The 
Committee desire the Commission to chalk out a  revised recruitment strategy to attract 
young and qualified talent from a diverse pool. The Commission may also consider 
empanelment of professionals on annual basis to tide over the shortage of skilled 
manpower.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 At present, 10 0 posts are filled while 95 posts are vacant in the Commission 
(including in the O/o Director General). CCI is committed to fill up all the vacancies 
either by deputation or by direct recruitment.  Sometime back, 37 posts had been 
advertised for being fill ed up by deputation in CCI.  Out of these posts, 3 posts have 
been filled and one more is likely to be filled soon.  Three more posts are likely to be 
filled in the near future and thereafter the remaining posts will be re-advertised for being 
filled on deputation basis. 
2. The posts in the Office of the Director General are filled by the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. On the basis of recent advertisement for filling up vacant posts in the 
O/o Director General, two candidates have already joined.  Offers of  appointment have 
been issued to three candidates and offers are being issued to three more candidates.  
The remaining vacancies will be re-advertised for being filled on deputation basis. 
3. 33 posts had also been advertised for being filled on direct rec ruitment basis.  
The process of selection is over and only four candidates could be selected.  Further 
action to advertise the remaining posts is being taken separately.  In addition, it is 
submitted that the Commission also engages Experts in the differen t fields viz., Law, 
Economics, Financial Analysis etc. from time to time, as per requirement. 
4. At present, a total of 14 Experts have been engaged by the Commission (11 in 
the field of Law, 2 in the field of Economics and one in the field of Management).   The 
Commission also proposes to engage 15 more Experts for which applications have 
already been received and are being scrutinized.  
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 

 19 
Recommendation Serial No. 9                             Paragraph No. 9 
 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) 
  SFIO is a multi-disciplinary investigating agency wherein experts from the field of 
banking, Capital Market, Company Law , Forensic, Audit, Taxation, Information 
Technology, etc. work together to unravel a corporate fraud. The Committee notice that 
on one hand, the Ministry have proposed statutory status to the SFIO through 
Companies Bill, 2011 while on the other hand the budgetary provision for FY 2012 -13 
has been reduced from Rs.595 lakh in RE of the year 2011 -12 to Rs.511 lakh in BE of 
the year 2012-13. The reason furnished by the Ministry for this shortfall that since there 
has been an overall reduction in the Budget allocation of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, budgetary allocation for SFIO had also been pro-rata reduced is not convincing. 
In view of SFIO‟s enhanced powers and responsibilities in the proposed company law 
regime, the Ministry will have to beef up its resources, both human and technological. 
The Committee are appre hensive that the reduced outlay for running such important 
attached office of the Ministry would hamper the investigation of complex corporate 
frauds, having inter -departmental and multi -disciplinary ramifications. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Minist ry to provide enhanced funds and skilled manpower to SFIO 
so that it can effectively discharge its functions.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Companies Bill, 2011 seeks to give statutory status to the Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO). New Regional O ffices of SFIO have already been opened 
at Chennai and New Delhi. It has also been decided to open Regional Offices at 
Kolkata, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad in due course of time.  
2. All out efforts are being made to recruit people on deputation by issuing 
advertisements in the Newspapers/Employment News and requests to different Heads 
of organizations through D.O. letters have been made to select skilled manpower 
having expertise in the required field. In addition, to cope up with the shortage in 
various disci plines, Consultants in different fields like Banking, Forensic Audit, 
Company Law, Investigation, Chartered Accountancy have been engaged. Government 
is hopeful of meeting the challenges of effective investigation through the skilled 
manpower in the form of experts in different fields.  
3. For opening of new Regional Offices and filling up of vacancies in the different 
disciplines in SFIO, additional funds will be needed which will be sought at the RE 
stage.  
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 

 20 
Recommendation Serial No. 10                           Paragraph No. 10 
 
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) 
  The Committee note that the Ministry has established the IEPF with the objective 
of promoting investor aw areness and protecting their interest including the small 
investors. The Committee welcome the move of the Ministry to get Investor Awareness 
Programmes conducted through Regional Directors, as this would help in covering 
region-wise maximum number of inve stors spread across different regions of the 
country. However, the Ministry has made allocation of Rs.3.6 crore to Regional 
Directors for investor awareness programmes by reducing the annual fund allocation of 
IEPF to Rs.1.4 crore. The Committee have been recommending time and again to the 
Ministry for augmenting the corpus of IEPF as this is an emerging area of concern with 
an ever-increasing number of grievances and widening scope for redressal, involving 
multitudes of people and organizations. While emph asizing to treat investor awareness 
and protection with due seriousness, the Committee reiterate the demand for more 
allocation under this head and suggest the Ministry to devise interactive methods of 
conducting investor awareness programmes through out the country.  
   
Reply of the Government 
   
 The Ministry has been organizing the investor awareness programmes through 
Professional Institutes regularly. It was felt that Regional Directors as the representative 
of the Ministry in the field should be activ ely involved to monitor and steer these 
programmes. It was decided to allocate funds to Regional Directors to involve them 
more in this activity. It is brought to the notice of the Committee that the total fund 
allotment (i.e. Rs. 5.00 crore) has not been reduced. Enhancement of funds under IEPF 
will be considered at Revised Estimates stage keeping in view the expenditure incurred 
and the benefits accrued thereon.   
 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 

 21 
Recommendation Serial No. 11                           Paragraph No. 11 
 
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) 
  The Committee note that the Ministry has decided to discontinue the Investor 
Helpline Project as it has restructured its complaint module on MCA -21 System. The 
Committee, however, feel that since net penetration in India is rather low, especially in 
tier II and tier III cities and remote areas of the country, the Ministry should reconsider 
its decision to discontinue Investor Helpline Project.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The Ministry has examined the utility aspect of the website 
www.investorhelpline.in before discontinuing the financial support. It was observed that 
the number of complaints on this webs ite was showing a declining trend. In the 
meantime, a complaint monitoring module was made functional in MCA -21 Systems 
where such complaints were monitored and progressed by the field offices of the 
Ministry. In order to avoid duplicacy of work and save government money, a decision 
was taken to discontinue financial support to this website. The aspect of re -continuation 
of financial support was examined in the Ministry again and was not agreed to. The 
point about low penetration of net in India is agreed.  However, it is informed that all 
complaints received in the Ministry and the field offices are entered into MCA -21 
System for better monitoring and traceability. To reach out to the investors of tier II & 
tier III towns and remote places, the Ministry or ganized 2000 (approximately) investor 
awareness programmes through Professional Institutes (PIs) covering the entire nation.  
 
Out of these investor awareness programmes, about 1800 programmes were 
conducted in tier II and tier III cities. Registrars of Companies receive physical copies of 
complaints which they enter into MCA – 21 System. 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 

 22 
Recommendation Serial No. 12                           Paragraph No. 12 
Corporate Governance 
  The Committee note that the Ministry have forwarded a committee to formulate a 
policy document on corporate governance. The proposed Committee on Corporate 
Governance will enable the Government to have free and frank opinion of all 
stakeholders in the cor porate sector, academics and members of public before 
finalizing any policy document on corporate governance. The Committee feel that in 
order to avoid Satyam like scandals, it is imperative to have strong corporate 
governance standards in the Country to p rovide a uniform and well - defined framework 
of good corporate governance. The Committee, while noting that the Companies Bill, 
2011 has recognized the importance of strengthening the audit mechanism of 
Companies and independence thereof, urge the Ministry  to come out with a formal 
whistle blower policy on the lines of corporate governance policy, so that adequate and 
uniform safeguards are put in place against victimization of persons who report 
instances of corporate misgovernance and scams. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
      The Companies Bill, 2011 has recognized the importance of strengthening audit 
mechanism of companies (in Chapter X clauses 139 to 148) and independence thereof.  
Clause 177 (9) & (10) of the Companies Bill, 2011 provides that a vigil mec hanism has to 
be set up by the listed companies on the basis of rules to be prescribed for the purpose. A 
committee has been set up under the Chairmanship of Shri Adi Godrej to prepare a draft 
policy document on corporate governance.   
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 
 Recommendation Serial No. 14                           Paragraph No. 14 
Corporate Governance 
The Committee observe that many companies float their own NGOs and Trusts 
for Corporate Social Responsibi lity (CSR) activities and have received government 
grants and funds instead of spending their own money on CSR activities. The 
Committee recommend that the proposed corporate governance framework should 
suggest ways and means of monitoring CSR commitments of the Companies. The 
proposed framework should also suggest methods to check the release of funds from 
Central and State Governments to such NGOs, Trusts, Foundations, which are often 
aligned to the business objectives of their respective companies, so th at the extent of 
financial support received by these organizations from their patron companies is clearly 
brought out.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 23 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Clause 135 of the Companies Bill, 2011 provides for a class of companies to 
constitute Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Committee of the Board to formulate 
and recommend CSR policy, to take up CSR activities as per Schedule -VII of the Bill 
and also monitor the CSR policy from time to time. The Board of such companies shall 
make every endeavour to ensure  that the company spends, in every financial year, at 
least two percent of the average net profits of the company on CSR activities. In case 
the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall disclose the reasons for such 
failure. Thus monitoring of C SR under the Companies Bill, 2011 is through disclosure 
norms.   
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 

 24 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL-

 25 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1                             Paragraph No. 1 
 
Budgetary Allocation  
  The scrutiny of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs reveals 
substantial and persistent underutilization of the total expenditure in the Non Plan 
outlay.  For instance, the provisions of Rs.196.62 crore at the BE stage in the year 
2009-10 was incre ased to Rs.206.05 crore at the RE stage, while the actual 
expenditure was to the tune of Rs.190.15 crore only. Though, the provision of 
Rs.209.01 crore at the BE stage in the year 2010-11 was reduced to Rs.198.89 crore at 
the RE stage, the actual expenditu re turned out to be Rs.183.09 crore, which was even 
less than the RE. Further, in the year 2011 -12, provision of Rs.210.94 crore at the BE 
stage remained unchanged during the RE stage, still, the actual expenditure was 
Rs.172.56 crore only till February, 2 012. This trend reflects that the formulation of 
Budget of Ministry of Corporate Affairs has been reduced to an exercise of unrealistic 
estimates projection coupled with underutilization of funds. The Committee in their 
earlier reports had commented upon t he Ministry‟s failure in regard to appropriate 
projection of fund requirements while formulating budget estimates. However, recurrent 
and substantial underutilization of allocated funds indicate that the budgetary 
mechanism in place has been ineffective. T he Committee, therefore, expect the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs to exercise greater care in formulating their budget 
estimates and are of the view that periodic/quarterly meetings should be held to review 
and constantly monitor the trend and progress of expenditure.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The budget grant of this Ministry provides for the expenditure on the Secretariat 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and its field & attached/subordinates offices all over 
India under the Non-Plan Heads i.e. Modernization, Computerisation and Networking of 
Corporate Affairs and its field offices (MCA21), Investor Education & Protection Fund 
(IEPF), infrastructure activities. It also includes Grants -in-aid-General to the 
Competition Commission of India (CCI). The Bu dget Estimates and Revised Estimates 
are projected on the basis of anticipated expenditure proposed by each budgetary unit 
of the Ministry. Shortfall in utilisation of the budgeted funds is on account of non -filling 
up many posts in the Competition Commiss ion of India, Attached/Subordinate offices. 
Also, savings under the various object heads were on account of strictly enforcing the 
austerity measures and following the prescribed ceilings on expenditure. The Ministry 
exercises diligence while formulating i ts budget estimates and the process of 
expenditure is periodically monitored. 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24 .07.2012 
 

 26 
Recommendation Serial No. 2                           Paragraph No. 2 
 
Registrar of Companies (ROCs) 
 
  The Committee note that inspite of the efforts made by the Ministry in trying to 
beef up the regulatory and enforcement machinery in its field offices, the situation at the 
ground level is rather disappointing with 52,201 cases pending as on 31.12.2011 . The 
Committee in its 37 th Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs had recommended that the Ministry should augment the cadre strength of the 
services manning the field posts and also if required, engage qualified personnel  on 
deputation or short -term contracts. The Committee feel that to clear the technical 
backlog of work the Ministry should consider engaging professionals like practicing 
Chartered Accountants, Company Secretaries, etc. as consultants who being peer 
group are better equipped to scrutinize statements and other documents prepared on 
behalf of companies. Since the experience of the Ministry in engaging trainees (semi -
qualified professionals of ICSI and ICWAI) for 6 months and on continuous basis in the 
field o ffices and Headquarters to assist the staff members in routine work enabling 
them to follow up more critical activities has been found to be satisfactory, the 
Committee expect the Ministry to increase the scale of such engagement. To make this 
system work efficiently, the Committee desire the Ministry to clearly define the duties 
and accountability of these hired professionals in their terms of engagement.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee to increase the scale of engagement of  
trainees (semi-qualified professionals of ICSI and ICWAI) has been noted.  The number 
of such trainees will be suitably increased keeping in view the requirement of the field 
offices and Headquarters.  The present requirement of trainees has been worked o ut 
on the basis of quantum of work, pendency, backlog etc. in those offices.  These 
trainees will help the regular staff of ROCs in routine work and the regular staff will 
follow up the important activities, such as; 
 
(i)        Action against companies which are not submitting returns. 
(ii)       Investigations and inspections of defaulting companies. 
(iii) End use of funds of IPOs. 
(iv) Follow up of cases of mergers, acquisitions, demergers, winding up in 
courts. 
 
2.  It is brought out that such training is mandator y for these semi -qualified 
professionals for practicing the profession after qualifying the examination. 
 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 

 27 
Recommendation Serial No. 6                             Paragraph No. 6 
 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
 
  The Committee also urge the Ministry to expedite the investigation of 
cartelization in cement and onion sectors and reports its findings to the Committee at 
the earliest. The Committee note that in case of the avia tion sector, the Commission 
has closed the matter as it has found no evidence on record to suggest that airlines 
operators raised the airfares and/or withdrew their promotional fares across all sectors 
because of some agreement between them. While disagree ing with the findings of the 
commission, the Committee would like to have details of the investigation on the basis 
of which such conclusion has been drawn by the Commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 With regard to the alleged cartelization in Cement Ind ustry, the Competition 
Commission of India has issued final order on 20.06.2012 in case No.29/2010 filed by 
Builders Association of India against Cement Manufacturers Association. The 
Commission has imposed penalty on 11 Cement manufacturers at 0.5. times of their 
profit for the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. The Commission has also imposed penalty 
on the Cement Manufacturers Association.  
 Copy of the final order of the Commission is available on the website of the 
Competition Commission of India i.e. www.cci.gov.in 
2. As regards Onion, the Commission took suo moto notice of increase in prices on 
06.01.2011 and referred the matter to Director General for Investigation. Based 
submitted by the Director General, the Commissio n closed the matter under section 26 
(6) of the Act on 10.04.2012. The brief findings of the Commission in this matter are:  
 Price of onions in Delhi had fluctuated due to change in demand -supply 
conditions in the wake of untimely and erratic rains in area s of Kharif onion 
producing states which damaged the crop. Not only in Delhi, there were 
fluctuations in other cities also in onion prices due to the supply shocks.  
 No evidence of mass hoarding under an agreement could be found for the period 
under reference. 
 Price of onions in mandis is determined by auction. The auction price ultimately 
affects the wholesale and retail prices in the markets. W hen the auction price of 
Onion itself was very high at all places – Delhi, Alwar, Lasalgaon, Pimpalgaon, 
Bhavnagar and at the other mandis of Gujarat, Rajasthan and Maharashtra in 
the second quarter of month of December 2010, it was natural for prices to go up 
further in wholesale and retail market absorbing the margins at various levels in 
supply chain.  
 The Commission observes that there is no evidence to suggest that there was 
manipulation in the auction prices and while produce was auctioned at a higher 
rate, farmers were paid lower prices. 
 
3. As desired by the Committee, the details of the investigation on the b asis of 
which Commission closed the matter for the alleged cartelization by the airlines 

 28 
operators to raise the air fares and/or withdrawal of promotional fares is given 
hereunder : 
4. The Commission, after going through items published in various dailies/ weeklies 
and the details obtained from DGCA (Air Transport Circular 2 of 2010 dated 19 th 
November, 2010), had taken suo moto notice of the issue that there appears to be 
concerted action by the airlines to increase the fares. The said concerted action „pri ma 
facie‟ appeared to be in pursuance of a tacit collusion between the airlines. Accordingly, 
the Commission formed opinion of existence of prima facie case and, therefore, 
referred the matter to DG for investigation u/s 26 (1) of the Act. 
 5. Present position:  The Commission has passed final order in the matter. The 
Commission could not find any violation of provisions of Competition Act by the Airlines. 
The Commission had made following observations in the order: 
 
“The Commission notes from the findings of Director General that like in any 
peak season, during Diwali of 2010, load factor on airlines had increased and in 
some cases it was about 100%. Keeping with this trend, the percentage of tickets 
sold in the higher buckets of airlines had also gone up. To this extent, it may be said 
that there is a pattern in air fares going upwards together in a sense that during the 
period of high demand, fares of all airlines tend to move together. However, in 
absence of evidence of any organized, express or tacit col lusion among the airlines, 
the Commission feels that it cannot  be concluded that the airlines have entered into 
any anti-competitive agreement in violation of section 3 (3) of the Act. 
The Commission also observes that in course of investigation, DG has n ot 
come across any evidence which would suggest that there was any concerted 
action on part of airlines to reduce the capacities with a view to raise the fares in 
face of high demand during February 2009 and October -November 2010. Before 
Director General, Airlines like GoAir, IndiGo and SpiceJet have denied that there 
was any reduction in number of flights during October -December 2010. In fact, 
IndiGo has submitted that on many sectors to cater to the demand, number of flights 
was increased. There is no evi dence which brings out any concerted action on part 
of airlines to reduce capacities in February 2009 either. 
Based upon the foregoing, the Commission finds that no case of 
contravention of any of the provisions of section 3 (3) of the Act is made out agai nst 
the airlines as has been alleged in these two cases. 
Accordingly, the Commission concludes that since there are no evidences on 
record to suggest that the airlines operators raised the air fares and /or withdrew 
their promotional fares across all secto rs because of some agreement among them 
during the period under investigation, the proceedings in matter deserve to be 
closed forthwith.” 
6. The Committee desired to have details of the investigation on the basis of which 
the Commission has decided to clos e the matter. In this regard findings of DG have 
been reflected in the order of the Commission dated 10.01.2012 at Annexure.  
7. In another case, the Commission received a reference under Section 19(1)(b) of 
the Competition Act from Standing Committee on F inance through Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs on the increase in the fares by different airlines.  The Committee 
observed that: 
a) Due to strike of Air India, different Airlines are charging exorbitant prices for 
tickets; 
b) In a normal course also, one cannot ta ke tickets on line, even though seats 
are available, and tickets have to be bought at higher prices near to the date 
of departure. 

 29 
8. The Commission, after considering the investigation report submitted by Director 
General on the subject, passed final Order on 11th January, 2012.  The Commission 
could not find any violation of provisions of Competition Act by the Airlines. 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 13                           Paragraph No. 13 
Corporate Governance 
In the light of emerging industrial practices and evolving accounting/financial 
norms and standards, the Committee desire that the Ministry may review the role, 
functions and scope of the two related professions, namely C hartered Accountants and 
Cost Accountants and bring necessary amendments, if required, in their respective 
statutes so that the ambiguities and grey areas are duly addressed.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The process of review of the Chartered Accountants Ac t and Cost Accountants 
Act is on going and grey areas as and when identified are suitably addressed.  
 
  
  Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20018/17/2012-BGT dated 24.07.2012 

 30 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                 YASHWANT SINHA 
 4 December, 2012                                                               Chairman, 
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance  

 31 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th November, 2012 from 1530 hrs to 1730 hrs. 
 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
 
  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram   
3.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
13.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
14.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
 
2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption: -  
 
(i)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment); 
 
(ii)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue); 
 

 32 
(iii)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Gr ants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Planning; 
 
(iv)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
 
(v)      Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.   
 
3.  The Committee adopted the draft rep orts at Sl.no. (iv) without any 
modification and those at Sl.nos. (i), (ii), (iii) and (v) with modifications.    The 
Committee also authorized the Chairman to present all the Reports to Parliament in 
the current session.     
 
 
      The Committee adjourned at 1730 hours. 

 33 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
  
                Total      % of Total 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   14   
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government  10  71.42 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7,  
 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government’s replies 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect            
of which replies of the Government have   04  28.58 
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 6 and 13) 
 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect   NIL  0.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
  