 1 
29 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2010-11) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation  
 
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2010/ Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)


 2 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF  STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands 
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation  
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 December, 2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  10 December, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2010/ Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)


 3 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................………………......  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…….....      1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................………..       
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………….        
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………......        
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……….        
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I.   Information to be furnished by the Ministries on implementation of projects…… 
II.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 08 December, 2010……..  
                 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
*Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
Contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation…………… 
 
 
 
 
*  Not appended to the Cyclostyled copy of the Report 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2010-2011    
 
 
       Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri C.M. Chang 
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7. Shri Khagen Das 
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
12. Smt. Jaya Prada  Nahata 
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Vacant
  
16. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
17. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara 
18. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
19. Shri Manicka Tagore 
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
21. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
23.   Shri Raashid Alvi 
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
25.   Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan 
27.   Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
28.   Shri Mahendra Mohan 
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
31.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary 
2.      Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, MP has resigned on 29 November, 2010  

 5 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Fin ance, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty -Ninth Report on action taken 
by Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of 
the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.  
 2. The Fourteenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010.  Replies indicating action taken 
on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by t he 
Government on 20 July, 2010.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their 
sitting held on 8 December, 2010. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Ninth Report of the Committee is 
given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          YASHWANT SINHA, 
8 December, 2010                            Chairman, 
 17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Finance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

 6 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Four teenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 19 April, 2010 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
2.   The Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 13 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analysed and 
categorised as follows: 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
      Recommendation Nos. 1 to 3 and 5 to 13 
(Chapter-II)         (Total: 12) 
            
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
Nil 
(Chapter-III)         (Total : Nil) 
         
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
(Chapter-IV)                   (Total: 1) 
 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 Nil 
(Chapter-V)        (Total : Nil) 
 
 
3.   The Committee desire that the replies to the comments contained in Chapter I be 
furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by t he Government on some of 
their recommendations. 

 7 
A.   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
 
5. Noting the increasing trend of variation in Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual Expenditure of the Ministry of the Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MOSPI), the Committee reiterated the need 
expressed in their earlier report of 2009 -10 on devising an effective mechanism 
for identifying and overcoming the deficiencies in the existing system of 
budgetary planning for assessing the require ment of funds and in ensuring 
proper utilization of allocated funds. The Committee also desired that the 
Government ensure that the on -going scheme namely, India Statistical 
Strengthening Project (ISSP) is taken up in right earnest and the plan scheme, 
Basic Statistics for Local Development finalised immediately.  The Committee 
also emphasized on taking concerted action for ensuring timely and effective 
implementation of projects so as to add to the credibility, accuracy and timeliness 
of statistics.  
 
6. The Government, in their action taken reply, have inter-alia stated as 
below :- 
“Consequent to the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry, at 
the level of Secretary (S&PI), has undertaken a comprehensive review of 
the entire budgetary planning process of MOSPI, particularly in the light of 
the observation of the Committee with regard to shortfall in actual Plan 
expenditure, which are given in the succeeding paragraphs :- 
 
a) Budgetary Planning Process 
Formulation of Annual Plan proposals will, hencefort h, be more 
rigorous to avoid large variations in the Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimate and Actual Expenditure. In future, all Plan proposals would be 
prepared by Divisions with more realistic assessment of financial 
resources. In order to identify the spe cific Heads of Accounts where 
the earmarked fund has not been spent for a particular year, all 
Divisions of MOSPI, while proposing the plan allocations for the 
scheme(s), a break -up of all activities, and activity -wise budget 
requirement as per the heads o f account would invariably be  indicated 
in their respective Plan proposals. The consolidated Annual Plan 
proposals of MOSPI would be discussed threadbare with the senior 
officers of the Ministry, before it is finally sent to Planning Commission.  
 

 8 
In respect of all major initiatives proposed in the Plan proposals for the 
next year, initial basic work would be taken up in January itself so that 
immediately at the beginning of the financial year in April, activities are 
taken up in real earnest and expenditure made. 
 
b) Monitoring of Plan expenditure 
 
Stringent monitoring mechanism will be put in place in the Ministry to 
monitor the expenditure of various schemes of the Ministry. Towards 
this end, it has been decided to adopt a two -pronged approach to 
monitor the  expenditure in the Ministry. At the initial level, the 
expenditure would be reviewed by Director Generals of Central 
Statistical Organisation (CSO) and National Sample Survey 
organisation (NSSO)/Additional Secretary, as the case may be, on 
monthly basis; and corrective measures taken so as to ensure pro -rata 
expenditure vis -à-vis the budget allocations. Thereafter, on quarterly 
basis, the expenditure would be reviewed at the level of 
Secretary(S&PI) along with the physical monitoring of activities 
proposed, as part of the annual action Plan of the Ministry.  
 
In respect of schemes, which are operated by more than one divisions 
of the Ministry, division –wise allocations would be made by DG, CSO 
/DG, NSSO before the beginning of the year. Each Division would be 
instructed   to maintain an expenditure register, activity –wise and 
Head-wise, which should be put up to DGs on regular basis for perusal 
and for suggesting remedial measures.  
 
c) Action for not spending the funds  
Any shortfall in expenditure in respect of any Division, without any 
proper justification, would be viewed seriously, warranting 
administrative action against the defaulters. 
 
d) Measures to avoid blocking of resources  
 
In respect of Plan schemes/activities, for which requisite approvals 
have not been received at the time of proposing allocations, and any 
delay is expected, only a token provision would be made in the Plan 
proposals so that scarce Government resources do not remain blocked 
for want of administrative clearances.  
 
e) Timely completion of major works   
 
All civil works to be taken up by the Ministry or its subordinate 
formations would be identified well in advance before the start of 
financial year, and advance action like getting land or getting estimates 
of construction or preparation o f architecture design etc.  taken up so 
that work is initiated, at the beginning of year and funds released in 

 9 
time. In case of delays by the construction agency, regular meeting 
with CPWD/(or other construction agency, as the case may be), would 
be arrang ed by the Divisional Heads with Secretary(S&PI) to ensure 
timely completion of projects”. 
 
 
7. At the behest of the Committee, the Ministry have undertaken a 
comprehensive review of the entire budgetary planning process and proposed 
institutionalized measu res for enabling realistic assessment of financial 
resources, stringent monitoring mechanism of the expenditure on various 
schemes, and taking administrative action on those held responsible for 
shortfalls and slippages in utilization of plan resources.  T he Committee would 
like to be kept apprised of the effectiveness of these measures in addressing the 
persistent problem of shortfalls in meeting the plan expenditure and 
implementing schemes.   

 10 
B.   NATIONAL STATISTICAL COMMISSION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 4 and 6) 
 
8.       The Committee had desired that concrete action be taken for persuading all 
the Ministries/ Departments concerned for expeditiously furnishing all the required 
inputs to the National Statistical Commission so as to enable the Commission  in 
preparing the list of „core -statistics‟ and formulate the methodology for collection of 
such statistics without any further delay. 
   
9. In reply to the recommendation made in the report on Demands for Grants 
(2007-08) on according statutory status to the National Statistical Commission, the 
Ministry had vide reply dated 26 July, 2007 informed that the matter was being 
submitted for Cabinet approval.  The National Statistical Commission was yet to be 
accorded statutory status.  The Committee reiterated their earlier recommendation that 
conferring statutory status would enable the Commission to function in an independent 
manner for strengthening the statistical system in the Country. The Committee also 
desired that vigorous efforts be made to ensure prope r interaction and coordination in 
statistical matters between the various Ministries and agencies of the Government. 
     
10. In their action taken notes, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation have stated as under :- 
 “The National Statis tical Commission has decided to interact with the 
Central Ministries/ Departments on the issue of finalizing the list of core 
statistics. The interaction sessions are scheduled to be held on 20 th & 21st 
May 2010. Based on the discussions during these sessi ons, the 
Commission would consider recommending a list of core statistics to the 
Government. 
 
The issue of conferring statutory status to the National Statistical 
Commission is under examination of the Commission. Interaction and 
coordination in statistica l matters between the various Ministries and 
agencies of the Government at the Centre and in the States is an ongoing 
process, which is reviewed every year in the Conference of Central and 
State Statistical Organisations”. 
 
 

 11 
11. The Ministry have informed  that the National Statistical Commission 
proposes to hold inter -active sessions with the Central Ministries / Departments 
on the issue of finalizing the list of core statistics.  The Committee cannot help 
expressing unhappiness on the delay in finalizing the list of core statistics. The 
Committee urge upon the Government to ensure that listing out the areas of core 
statistics as well as the methodology for collection of core statistics is finalized 
expeditiously.  
 
12. The Committee also regret to note tha t though the issue of conferring 
statutory status to the National Statistical Commission was slated to be placed 
before the Cabinet way back in 2007, no tangible progress has been made in this 
direction even after a lapse of more than three years.  The Com mittee urge upon 
the Government to ensure that the examination of the proposal is completed 
expeditiously and the related Bill, which would enable the National Statistical 
Commission to function independently is brought before Parliament. In this 
regard, t he Committee would like to know as to by when the Bill would be 
readied for introduction.   The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
findings of the reviews undertaken at the conferences of Central and State 
Statistical Organisations for improvin g interaction and co -ordination between 
them in statistical matters and action taken thereon. 

 12 
C. Price Indices 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
13. At present, there are multiple agencies involved in the collection, compilation 
and release of various indices.  With a view to rationalizing the compilation and 
release of the various indices, the Committee reiterated their earlier recommendation 
made in Sixth Report that the Government should consider entrusting the job of 
coordinating and releasing of indices to a  single nodal agency, preferably the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation, which already had the professional 
expertise required for this purpose.  
 
14. The Ministry, in their action notes, have submitted as under :- 
“As recommended by the S tanding Committee on Finance the 
issue was referred to National Statistical Commission (NSC). The 
Commission has informed that it has been decided to constitute a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of one of its Members to examine the 
issue of institutional arrangements for collection of prices, compilation and 
dissemination of Wholesale and Consumer Price Indices and integration 
of data collection machinery. The Committee has started its functioning”. 
 
15. The Committee appreciate the fact that the Governmen t has taken up 
their recommendation for entrusting the work of co -ordinating and 
releasing various price indices to a single nodal agency in right earnest by 
referring the matter to the National Statistical Commission, who, in turn, 
have constituted a sepa rate committee for examining the matter.  
Reviewing the existing institutional arrangements for data collection, 
compilation and release of various indices to have a co-ordinated approach 
under a nodal agency is, as recommended by the Committee, an imminen t 
necessity.  The Committee, therefore, wish to be kept apprised of the 
progress made in this regard on the basis of the examination of the matter 
by the National Statistical Commission.  

 13 
D.  SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER   
   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
16. The Committee, upon taking note of the submission of the Ministry that 
shortage of manpower in the Indian Statistical Service (ISS) and in the Subordinate 
Statistical Service (SSS) was adversely affecting the programmes and schemes of the 
Ministry of Statistic s and Programme Implementation including the functioning of the 
National Academy of Statistical Administration, i nter-alia desired that the Ministry 
pursue the matter relating to amendment of recruitment rules with the Department of 
Personnel and Training (DOPT).  The Committee also desired that simultaneously, the 
Staff Selection Commission should be impressed on the need for making adequate 
efforts for filling up the vacant posts by direct recruitment without any delay.  The 
Committee also recommended tha t the matter relating to the revision of grade pay for 
certain posts (Statistical Investigators Grade -I and II) should be actively pursued with 
the Ministry of Finance for an early decision so as to enable in overcoming the 
problem of high attrition. 
 
17. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have inter-alia stated as under: 
“With respect to shortage of manpower, it is stated that vacancy in ISS 
are mainly in promotional grades and suitable action is taken to consider 
promotions in accordance with provisions contained in recruitment rules. 
So far as shortage of manpower in SSS is concerned, it is stated that 
appointment procedure for 441 candidates against 2008 Examination is 
in progress and it is expected that these candidates will be joining by the 
end of August 2010.  Staff Selection Commission (SSC) did not conduct 
examination for 2009 and, however, 2010 examination is in progress 
against which, 350 confirmed vacancies have been communicated.  With 
regard to revision of Grade pay from Rs.4200 to Rs.4600 and Rs.4600 to 
Rs.4800 in respect of Statistical Investigators (SIs) of Grade -II and 
Grade-I respectively, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) 
was approached but vide their note UO No.41(1) -E-III CB/2010 dated 26 
May, 2010 proposal has agai n been turned down.  Hence, it is 
apprehended that number of candidates joining the Service may be low 
and rate of high attrition may continue.  Keeping in view, functional 
requirements of the organization, posts falling vacant in S.I Grade -I upto 
31 March , 2010, have been filled -up on ad -hoc basis and adequate 
number of contract Investigators have been engaged by NSSO(FOD) 
against vacant posts of S.I Grade -II.  Thus, shortage of manpower in 
NSSO(FOD) have been taken care on short -term basis. In order to 
address long -term solution to manpower shortage, provision for 
appointment on deputation, along with appointment on contractual basis, 

 14 
in exceptional circumstances, have been incorporated in the revised 
recruitment rules of SSS and Department of Personnel an d Training 
(DOPT) has been requested to approve the recruitment rules on priority.  
The contract Investigators who have been engaged by NSSO(FOD) on 
regional basis are being imparted training, related to their assignments 
by concerned field units. With eff ect from 2010 onwards, SSC has 
included recruitment of Statistical Investigators in Combined Level 
Graduate Examination and hence it will be able to provide candidates on 
yearly basis.” 
 
 
18. The Committee note from the information furnished in the action taken note 
that the vacancies in Indian Statistical Service (ISS) are mainly in promotional 
grades which is within the purview of the Ministry.  The Committee expect that, as 
proposed, suitable action is taken expeditiously for filling up the vacant 
promotional posts so as to address the problem of shortage of manpower.  As 
regards manpower shortage in Subordinate Statistical Service (SSS), the Ministry 
have stated that as a long -term solution, provisions for appointment on 
deputation, along with appointmen t on contractual basis, in exceptional 
circumstances, have been incorporated in the revised recruitment rules of SSS 
and Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT) has been requested to 
approve the recruitment rules on priority.  The Committee expect the Ministry to 
incessantly pursue the matter with DOPT for early approval of the revised 
recruitment rules. 

 15 
E. INFRASTRUCTURE AND PROJECT MONITORING 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
19. The Committee urged upon the need for addressing the inherent 
deficiencies relating to project formulation, functioning of Empowered 
Committees and ensuring accountability of the agencies involved in project 
implementation.  The Committee expected that concerted action would be taken 
in identifying and rectifying the deficiencies  in the system in coordination with the 
administrative Ministries concerned so as to bring -in qualitative and systematic 
improvements in various areas of project formulation, planning, implementation 
and monitoring.  The Committee desired to be apprised of  the outcome in this 
regard.   
20. In their action taken note, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation have submitted as follows :- 
“In pursuance to the observations of the Standing Finance Committee on 
the issue of the time and cost overru ns as a follow up, a Committee has 
been constituted in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary to 
examine in details the recurring problems of time and cost overruns in 
projects and other obser vations made by the Committee. The Committee 
would submit a report after its detailed deliberations”.  
 
21. The Committee note that in the light of their recommendation, the Ministry 
have constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of an Additional Secr etary 
level officer to examine in detail the recurring problem of time and cost overruns 
in implementation of the projects.  The Committee expect the internal group 
constituted by the Ministry to complete its work within a time frame of two 
months and they  be apprised of its findings and the measures proposed for 
bringing improvements in project formulation and implementation. 
 
New Delhi;                   YASHWANT SINHA, 
08 December, 2010                                    Chairman, 
17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Finance. 

 16 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Sl Nos. 1 & 2) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.1 
 
The Committee note with concern the persistent shortfall in the p lan 
expenditure of the Ministry as compared to the budgeted estimates which has 
been to the extent of Rs. 27.76 crore (33%) in 2006 -07, Rs. 26.00 crore (28%) in 
2007-08, Rs. 66.15 crore in 2008 -09 (51%) and Rs. 137.41 crore in 2009 -10 
(60%).   Taking note of the continued underutilization of the budgeted planned 
funds, the Committee had, in their 4 th Report on Demands For Grants (2009 -10), 
inter-alia emphasized the need for undertaking an effective exercise for 
identifying the shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning and 
ensuring proper utilization of funds.  Regrettably, however, no special efforts 
appear to have been taken by the Ministry in this regard with the position having 
deteriorated further, mainly due to shortage of manpower and slippag es in 
implementing schemes which have a significant bearing on the accuracy and 
credibility of statistical data.  For instance, the entire amount of Rs. 30.00 crore 
for  2008 -09 and Rs. 100.00 crore for the year 2009 -10 earmarked for the India 
Statistical Strengthening Project was left unutilized for want of requisite approvals 
for implementing the scheme.  And, a budgetary allocation of Rs.100.00 crore 
has once again been made for the scheme for the year 2010 -11.  Similarly,  the 
scheme, Basic Statistics for Local Level Development could not be launched as a 
full fledged centrally sponsored scheme so far with a substantial portion of the 
budgeted funds of Rs. 5.00 crore each for the years 2007 -08 and  2008 -09, and 
Rs. 12.00 crore for the year 2009 -10 remain ing unutilized.  Recurrent and 
substantial underutilization of the budget allocation as well as sharp variations in 
the budget and revised estimates have also been witnessed under certain plan 
heads which include,  „Strengthening of Computer Centre‟, „Capa city 
Development‟  and „Strengthening monitoring and Evaluation for Projects and 
Programmes‟.  The budget estimate of Rs. 14.70 crore and Rs.25.00 crore made 
for the „Computer Centre‟ in the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 respectively was 
substantially reduced to Rs. 7.84 crore and Rs. 15.30 crore at the stage of 
revised estimates and the funds finally remained substantially unutilized.   
 
Recommendation Sl.No.2 
 
The increasing trend of variations in the Budgetary Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual Expendit ure of the Ministry is indicative of lack of objectivity on 
the part of the Government in ensuring proper budgetary planning and adopting a 
casual attitude in implementing Plan schemes. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the 
need on the part of the Govern ment in devising an effective mechanism for identifying 
and overcoming the deficiencies in the existing system of budgetary planning for 
assessment of required funds and in ensuring proper utilization of allocated funds.  The 

 17 
Committee also expect the Gove rnment to ensure that the pending schemes are 
finalised immediately and concerted action taken for timely and effective 
implementation of projects so as to add to the credibility, accuracy and timeliness of 
statistics.  The Committee expect to be apprised of the specific action taken in this 
regard.     
 
  Action Taken by the Government 
Expressing concern over the persistent shortfall in the plan expenditure of 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation as compared to the 
budgeted estimates, the St anding Committee has emphasized the need for 
undertaking an effective exercise for identifying the shortcomings in the 
mechanism of budgetary planning and ensuring proper utilization of funds so as 
to avoid large variations in the BE, RE and Actual Expenditure under various plan 
heads of MOSPI. The Committee has also called for devising an effective 
mechanism for identifying and overcoming the deficiencies in the existing system 
of budgetary planning for assessment of required funds and in ensuring proper 
utilization of allocated funds.    
 
2. Consequent to  the  recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry, at 
the level of Secretary(S&PI),has undertaken a comprehensive review of the 
entire   budgetary planning process of MOSPI, particularly in the light o f the 
observation of the committee with regard to shortfall in actual plan expenditure, 
which are  given in the succeeding paragraphs :- 
 
a) Budgetary Planning Process 
Formulation of Annual Plan proposals will henceforth be more rigorous to 
avoid large variat ions in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimate and Actual 
Expenditure. In future, all plan proposals would be prepared by Divisions with 
more realistic assessment of financial resources. In order to indentify the specific 
heads of accounts where the earmar ked fund has not been spent for a particular 
year, all Divisions of MOSPI, while proposing the plan allocations for the 
scheme(s), a break -up of all activities, and activity -wise budget requirement as 
per the heads of account would invariably be  indicated in their respective plan 
proposals. The consolidated Annual Plan Proposals of MOSPI would be 
discussed threadbare with the Senior Officers of the Ministry, before it is finally 
sent to Planning Commission.  
 
In respect of all major initiatives proposed in the plan proposals for the 
next year, initial basic work would be taken up in January itself so that 
immediately at the beginning of the financial year in April, activities are taken up 
in real earnest and expenditure made. 
 
b) Monitoring of Plan Expenditure 
Stringent monitoring mechanism will be put in place in the Ministry to 
monitor the expenditure of various schemes of the Ministry. Towards this end, it 
has been decided to adopt a two-pronged approach to monitor the expenditure in 

 18 
the Ministry. At the init ial level, the expenditure would be reviewed by Director 
Generals of CSO and NSSO/Additional Secretary, as the case may be, on 
monthly basis; and corrective measures taken so as to ensure pro -rata 
expenditure vis-à-vis the budget allocations. Thereafter, o n quarterly basis, the 
expenditure would be reviewed at the level of Secretary(S&PI) along with the 
physical monitoring of activities proposed, as part of the Annual Action Plan of 
the Ministry.  
 
In respect of schemes, which are operated by more than one Divisions of 
the Ministry, Division –wise allocations would be made by DG, CSO /DG, NSSO 
before the beginning of the year. Each Division would be instructed   to maintain 
an expenditure register, activity –wise and Head-wise, which should be put up to 
DGs on regular basis for perusal and for suggesting remedial measures.  
 
c) Action for not spending the funds  
 
Any shortfall in expenditure in respect of any Division, without any proper 
justification, would be viewed seriously, warranting administrative action a gainst 
the defaulters 
 
d) Measures to avoid Blocking of resources  
 
In respect of plan schemes /activities, for which requisite approvals have not 
been received at the time of proposing allocations, and any delay is expected, 
only a token provision would be m ade in the plan proposals so that scarce 
Government resources do not remain blocked for want of administrative 
clearances.  
 
e) Timely completion of Major Works   
All civil works to be taken up by the Ministry or its subordinate formations 
would be identified well in advance before the start of financial year, and advance 
action like getting land or getting estimates of construction or preparation of 
architecture design etc.  taken up so that work is initiated , at the beginning of 
year and funds released in t ime. In case of delays by the construction agency, 
regular meeting with CPWD/(or other construction agency, as the case may be), 
would be arranged by the Divisional Heads with Secretary(S&PI) to ensure timely 
completion of projects. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of the Chapter I) 

 19 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
  
The Committee are constrained to note that the work of the National Statistical 
Commission (NSC), which was constituted in July, 2006 in pursuance of the 
recommendations made by the Rangarajan Commission in 2001 was stymied in the 
year 2009 -10 owing to the vacant positions of part -time Chairman and Members.  
Consequently, as against the budg etary allocation of Rs. 0.84 crore made for the 
Commission for the year 2009-10 only an amount of Rs. 0.31 crore was expended with 
the studies planned not having being commissioned.  The Committee emphasize the 
need for ensuring that important positions ar e not left vacant so as to ensure that the 
work of the National Statistical Commission is not jeopardized.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
      At present, there are no vacancies in the National Statistical Commission. 
However, in future, suitable steps  would be taken to expeditiously complete the 
process of filling vacant positions in the Commission, as and when they arise. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee also find it surprising that the mechanism created in the form of 
an Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation with a clear mandate to expedite the 
implementation of the recommend ations made in the report of the Rangarajan 
Commission (2001) covering administrative and technical requirements for bringing 
improvement in the Indian Statistical System has failed in achieving this goal.  
Consequently, the National Statistical Commission  has sought adequate powers for 
monitoring and enforcing implementation of the recommendations.  The Committee 
desire to be kept apprised of the proposal for appointing a Standing Committee for 
monitoring the implementation of the Rangarajan Commission‟s r ecommendations as 
also the recommendations of the National Statistical Commission and the 
improvements brought about in the Indian Statistical System as a consequence of 
pursuing the recommendations for implementation. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The N ational Statistical Commission decided to constitute a Standing 
Committee under the Chairmanship of one of its Members to monitor the 
implementation of the Rangarajan Commission‟s recommendations as also the 
recommendations of the present National Statisti cal Commission. Status reports 
required for review and monitoring by the Committee are under preparation. The 
Committee is expected to start functioning after a month. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
 
 

 20 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Identification of the areas of core statistics and evolving appropriate 
standards and methodology for collection of such statistics is one of the 
mandates of the National Statistical Commission, completion of which has  been 
emphasized upon by the Committee in their reports presented earlier.  The 
Committee desire that concrete action be taken for persuading all the Ministries/ 
Departments concerned for expeditiously furnishing all the required inputs to the 
National Statistical Commission so as to enable the Commission in preparing the 
list of „core -statistics‟ and formulate the methodology for collection of such 
statistics without any further delay. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
      The National Statistical Commissi on has decided to interact with the Central 
Ministries/ Departments on the issue of finalizing the list of core statistics. The 
interaction sessions are scheduled to be held on 20 th & 21st May 2010. Based on 
the discussions during these sessions, the Commi ssion would consider 
recommending a list of core statistics to the Government. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.11 of the Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee had, in their 4 th Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the 
Ministry, as well as the 6 th Report on Inflation and Price Rise, inter -alia recommended 
expediting the work of compilation of new series of nation wide Consumer Pric e Index 
for urban and rural areas, which, as perceived by the Rengarajan Commission (NSC; 
2001) would be a prelude in formulating a National Consumer Price Index (CPI).  As 
per the current submission of the Ministry, releasing the new series of CPI (Rural)  and 
CPI (Urban) with a revised base year, which has been in the anvil since long is now 
expected by February, 2011.  The Committee expects that the Ministry would spare no 
effort in completing this long delayed work of bringing out the new series of price  
indices as per the schedule now indicated.  The Committee also desires to be kept 
apprised of the progress made in this direction.   
 
Action Taken by the Government 
    The current status of compilation of new series of CPI (Urban) and CPI (Rural) and 
the future plan of work are as under: 
 
CPI for Urban areas 
 
CPI(Urban) would be compiled at State/UT as well as at all India levels.  
Weighting diagrams (consumption pattern) of the CPI (Urban) have been derived 
from the results of the NSS 61 st round of Consu mer Expenditure Survey (2004 -

 21 
05).  All cities/towns having population (2001 Population Census) more than 9 
lakh and all State/UT capitals not covered therein were selected purposively.  In 
all 310 towns have been selected either on purposive or random basi s from 
which 1114 quotations (price schedules) are canvassed every month. Regular 
price and rent data are being collected by the NSSO (FOD). 
 
Trial indices of CPI (Urban) at State/UT/All India level were compiled in 
February, 2010.  It is expected to relea se January, 2011 indices at State/UT/All 
India levels by February, 2011 [subject to the approval of the Technical Advisory 
Committee (TAC) on Statistics of Prices and Cost of Living (SPCL) on the 
selection of the base year] and release of indices for subseq uent months 
accordingly. 
 
CPI for rural areas 
 
         CPI (Rural) would also be compiled at State/UT as well as at all India 
levels.  Weighting diagrams of the CPI (Rural) have also been derived from the 
results of the NSS 61 st round of Consumer Expendit ure Survey (2004-05).  With 
a view to have a workload within manageable limits and considering the fact that 
the CPI (Rural) would provide the price changes for the entire rural population of 
the country, a total of 1183 villages have been selected at all India level.  The 
broad criterion of selection of villages is to have representation of all the districts 
with in State/UT and therefore two villages from each district adjusted on the 
basis of rural population of the State/UT have been selected randomly f rom 
different tehsils. As field investigators of NSSO (FOD) were not available for price 
collection in the rural areas, this work has been entrusted to the Department of 
Posts.  After training by NSSO (FOD), price data collection work has started from 
October 2009. 
 
It is expected that trial indices of CPI (Rural) would be available by 
September, 2010. Further it is expected to release January, 2011 indices at 
State/UT/All India levels by February, 2011 [subject to the approval of the 
Technical Advisory Com mittee (TAC) on Statistics of Prices and Cost of Living 
(SPCL) on the selection of the base year] and release of indices for subsequent 
months accordingly. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee also find that the proposal made in their Sixth report for 
entrusting the work of coordinating and releasing various price indices to a single nodal 
agency has found favour by the Ministry.  The Committee desire that th e proposal of 
having a single agency for compilation and releasing of various price indices 
(consumer and wholesale) with standardized parameters be pursued further in 
consultation with the National Statistical Commission.  The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this direction.   

 22 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
      As recommended by the Standing Committee on Finance the issue was 
referred to National Statistical Commission (NSC). The Commission has 
informed that  it has been decided to constitute a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of one of its Members to examine the issue of institutional 
arrangements for collection of prices, compilation and dissemination of 
Wholesale and Consumer Price Indices and integration of data collection 
machinery. The Committee has started its functioning . 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.15 of the Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9)     
 As touched upon in the earlier section of this report, significant budgetary 
allocation made for the World Bank aided India Statistical Strengthening Project 
(ISSP) which were to the extent of Rs.30.00 crore in 2008 -09 and Rs.100.00 
crore in 2009 -10 remained unutilized.  As per the submission now made to the 
Committee, the process of obtaining all mandatory approved for implementing 
the project for which an allocation of Rs.100.00 crore has been earmarked (for 
2010-11) is expected to be completed soon and the project laun ched in the near 
future. The Committee can not help noting here that the project, which is aimed 
at strengthening the statistical system of the Country as a whole has been 
languishing for the last eight years. Having a rigorous and reliable statistical 
system, which would aid in framing the policy direction being an imminent 
necessity, the Committee expect that, as assured by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation, the project is taken up for 
implementation in right earnest. Offi cial Statistical System needs revamping from 
time to time in order to ensure timely collection and dissemination of reliable and 
credible statistical for policy formulation and planning – both at National level and 
State level. The system has to be reviewe d and redefined according to the data 
needs of the country as a whole by usage of latest methods and modern 
technology. The Committee, therefore, expect that the project would be focused 
on building a strong statistical system with adequate and trained man power in 
each Ministry/Department for maintaining and disseminating credible and reliable 
statistics.  The Committee expect to be apprised of the Ministry‟s plan of action 
and progress in implementing the India Statistical Strengthening Project. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Plan Scheme India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) could not 
be taken for implementation in 2008 -09 and 2009-2010 due to procedural delays 
which came in the way of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
approval of t he Scheme.  After getting the ISSP appraised by the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) and obtaining the required approval of the Full 
Planning Commission for the project, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI) obtained the approval of the CCEA on 19th March, 2010 

 23 
for the implementation of the ISSP as a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme, with a 
total budget of Rs. 650.53 crores of which, 80% would be funded through a 
World Bank Loan and 20% would be borne by the Government of India. 
 
 The ISSP has been formulated by the Government of India primarily with a 
view to supporting the State Statistical Systems and the reforms there under.  
The four main envisaged policy areas of the reforms are the following:- 
 
 (a) Strengthening the institutions of leadership and coordination of the  
  national statistical system; 
(b) Improving and increasing the support provided by the Government 
of India to the statistical systems of the States/UTs; 
(c) Strengthening the capacity and performance of the sta tistical 
systems in States/UTs; and 
(d) Improving the coverage, quality, timeliness and credibility of the 
statistics generated by the States/UTs.    
  
As regards the Ministry‟s action plan for implementing the project, it is to 
be mentioned that the works  of preparation of State Strategic Statistical Plans 
(SSSPs) and signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the 
Government of India and the participating 24 States/UTs, on a case -specific 
basis and release of funds thereon will be intensively tak en-up during 2010 -11 
and continued, if necessary, during the following year.  The various institutional 
mechanisms which have been designed and created under the project, such as 
the following, are proposed to be effectively utilized in facilitating the 
achievement of the objectives and goals of the project:- 
 
(a) Steering Committee for ISSP at the Government of India level 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MOSPI; 
(b) The High level Steering Committee for the ISSP at the State/UT 
level, under the Chairmanship of the concerned Chief 
Secretary/Administrator; 
 (c) Project Support Group (PSG) for ISSP set up in MOSPI; and 
 (d)  Project Management Teams for the ISSP at the State/UT level. 
 (e) Dy. Director Generals (DDGs) of Zonal/Regional offices of  
NSSO(FOD)  incharge of State/UT level coordination are also given 
the responsibility to guide the States/UTs in preparation of their 
SSSP. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10) 
 
The Committee feel constrained to note that presently there are about 140 
vacancies in the Indian Statistical Service (ISS) and 1300 vacancies in the 
Subordinate statistical Service (SSS) which comes to nearly 30% of the existing 
posts.  Shortage of manpower  has been stated to be adversely affecting the 
functioning of many programmes and schemes of the Ministry including the 
functioning of the National Academy of Statistical Administration.  The Secretary, 
MOSPI has attributed the problem to the fairly high a ttrition for resolving which 

 24 
the Ministry of Finance has been approached for getting the grade pay of certain 
posts revised.  The Committee had in their 4 th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) of the Ministry, inter -alia recommended that for overcoming the 
problem of shortage of manpower, the desirability of appropriately revising the 
methods and conditions of recruitment need to be taken up with Department of 
Personnel and Training(DOPT) and the policy of engaging qualified and trained 
investigators on contract basis pursued.  The Committee understand that the 
proposal for revising the recruitment rules is under process. The Committee 
expect the Ministry to pursue the matter relating to amendment of recruitment 
rules without compromising the standards wi th the DPOT and the concerned 
cadre controlling authority. Simultaneously, the Staff Selection Commission 
should be impressed on the need for making for making adequate efforts for 
filling up the vacant posts by direct recruitment without any delay.  The 
Committee recommend that the matter relating to the revision of grade pay for 
certain posts should be actively pursued with the Ministry of finance for an early 
decision so as to enable in overcoming the problem of high attrition. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
With respect to shortage of manpower, it is stated that vacancy in ISS are 
mainly in promotional grades and suitable action is taken to consider promotions 
in accordance with provisions contained in recruitment rules. 
 
So far as shortage of manpower in SSS is concerned, it is stated that 
appointment procedure for 441 candidates against 2008 Examination is in 
progress and it is expected that these candidates will be joining by the end of 
August 2010.  SSC did not conduct examination for 2009 and, howev er, 2010 
exam. is in progress against which, 350 confirmed vacancies have been 
communicated.  With regard to revision of grade pay from Rs. 4200 to Rs.4600 
and Rs.4600 to Rs.4800 in respect of Statistical Investigators of Grade II and 
Grade I respectively, M/o. Finance (Department of Expenditure) was approached 
but  vide their note UO No.41(1) -E-III CB/2010 dated 26.5.2010 proposal has 
again been turned down.  Hence it is apprehended that number of candidates 
joining the Service may be low and rate of high attrition may continue.  Keeping 
in view, functional requirements of the organization, posts falling vacant in S.I 
grade I upto 31.3.2010,  have been filled -up on adhoc basis and adequate 
number of contract Investigators have been engaged by NSSO(FOD) agai nst 
vacant posts of S.I Grade II.  Thus shortage of manpower in NSSO(FOD) have 
been taken care on short term basis. In order to address long term solution to 
manpower shortage, provision for appointment on deputation, along with 
appointment on contractual basis, in exceptional circumstances, have been 
incorporated in the revised Recruitment Rules of SSS and DOPT has been 
requested to approve the RRs on priority.  The contract Investigators who have 
been engaged by NSSO(FOD) on regional basis are being impar ted training, 
related to their assignments by concerned field units. With effect from  2010 
onwards, SSC has included recruitment of Statistical Investigators in Combined 
Level Graduate Exam. and hence it will be able to provide candidates on yearly 
basis. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 

 25 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.18 of the Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11) 
Considering the importance of statistics in the various areas, the  
Committee are of the view that the subject of statistics can be made a part of the 
curriculum of other subjects offered by the Universities.  The Committee also 
desire that the feasibility of recruiting people from different streams at the initial 
level o f appointment - which has also been agreed to be appropriate by the 
Secretary - be considered, with the incumbents imparted necessary training for 
meeting the requirements of the assigned jobs.  The Committee also emphasise 
on evolving a mechanism for havi ng training programmes in campuses and 
institutes across the country so that people even from remote corners where 
unemployment is rampant secure jobs. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
It has been decided to refer this issue to the National Statistical 
Commission for taking up with University Grants Commission. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.12) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that during the period April -
December, 2009, performance of most of the infrastructure sectors have lagged 
behind their targets.   Keeping in view the importance of the infrastructure sectors 
in the overall growth and development of the country, the Committee desire  that 
the reasons for inabil ity to achieve the set targets should be properly examined 
and analysed to impress upon the  concerned departments for taking appropriate 
remedial measures for meeting the targets and improving the growth rate.  The 
Committee desire that the monitoring mec hanism of the Ministry should be made 
more effective particularly in regard to enabling in addressing problems relating 
to land acquisition, constraints in the infrastructural linkages etc. 
 
Action Taken by the Government 
     The infrastructure performanc e has been examined with respect to the 
information available for the period April, 2009 to March, 2010. Shortfall against 
target has been observed in 6 sectors pertaining to power generation, production 
of crude oil in Natural Gas, construction of roads b y National Highway Authority 
of India, Railway Revenue Earnings Goods Traffic, cargo handled at major ports 
and net addition to switching capacity in Telecommunication. The concerned 
Ministries are being requested to provide the reasons for shortfalls, act ion taken 
by them to improve performance, details of constraints in infrastructure linkages 
and action to resolve them as per the Annexure-I.  
 
 

 26 
A Committee has also been constituted under the Chairmanship of  
Addl.Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Pro gramme Implementation to examine 
the recurring problems of time and cost overruns in  projects and the monitoring 
mechanism for in`frastructure  performance.  
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13) 
 
The Committee are distressed to note that out of 937 projects costing Rs. 
20 crore and above on the monitor of the MOSPI, as on 30th September, 2009, 
308 projects have cost overrun, 486 have time overrun with respect to their 
original approved cost and time frame, and 137 projects have experienced both 
time as well as cost overruns.  The reasons given by the Ministry in this regard 
which include delays in award of contract, supply of equipment, completion of 
works by contractors, a cquisition of land, change in scope and inadequate 
infrastructure could have been resolved by taking suitable measures and 
coordination and proper planning of the projects at the conceptual stage itself   
and effective monitoring for resolving the bottlene cks during implementation. In 
their 4th Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Ministry, the Committee 
had recommended that corrective steps should be taken for addressing issues 
contributing to delays and cost escalation in implementing projects an d also 
action taken against those held responsible for the lapses.  Evidently, the 
Ministry has been lagging on the issue. Keeping in view the magnitude and 
persisting problem of time and cost overruns over the years despite various 
measures stated to have  been taken by the Ministry, as also admitted by the 
Secretary, MOSPI, the Committee are of the view that it is imperative to address 
the inherent deficiencies relating to project formulation, functioning of 
Empowered Committees and ensuring accountability .   The Committee expect 
that the deficiencies in the system should be identified and rectified in 
coordination with the administrative ministries concerned for bringing qualitative 
systematic improvements in various areas of project formulation, planning,  
implementation and monitoring.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
outcome in this regard.   
Action Taken by the Government 
In pursuance to the observations of the Standing Finance Committee on 
the issue of the time and cost overruns as a follow u p, a Committee has been 
constituted in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary to examine in details the recurring 
problems of time and cost overruns in projects and other observations made by 
the Committee. The Committee would submit a report after its detailed 
deliberations.  
  
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.21 of the Chapter I) 

 27 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N I L 

 28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.4) 
 
The Committee further note that in pursuance of their earlier recommendation to 
accord statutory status to National Statistical Commission, the Ministry had informed 
vide their reply dated 26 July, 2007 that the matter is bein g submitted for Cabinet 
approval.  However, even after the lapse of about three years, no progress has been 
made.  The Committee reiterate that conferring statutory status would enable the 
National Statistical Commission to function in an independent manner for strengthening 
the statistical system in the country. The Committee also desire that vigorous efforts 
are made to ensure proper interaction and coordination in statistical matters between 
the various Ministries and agencies of the Government. 
       
Action Taken by the Government 
    The issue of conferring statutory status to the National Statistical Commission is 
under the examination of the Commission. Interaction and coordination in statistical 
matters between the various Ministries and agencies of  the Government at the Centre 
and in the States is an ongoing process, which is reviewed every year in the 
Conference of Central and State Statistical Organisations. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation O. M.No.G-20017/1/201-B&F/dt.20.7.2010] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.12 of the Chapter I) 

 29 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
N I L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi :                YASHWANT SINHA  
 08 December, 2010                     Chairman  
17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Finance 
 

 30 
 
Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 8th December, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3.  Shri C.M. Chang 
4.  Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
5.  Shru Gurudas Dasgupta 
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
10. Shri Manicka Tagore 
11. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Raashid Alvi 
13.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14.  Shri Moinul Hassan 
15.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
16.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
17.  Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh       - Joint Secretary 
 2.  Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar              - Additional Director 
 3.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
    2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption :-  
 
(i)  Draft Repor t on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Financial Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment); 

 31 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue); 
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the r ecommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning; 
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Dem ands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.   
 
3.    The Committee adopted the draft reports with minor modifications.  The 
Committee also authorized the Chairman to present all the Reports to Parliament in 
the current session.     
 
 
      The Committee adjourned at 1550 hours. 
 
 