pg. 1 
 
65 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
  
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of  Financial Services)  
 
 
 
 
THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)


pg. 2 
 
 
   SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services)  
 
 
THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon‟ble Speaker on 16 February, 2013 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  5 March, 2013 
Laid in the Rajya Sabha on  5 March, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)


pg. 3 
 
CONTENTS 
                                         Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............….………………………..                  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION .................................…………………….…………………                (iv) 
Report  
   
I Background 1 
 A.  Amendment of NHB Act in 2000 3 
 B. Changes proposed in the Bill 3 
 C. Concurrent powers of supervision  5 
 D. Housing Sector scenario in the country 6 
II 
 
IIA 
Clause 4 – Amendment of Section 4 -Authorised capital 
 
Clause 5 – Insertion of new Sections 4A & 4B – Transfer of Capital 
to Central Government & Payment amount 
 
13 
 
14 
III Clause 6 – Amendment of sub -section (1) (d) of Section 6 – issue 
pertaining to Board of Directors 
 
 
15 
IV Clause 12 –Amendment of Section 29A sub -section (2) – 
Requirement of registration and net owned fund 
 
17 
V Clause 38 - Amendment of Section 51 – Cognizance of offences 19 
  
APPENDICES 
 
I.     Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 9th November, 2012  
       and 11 January, 2013                
  
II.    The National Housing Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2012     

pg. 4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2012-13) 
 
  
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay* 
6.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
7.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
10.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
12.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
13.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
14.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
15.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
16.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
17.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -   Additional Director 
3. Shri Sanjay Sethi   -    Under Secretary 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member of the Standing Committee on Finance w.e.f  13th December, 2012 

pg. 5 
 
   
INTRODUCTION   
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by the 
Committee, present this Sixty -fifth Report on the National Housing Bank  (Amendment) Bill, 
2012. 
2. The National Housing Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2012  introduced in Lok Sabha on            
30 April, 2012, was referred to the Comm ittee on 16 May, 2012 for examination and report 
thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in the 
aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
4.   Written views/memoranda were received from Reserve Bank of India (RBI),                        
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), Value & Budget Housing Corporation Pvt. Ltd. and 
Shri P.P. Vora, Former CMD, National Housing Bank & Former Chairman, IDBI. 
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 9 November, 2012 took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) and National 
Housing Bank (NHB).   
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 11 January, 2013 considered and adopted the 
draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the same and present it to the            
Hon‘ble Speaker/Parliament. 
7. The Committee wish to  express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) and the National Housing Bank (NHB) for appearing before 
the Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information which were desired in 
connection with the examination of the Bill.      
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to Reserve Bank of India (RBI),                
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC), Value & Budget Housing Corporation Pvt. Ltd. and 
Shri P.P. Vora, Former C MD, National Housing Bank & Former Chairman, IDBI for placing 
before them their considered views on the Bill in the form of memoranda. 
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
New Delhi;                        YASHWANT SINHA 
23  January, 2013                                                 Chairman, 
03  Magha, 1934 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on Finance  
 

pg. 6 
 
REPORT 
I.  BACKGROUND 
  The National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (the NHB Act) was enacted in 
December,1987 to establish the National Housing Bank to operate as a principal 
agency to promote housing finance institutions both at local and regional levels and 
to provide financial and other support to such institutions. The NHB Act was last 
amended in 2000 to enable the Central Government to increase the authorised 
capital of the Bank in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India up to two 
thousand crore rupees and issue the increased authorised capital to the Reserve 
Bank, the Central Government, scheduled banks, public financial institutions, 
housing finance institutions or such other institutions as may be approved by the 
Central Government in such manner that the insti tutions owned and controlled by 
the Central Government shall hold in aggregate at any time not less than fifty per 
cent. of the issued capital of the National Housing Bank. 
 2. The issued capital of the Bank as on date is four hundred fifty crore 
rupees an d is fully subscribed by the Reserve Bank. In order to enable the 
Reserve Bank to focus on its regulatory and supervisory functions and to 
avoid conflict of ownership and regulatory role , it is proposed to transfer the 
shareholding of the Reserve Bank in t he National Housing Bank to the Central 
Government. It is also proposed to provide for transfer of surplus by the National 
Housing Bank to the Central Government in place of the Reserve Bank consequent 
upon the transfer of ownership. Further, it is propose d to confer power upon the 
Central Government to increase the authorised capital of the National Housing 
Bank to such amount, as may be specified by notification, from time to time. It 
raises resources through issue of bonds and debentures , term loans from  LIC, 
banks, deposits from public etc. NHB has also been allowed in the past to issue 
capital gain bonds.  It also gets allocation from the Government for its Rural 
Housing Fund.   
 
 3. The NHB Act contained provisions about the establishment of NHB, its 
management by a Board of Directors, its business which included promotion of 
housing finance companies, extension of financial and other support for housing 
activities to such companies and banks, borrowing in rupee and foreign currency in 

pg. 7 
 
domestic and fore ign markets, regulation and supervision of housing finance 
companies, its accounts and audit etc. NHB helps central and State Governments 
in formulation of policies related to housing and also helps in implementation of 
such policies.  NHB is mainly engage d in refinancing the housing loans granted by 
housing finance companies, banks, Regional Rural Banks, Urban Co -operative 
Banks etc. NHB is also regulator and supervisor of housing finance companies and 
presently regulating and supervising the activities of  57 housing finance companies 
in the country .  To ensure uniform control over non -banking financial 
companies including housing finance companies, the registration and 
regulation related powers over housing finance companies are proposed to 
be transferred to the Reserve Bank. The National Housing Bank will 
henceforth concentrate on supervision and financing of such institutions. 
 4.  The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (the said Act), was enacted to provide 
for recovery of the dues of the scheduled banks, public financial institutions and 
other notified financial institutions. The Central Government has notified number of 
housing finance institutions which are companies registered under the  NHB Act as 
financial institutions under the said Act. It is proposed to amend the said Act as to 
make a provision to cover all the housing finance institutions which are companies 
registered under the NHB Act for the purposes of the said Act to provide th em level 
playing field. 
 5. NHB  has its head office at New Delhi.  NHB also has one Regional 
Office at Mumbai and 8 other Representative offices at various places in the 
country. 
  
6. In the light of the experience gained in the operations of the National  Housing 
Bank, it is felt necessary to make certain amendment in the NHB Act for the smooth 
working of the  National Housing Bank and to authorise it to undertake certain other 
business of financing non -banking financial companies for their housing activit ies, 
for securitisation of loans and advances and to promote mortgage guarantee 
companies, credit information companies, etc. 

pg. 8 
 
 
A. AMENDMENT OF NHB ACT IN 2000 
  
7.  The NHB Act was last amended in 2000, inter alia, to enable the Central 
Government to increase NHB‘s authorized capital to Rs. 2000 crore, to enable it to 
promote securitization in the country for making resources available to the housing 
sector, to strengthen its regulatory and supervisory role over housing finance 
companies by making registratio n of such companies compulsory with NHB and 
conferring powers of imposition of fine, winding up etc. on the lines of powers 
vested in RBI over NBFCs.  NHB Act was also amended to confer powers on HFCs 
to enforce security interest without intervention of the Courts. 
 
B. CHANGES PROPOSED IN THE BILL 
 
8.  The National Housing Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2012 inter alia, provides for— 
(a) insertion of new sections 4A and 4B in the NHB Act to enable the transfer of the 
issued capital subscribed by the Reserve Bank to the Central Government as 
mentioned in paragraph 2 above and payment by the Central Government to the 
Reserve Bank an amount equal to the face value of the said subscribed capital;  
(b) amendment of section 6 of the NHB Act for the purpose of nomination of one 
director by the Reserve Bank instead of two directors and to dispense with the 
requirement of consultation with the Res erve Bank in appointment of the directors 
other than the Chairman and the Managing Director; 
(c) amendment of section 14 of the NHB Act, to insert the expression "nonbanking 
financial companies" in clause (b) thereof so as to extend refinancing facilities to 
these companies; define the expression "housing activities" and in clause (f) insert 
the expressions "including mortgage guarantee companies, securitisation 
companies, reconstruction companies and credit information companies" so as to 
enable the National Housing Bank to do business in relation to such companies; 
(d) conferring of powers relating to registration, maintenance of certain percentage 
of assets in liquid assets, creation of a reserve fund, regulate or prohibit issue of 
prospectus or advertisement, to determine policy and issue direction under sections 
29A, 29B, 29C, 30 and 30A of the NHB Act upon the Reserve Bank in place of the 
National Housing Bank; 

pg. 9 
 
(e) conferring of powers, relating to, power and duties of auditors of housing finance 
companies, to prohibit acceptance of deposit and alienation of assets, inspection of 
housing finance companies and impose penalties under sections 33, 33A, 34 and 
52A of the NHB Act, upon the Reserve Bank in addition to the National Housing 
Bank; 
(f) confer powe rs upon the Company Law Board constituted under section 10E of 
the Companies Act, 1956 to direct housing finance institution to make repayment of 
such deposit or part thereof forthwith or within such time and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in the order; 
(g) omission of Chapter VA relating to recovery of dues of the approved institutions 
consequent upon the proposed amendments in the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; 
(h) to e nable the Board of the National Housing Bank to cause the books and 
accounts of the National Housing Bank to be balanced and closed as on the thirty -
first day of March of each year in place of thirtieth day of June of each year; 
(i) insertion of new sub -clause (iiia) in clause (m) of sub -section (1) of section 2 of 
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of 
Security Interest Act, 2002 so as to extend the provisions of the said Act to any 
housing finance institution which is a company and is registered under the NHB Act. 
 To sum up, once the Bill is enacted: 
 The paid up capital of NHB of Rs. 450 crores will be transferred from RBI 
to the Central Government at book value. 
 The power of registration and regulation of housing fin ance companies 
presently vesting in NHB will stand transferred to RBI.  NHB will continue 
to supervise the housing finance companies. 
 The Company Law Board will have the powers to order repayment of 
deposits by a housing finance company in case of failure of a housing 
finance company to do so. 
 NHB will be able to close its books of accounts as on 31 st March each 
year instead of closing twice in a year i.e. on 31st March and 30th June. 
 All companies registered under NHB Act will get covered under 
SARFAESI Act, instead of notification of such companies on case to 
case basis by the Central Government. 
 NHB will be able to refinance housing loan portfolio of NBFCs and also 
promote mortgage guarantee companies, securitization companies etc. 
 
C.  CONCURRENT POWERS OF SUPERVISION 
 

pg. 10 
 
9. The supervision of HFCs is proposed to be continued with NHB with enabling 
powers of such supervision with RBI.  
 
Amendments proposed to give effect to the above are : 
 
Appropriation of reserve funds by HFCs to be reported to NHB as well as RBI 
{Clause 14 of the Bill}. 
 Prohibit acceptance of deposits by HFCs if it fails to comply with the direction 
given by RBI. {Clause 17 of the Bill} ;Statements, information or particulars 
required to be furnished under Sec.31 by HFCs shall be submitted to both NHB 
as well as RBI (Clause 17 of the Bill). 
 Order special audit of HFCs in certain circumstances. {Clause 19 of the Bill}; 
Obligation on the auditors of HFCs to enquire from such companies whether 
they have furnished the required information under Chapter V to the Reserve 
Bank in addition to the National Housing Bank and if not, also to report the same 
to both.{Clause 19 of the Bill 
 Prohibit acceptance of deposits by HFCs if it fails to comply with any order given 
or provisions of Chapter V. {Clause 20 of the Bill} 
 File application for winding up of HFC. {Clause 21 of the Bill} 
 Inspect all HFCs irrespective of companies accepting public deposits. {Clause 
22 of the Bill}. 
 
D.  HOUSING SECTOR SCENARIO IN THE COUNTRY 
 
10. Brief profile of housing scenario in the country as furnished to the Committee by 
the Ministry of Finance( Department of Financial Services) is stated as under: 
― The Total Urban Housing shortage is estimated at   18.78 million units in 
urban areas (M/HUPA, GoI, Report of the Techni cal Group,12th Five Year 

pg. 11 
 
Plan ) of which 95.6% of the urban housing shortage exists in EWS / LIG 
segments (Low Cost Housing). Majority of the housing requirements are 
expected to be with the low income households. To mitigate the housing 
problems in urban areas during the 11 th Plan Period, the investment 
requirements were estimated as 
  4 lakh crore which is likely to go upto 
 6 lakh crores during 2012-17.  
As per draft report of the Working Group on Rural Housing for the 12 th 
Five Year Plan (2012 -17), housing requi rements for BPL families in rural 
areas is estimated to be 43.93 million units which is about 90% of the total 
housing requirement in rural areas. To meet this requirement, an 
estimated funds requirement of 
  2.70 lakh crore is projected. 
Thus, to meet the housing requirements of poor, EWS/LIG segments 
both in rural and urban areas, a total investment of about 
  8-9 lakh crores 
will be required during the 12th FYP period i.e. 2012-17.‖ 
11. On housing finance scenario in the country, the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Financial Services)  furnished to the Committee as stated as under: 
― On an average, the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and Housing Finance 
Companies (HFCs) are disbursing housing loans of Rs.1.20 lakh crores per 
annum. Of the total loan disbursements, the loans in the loan size category 
upto Rs. 5 lakh constitute about 17% i.e. about Rs.20,000 crore per annum 
while loans upto Rs. 10 lakh constitute about 31% of the total yearly 
disbursements i.e. about Rs. 40,000 crores. This indicates that during the 
5 years‟ period i. e. 2007 -12, a total of about Rs. 2,00,000 crores has 
been the flow of credit from PSBs and HFCs to low income segments 
availing loan upto Rs. 10 lakhs. In case of loans upto Rs. 5 lakh, the 
total flow of credit is estimated as Rs. 1,00,000 crore during 200 7-12. 
Thus there is gap of about Rs. 2,00,000 crore for low income housing 
for EWS/LIG/median income.”  
  
12. While deposing before the Committee, the Chairman and Managing Director of 
NHB made the following oral submission as stated under: 
―As far as NHB is concerned, it was set up by an Act of 
Parliament in 1988, and today we are performing three broad functions. 
One is regulation / supervision; second is financing activities; and thirdly, 
promotional activities. 
As a result of our regulatory and supervisory roles, the number of 
housing finance companies in the country has gone up from three -- at 
the time when the NHB was set up -- to a total of 57 housing finance 
companies in the country now. 
The housing finance system in the country is broadly b eing 
served by two broad categories of institutions. One is commercial 
banks, and the second is specialised housing finance institutions , 

pg. 12 
 
and we have seen a growth in the retail housing finance scheme over 
the years averaging around 20 per cent. The compos ition of the market 
in terms of the market share is 70 per cent, which is occupied by the 
commercial banks and about 30 per cent is housing finance 
companies.‖ 
  
 13.      He added: 
 ―The NPAs in the retail housing finance sector for the housing finance 
companies today is only 0.48 per cent, as on 31 st March, 2012 and it 
was 0.53 per cent last year . The overall depth in the market has 
improved both for the housing finance companies and the commercial 
banks.‖ 
   
 
 
14.       He further submitted before the Committee that: 
 ―…there have been interest subvention scheme  of the Government 
of India, which is for the middle income category borrowers . There 
has been interest subsidy scheme for housing the urban poor, which is 
also in operation today, and we see goo d amount of interest from the 
lending institutions to a large number of EWS and LIG borrowers. 
These risk mitigants, which have been introduced through more 
innovative products.‖ 
 
15. In reply to a query on the benefits for NHB from the proposed 
amendments in the Bill, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) furnished the following as stated under: 
 
―There are certain amendments which relate to functioning of NHB which 
include new definition of housing finance institutions, definition of 
housing activities, inclusion of NBFCs for extending refinance 
assistance, power to collect information from institutions for preparation 
of report on trend and progress in housing in the country, change in 
accounting year to coincide with financial year t o avoid preparation of 
two balance sheet in a year 

pg. 13 
 
….. After the amendment, registration and regulations related 
activities will be transferred to RBI. Supervision will continue with 
NHB. However, other functions viz, finance and promotion will 
continue to be with NHB and will be further enlarged. “ 
 
16. In reply to a specific query whether NHB would be able to supervise 57 HFCs 
with staff strength of only 95, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) furnished the following as stated under: 
―From its inception, NHB is a very lean officer oriented organization. The 
small complement of staff has been very effectively and efficiently 
utilised for all functions of the NHB. NHB hitherto has been able to 
register, regulate and supervise these 57 companies with the said 
strength and robust IT support systems. It may be mentioned that its 
other function is primarily refinance. The Bank has developed an 
elaborate IT enabled monitoring mechanism through submission of 
various returns by the HFCs. The staffs are also trained in analysis of 
the returns submitted by the regulated entities. Thus the Bank has been 
able to discharge its regulatory and supervisory functions quite 
effectively, despite the growth in the number of HFCs registered with 
NHB.‖ 
  
17. Regarding the capacity NHB has built -up to regulate housing finance market in 
the country, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) made the  
following written submission as stated under: 
 ―NHB is regulating and supervising HFCs for the last 25 years. During 
this period, the number of HFCs has increased from 3 to 57. The total 
lending by such institution is now about Rs. 3,25,000 crore. During this 
period NHB has issued various guidelines and directions and put in 
place legal framework for registration and regulation of such companies. 
Over the last 25 years, NHB has developed in -house expertise to 
monitor the operations o f HFCs and have got trained staff. The NHB 
undertakes its supervisory roles through its on -site Inspections 
and off-site surveillance and monitoring  through regular submission 
of Returns and statements by the HFCs. There are also regular 
Meetings held with  the HFCs at various levels, and their CEOs for 
assessment of the developments in the market and the health of the 
Companies.‖ 
 
18. On the rate of interest charged by refinanced institutions from the ultimate 
borrowers it was submitted as below: 
 ―On-lending rate of interest is determined by PLIs based on their own 
cost of fund and market interest rate structure.  However, with regard to 
refinance under Rural Housing Fund NHB has instructed PLIs to keep 

pg. 14 
 
the interest rate low as compared to normal lending ra te to allow benefit 
of lower cost fund to ultimate beneficiary.   NHB keeps track on on -
lending rate of PLIs under RHF.‖  
19. The total amount of refinance disbursed by NHB annually in the last 5 years is 
shown as below: 
2011-12 
  14389 cr 
2010-11 
  11722 cr 
2009-10 
  8108 cr 
2008-09 
  10854 cr. 
2007-08 
  8587 cr. 
 
20. The Committee understand that the National Housing Bank (NHB) is 
mandated with business which includes promotion of housing finan ce 
companies, extension of financial and other support for housing activities to 
such companies and banks, borrowing in rupee and foreign currency in 
domestic and foreign markets, regulation and supervision of housing finance 
companies, etc. NHB, which hit herto, has been entrusted with the dual roles of 
regulation and supervision of 57 housing finance companies in the country, also 
helps Central and State Governments in formulation of policies related to 
housing and the implementation of such policies.  NHB  is refinancing the 
housing loans granted by housing finance companies, banks, Regional Rural 
Banks, Urban Co -operative Banks etc. The Committee are of the view that the 
Bill, proposing to transfer the registration and regulation of housing finance 
companies from NHB to RBI, is an expedient move, which would enable the NHB 
to give undivided attention to supervision of housing finance companies and 
ensuring better credit flow to the housing sector in the country. With their 
experience in the housing and home  loan sector, the Committee would expect 

pg. 15 
 
that with enactment of this Bill, NHB will be well placed to bring about qualitative 
progress while addressing the acute shortage of housing in the country, 
particularly keeping in view the increasing migration to urban areas.  
21 .  The Committee note  that during 2007 -12 a total  of about Rs. 2,00,000 
crore has been disbursed by Public Sector Banks and Housing Finance 
Companies to low income segments availing loan upto Rs. 10 lakh; and about 
Rs. 1,00,000 crore for those availing loan upto Rs.5  lakh.  The Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) has stated that there was a gap of 
about Rs. 2,00,000 crore for low income housing for   EWS/LIG/Medium Income 
Group and that the projected requirements for 20 12-17 period is estimated to be 
Rs. 6 lakh crore.  In this regard,  the Committee expect Government to make 
efforts to mobilise resources to meet the requirement for housing credit in the 
current plan period i.e. 2012 -17.   The Committee further desire the  Government 
to give special focus and attention to the lower income group/economically 
weaker sections of the society by way of putting in place a mechanism to 
stipulate specific percentage of lending by HFCs to lower income 
group/economically weaker secti ons of the society on the lines similar to the 
stipulations made for agriculture lending or priority sector lending by PSBs. The 
Committee also desire that the NHB must implement the Government housing 
schemes with greater commitment, especially where inte rest subventions are 
attached with the schemes and ensure that the intended beneficiaries are fully 
covered. 
22. The Committee note that after the enactment of the Bill, as stated by the 
Ministry of Finance,  „supervision will continue with NHB.  …… other functions 
viz. finance and promotion will  also continue to be with NHB and will be further 

pg. 16 
 
enlarged.‟   In view of its mandate to promote housing finance institutions both 
at local and regional levels and to reach out to all regions of the country 
equitably and to carry out on-site inspection/surveillance etc., the Committee are 
of the view that NHB, with small comp liment of Staff of 95 in all, with one 
registered Office at Mumbai and mere 8 representative Offices at various places 
in the country needs to be expanded.  The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend that NHB   be strengthened to build up its capacity – both manpower 
as well as technological – so that it can fulfill its mandate and perform its 
assigned role of promoting housing finance activities  more effectively and 
fruitfully. 
 
23. The Committee find it pertinent to point out that a number of Clauses in 
the Bill viz., Clauses 14, 17, 19, 20, etc. propose to give concurrent powers of 
supervision to both NHB and RBI on the issues such as reporting of 
appropriation of reserve funds by Housing Finance Companies (HFCs), power to 
collect information from housing  finance institutions as to deposits and give 
directions, furnishing of statements on deposits received by housing finance 
institutions to both NHB and RBI, prohibiting acceptance of deposits by HFCs if 
they fail to comply with the directions given by NHB/ RBI etc.   The Committee 
perceive such mandate would mean parallel regulations or duplication of work 
for housing finance institutions.  The Committee would recommend  the 
Government to rephrase these clauses appropriately, so that HFCs are  not 
subjected to unnecessary dual or parallel supervision.  

pg. 17 
 
24. The Committee note that there is no definite mechanism available for  
regulating interest rates on home loans. In this regard, the Committee desire that 
a proper system be put in place to enable NHB/Governm ent to fix a ceiling on 
interest rates chargeable by HFCs and other institutions lending for housing and 
related activities. 
II.  Clause 4 -  Amendment of Section 4 - Authorised Capital 
25. This clause seeks to amend Section 4 of the Act relating to capita l of the 
National Housing Bank. Under the existing provision, the Central Government in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank is authorised to increase the authorised capital of 
the National Housing Bank up to two thousand crores rupees. It is proposed to 
substitute proviso to subsection ( 1) of section 4 of the Act to provide that the Central 
Government may, by notification, increase the authorised capital to such amount as 
may be specified in the notification, from time to time. 
 
26. Section 4 sub-section (1), the proviso of the principal Act reads as: 
 ―Provided that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, by notification, increase the authorized capital up to two thousand crores 
of rupees.‖ 
 
27. Clause 4 of the Bill proposes the following changes as stated below: 
 ―In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for the proviso, 
the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:— 
―Provided that the Central Government may , by notification, increase 
the authorised capital to s uch amount as may be specified in the 
notification, from time to time.‖‖ 
 
28. A written view/suggestion furnished to the Committee has observed as stated 
under: 
 ―The equity ownership is now being shifted from RBI to Government of 
India (Ministry of Finance). While the authorised capital is Rs. 2000 
crores, the paid up capital has been Rs.450 crores. With the massive 
housing needs for ―Refinancing‖ and ―Direct Lending‖, the NHB‘s net 
owned funds have to be expanded, so that the borrowing (10 times of 
NOF) can be increased. The authorised capital should be doubled and 
increased to Rs.3500 to Rs.4000 crores and paid up capital to Rs.1000 – 
Rs.1500 crores.‖ 
 

pg. 18 
 
 
 
 
29. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) furnished the 
following comments on the above observation as stated under: 
―The proposed amendment removes the cap on the authorized capital 
and enables the Central Government to issue notification to increase 
the authorize capital depending upon the requirement. Hence, the 
suggestion has been taken care of in the proposed amendment (Clause 
4 of the Bill).‖    
 
30. The Committee feel that this amendment to remove the cap on the 
authorized capital will enable NHB  to meet the massive fund requirements for 
both direct lending and refinancin g  for housing and related activities as 
specified in the Bill . With this enabling provision, the Committee look forward to 
seeing NHB effectively addressing the housing shortage of the country in the 
near future. 
 
IIA Clause 5 – Insertion of  new Sections 4A and 4B  - Transfer of Capital to 
Central Government & Payment Amount 
 
30A. The Bill, in clause 5, proposes to insert new sections after section 4 of the 
principal Act i.e. insertion of  new section 4A relating to tr ansfer of capital to 
Central Government and a new section 4B relating to payment of amount to the 
Reserve Bank. Clause 5 the Bill reads as the following: 
 
―4A. The issued capital of the National Housing Bank, which has been 
subscribed by the Reserve Bank as on the date immediately preceding 
the commencement of section 5 of the National Housing Bank 
(Amendment) Act, 2012, shall , on such commencement, stand 
transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government. 
4B. The Reserve Bank shall be given by the Centra l Government, in 
cash, for the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the 
issued capital of the National Housing Bank which has been subscribed 
by the Reserve Bank, an amount equal to the face value of the said 
subscribed capital.‖. 
 
30B  The Committee understand that transferring an amount equal to the “face 
value” of subscribed capital from RBI in NHB to the Central Government will not 

pg. 19 
 
include transferring of other surplus and resources of NHB.  However if the said 
transfer is done on the “book value” of NHB, it will mean transferring of the 
capital as well as the other resources or surplus of the NHB to the Central 
Government. In this regard, the Committee, therefore, suggest that in Section 4B 
of Clause  5, the words  “face value”  be sub stituted with the words  “book 
value”.   
 
III. Clause 6 – Amendment of sub-section (1) (d) of Section 6  
– issue pertaining to Board of Directors 
31. This Clause seeks to amend Section 6 of the Act relating to composition of 
Board of Directors. 
Section 6  sub-section (1) (d) of  the principal Act reads as under 
 ―The Board of Directors of National Housing Bank shall consist of the 
following, namely:- 
 (d) two directors out of the directors of  the Reserve Bank;‖ 
 
32. The NHB (Amendment) Bill, 2012  proposes the following amendment in  
Section 6 sub-section (1) (d): 
― in sub-section (1), for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
―(d) one director to be nominated by the Reserve Bank;‖; 
 
Clause 7 – Amendment of sub-section (5), in the proviso, of Section 7 of the principal Act  
  
33. This Clause seeks to amend Section 7 of the Act relating to terms and 
conditions of appointment of Chairman and Managing Director and other Directors. 
 
. Section 7 sub-section (5), in the proviso, of the principal Act  reads as: 
  
―The directors shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be 
prescribed for attending  the meetings of the Board or of any of its 

pg. 20 
 
committees and for attending  to any other work of  the National Housing 
Bank: 
 
Provided that no such fee shall be payable to any director, who is an 
official of the Government or a director of the Reserve Bank.‖ 
   
 34. The NHB (Amendment) Bill, 2012 proposes the following amendment in Section 7 
sub-section (5): 
 ―In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub -section (5), in the proviso, for 
the words ―or a director of the Reserve Bank‖, the words ―or an official of 
the Reserve Bank‖, shall be substituted.” 
 
35. Written views/suggestions submitted to the Committee by an expert include the 
following points: 
―Section 6 and 7 of the Amendment Bill - While it is noted that instead of 
2 Directors, Reserve Bank of India shall have the powers to nominate 
one Director on the Board of Directors of National Housi ng Bank, it is 
felt that substitution of the word ‗or an official of the Reserve Bank of 
India‖ is not warranted, and therefore, the original word ‗or a Director of 
the Reserve Bank of India may be retained in Section 7 of the principal 
act.  
The reason for the above suggestion is that the housing finance activity 
deserves considerable importance at the highest level even from the 
Reserve Bank of India because the growth in the housing activity may 
directly lead to a higher multiplier growth in the GDP of t he Country. 
………. to dilute this provision by appointing an officer of Reserve Bank 
of India and not a Director would not be in keeping with the importance 
of the housing finance activity which Reserve Bank of India may attach 
to the importance of this sector.‖ 
36. On being asked to furnish comments on the above written views, the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) submitted the following reply as stated 
under: 
 ―The proposed amendment (Clause 6(a) of the Bill) would enable RBI to 
nominate a director on the Board of NHB who can also be a director on 
the Central Board of RBI. The option remains with RBI to appoint its 
Director or an official to the Board of NHB. However, the provision also 
enables RBI to appoint any other person as director  on the Board of 
NHB.  (This amendment has been proposed by the RBI). In case the 
proposal of the Expert is accepted, then the relevant section will need to 
be modified.‖ 

pg. 21 
 
 
37. As per the existing provisions of the Act, two directors from out of the 
directors of RBI are nominated on the Board of Directors of NHB by RBI.  It is 
now proposed to nominate one director instead of two directors and such a 
director needs to be a director of RBI.  However, the Ministry in their reply have 
submitted that the p roposed amendment in Clause 6(a) would enable RBI to 
nominate a director on the NHB Board who can also be a director on the Central 
Board of RBI and that RBI has the option to appoint its Director or an official to 
the NHB Board.  With a view to giving due  importance to housing finance 
activities, the Committee feel that Clauses 6 & 7 be suitably modified to spell out 
clearly, without any ambiguity, that one person from amongst the officials of RBI 
not below the rank of Director will be nominated by RBI on the Board of Director 
of NHB. 
 
IV.  Clause 12  –Amendment of Section 29A sub -section (2) - 
Requirement of registration and net owned fund 
38. This clause seeks to amend section 29A of the Act relating to requirement of 
registration and net owned fund of housing finance companies. It is proposed to confer 
powers relating to registration of housing finance companies which hitherto vested in 
the National Housing Bank to the Reserve Bank. 
39. Section 29A sub-section (2) of the principal Act reads as : 
 
―(2) Every such housing finance institution shall make an application for 
registration to the National Housing Bank in such form as may be 
specified by the National Housing Bank: 
 Provided that a housing finance institution which is a company in 
existence on the  commencement of the National Housing Bank 
(Amendment) Act, 2000, shall make an application for registration to the 
National Housing Bank before the expiry of six months  from such 
commencement  and notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  
(1), may continue to carry on the business of housing finance institution 
until a certificate of registration is issued to it or rejection of application for 
registration is communicated to it. 
 

pg. 22 
 
40. Clause 12 of the Bill reads as: 
―In section 29A of the principal Act,— 
 
for sub -section ( 2), the following sub -section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
―(2) Every housing finance institution which is a company shall make 
an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in such form as 
may be specified by the Reserve Bank: 
 Provided that an application made by a housing finance institution 
which is a company under this sub -section to the National Housing 
Bank and pending for consideration with the National Housing Bank 
as on the date of commencement of the National Housing Bank 
(Amendment) Act, 2012, shall be transferred by the National Housing 
Bank to the Reserve Bank and thereupon the application shall be 
deemed to have been made under the provisions of this sub -section 
and shall be dealt with accordingly: 
 Provided further that the provisions of this sub -section shall not 
apply to the housing finance institution which is a company having a 
valid  registration certificate granted under sub -section ( 5) on the 
date of commencement of the National Housing Bank (Amendme nt) 
Act, 2012 and such housing finance institution shall be deemed to 
have been granted a certificate of registration under the provision of 
this Act.‖;‖ 
 
41. Written views/suggestions received from the LIC housing Finance Ltd. on the 
above issue stated as under: 
―The proposal to transfer regulatory power from NHB to RBI should 
ensure no dual regulation and overlapping of compliances. Similarly, 
the rebate, concession and relaxations available to the banks should 
also be extended to HFIs. 
The existing inves tment by HFIs in other NBFC should not be 
reduced while calculating the Net worth of HFIs.‖ 
 
42. The Committee note that it is proposed to confer powers relating to 
registration of housing finance companies to the RBI, which hitherto has been 
vested in the  National Housing Bank . The Committee, while agreeing to the 
suggestions of a stakeholder, desire the Government to incorporate provisions 
in this Bill providing for concession / relaxations to HFIs that the existing 
investment by HFIs in other NBFC should  not be reduced while calculating the 
Net worth of HFIs as this would enable the number of institutions providing 

pg. 23 
 
institutional credit for housing in the country and also  that rebate, concession 
and relaxations available to the banks should also be extended to HFIs. 
 
V.     Clause 38 - Amendment of Section 51 – Cognizance of offences 
43. This clause seeks to amend section 51 of the Act relating to cognizance of 
offences. It is proposed to include the application to be made by the officers authorised 
by the  Reserve Bank. It is further proposed to provide that the Magistrate may 
dispense with the personal attendance of the officers of the Reserve Bank as in the 
case of the National Housing Bank. 
44. Section 51 of the principal Act reads as:  
―(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the 
National Housing Bank, generally or specially authorized in writing in 
this behalf by the National Housing Bank, and no court other than 
that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class or a court superior thereto shall try any such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding any contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, a Magistrate may, if he sees reasons so to  do, dispense with 
the officer of the National Housing Bank filing the complaint but the 
Magistrate may in his discretion, at any stage of the proceedings, 
direct the personal attendance of the complainant.‖ 
45. Clause 38 of the Bill reads as under: 
―In section 51 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) for the words ―the National Housing Bank, generally‖, the words ―the 
National Housing Bank or the Reserve Bank, generally‖ shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words ―in this behalf by the National Housing Bank,‖, the 
words ―in this behalf by the National Housing Bank or the Reserve Bank, 
as the 
case may be,‖ shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words ―of the National Housing Bank‖, the 
words 
―of the National Housing Bank or the Reserve Bank, as the case may be,‖ 
shall be substituted.‖ 
  
46. On this issue, the Reserve Bank of India have pointed out that: 
 ―There have been several instances where the Bank has initiated 
criminal proceedings against companies for non -payment of deposits 
or violation of regulations, but subsequently, the company may have 
repaid the deposits in full and may have rectified the violations. 
Having initiated criminal proceedings, there is no provision under the 

pg. 24 
 
RBI Act for the Bank to withdraw the same or st op the proceedings, 
leading to avoidable wastage of energy and time for both the 
regulator and the company. Hence there should be an avenue 
available for the regulator to apply for discontinuance of the 
proceedings in public interest. And therefore, for th e sake of public 
interest, the Bank is of the view that the  following clause may be 
inserted in the Bill, by suitable amending section 51: 
― (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, a Magistrate may, where deposits have been 
repaid in full by the company and contravention or default   of the 
nature referred to in section 49 committed by it has been rectified o r 
remedied to the satisfaction of the National Housing Bank or the 
Reserve Bank, as the case may be and it is not in the public interest 
to continue with the proceedings and where the imposition of penalty 
under section 52A of this Act would meet the end o f justice, for the 
reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage 
without pronouncing any judgment.  
(4) Where the proceedings are stopped after the evidence of the 
principal witnesses have been recorded, a judgment of acquittal may 
be pr onounced and in any other case the accused shall be 
discharged.”” 
47. In respect of ―power to stop proceedings in certain cases‖ Section 258 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 reads as stated below: 
―In any summons - case  instituted  otherwise than up on complaint, a 
Magistrate  of  the  first  class  or,  with the previous sanction of  the  
Chief  Judicial  Magistrate,  any  other Judicial Magistrate, may, for  
reasons  to  be  recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage 
without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of 
proceedings is made after the  evidence  of  the principal witnesses 
has been recorded,  pronounce a  judgment of acquittal, and in any 
other case, release the accused, and such release shall have the 
effect of discharge.‖ 
 
48. The Committee observe that the suggestion for making appropriate 
additions/modifications to Section 51 of the principal Act to enable   the 
Magistrate to stop the criminal proceedings against any company that had 
initially defaulted/contravened but  had subsequently fully paid the dues or 
rectified the violations referred in Section 49 of the Act may be considered by the 
Government for inclusion. The Committee believe that this proposal, which is in 

pg. 25 
 
tune with Section 258 of the Code of Criminal Proce dure, 1973,  would serve 
public interest and relieve both the regulator and the company of needless 
hardship. 
49. The Committee, having dwelt upon the various provisions of the Bill, 
recommend for enactment of the Bill, with modifications as recommended in the 
preceding paragraphs. 
 
 
New Delhi;        YASHWANT SINHA 
23    January, 2013                Chairman  
 03   Magha, 1934 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Finance
   

pg. 26 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 9th November, 2012 from 1100 hrs to 1530 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.       Dr. Baliram 
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
10.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
11.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
12.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
13.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
14.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
15.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
16.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
17.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
18.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
19.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.      Shri A. K. Singh     – Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.      Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora   –  Under Secretary       
 
Part I 
(1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs.) 
    
WITNESSES 
 
2. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
3. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 

pg. 27 
 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
       Part II 
(1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs.) 
        WITNESSES  
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 
1. Shri D.K. Mittal, Secretary 
2. Shri Sunil Soni, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Arvind Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 
National Housing Bank (NHB) 
1. Shri R.V. Verma, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri R.S. Garg, Executive Director 
 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
1. Shri Sushil Muhnot, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Shri N.K. Maini, Deputy Managing Director 
3. Shri T.R. Bajalia, Deputy Managing Director 
 
5. The Committee thereafter took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services), National Housing Bank (NHB) and Small 
Industries Development Bank of Indi a (SIDBI) on the (i) National Housing Bank 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 and (ii) Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012 .  The major issues discussed regarding the National Housing Bank 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 included the rural housing,  performance of NHB in the north 
eastern region, credit facility to the economically weaker sections of the society for 
housing construction, housing price index, land acquisition, minority housing schemes, 
reasons for clause on foreign currency in the Bil l, state of NPAs pertaining to housing 
loans, secondary mortgage market, etc.   
6. The major issues that came up during the discussion regarding the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012 included overall functioning of SIDBI, 
problems of Small Scale Industries (SSI), assistance to Micro and SSI in rural areas and 
their indebtness, institutional accessibility in the North Eastern region, sufficiency of this 

pg. 28 
 
amendment Bill to address various issues.  Members also raised questions o n percentage 
of sick units which are awaiting assistance from SIDBI, relevance of repayment of foreign 
currency loans in foreign currency and co-ordination of SIDBI with the State Governments, 
etc. The Chairman then directed the representatives of the Mini stry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services), National Housing Bank (NHB) and Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members 
during the discussion within a week‘s time. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

pg. 29 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 11th January, 2013 from 1130 hrs to 1440 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
    MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Dr. Baliram   
3.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
5.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
8.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
9.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
11.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
12.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
13.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
14.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
15.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh    _ Joint Secretary  
2.     Shri Sanjay Sethi   –  Under Secretary 
 
        
Part I 
(1130 hrs. to 1220 hrs.) 
  
2.    The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:  
(i) Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) Bill, 2012; 
and. 
(ii) National Housing Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2012. 
 
3.  The Committee adopted the above draft reports with some minor modifications as 
suggested by Members.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these 

pg. 30 
 
Reports in the light of the modifica tions suggested and present the same to Hon‘ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
Part II 
(1230 hrs. to 1440 hrs.) 
   WITNESSES 
 
 
4. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
5. XX   XX   XX   XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX 
 
 
                A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
     The Committee then adjourned. 
 