STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Planning]
TWENTY-EIGHTH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
28

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010 /Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)

COF No. 28
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
P AGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................... (v)
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 10
C HAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies................................................................................. 26
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ............................................................. 27
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government is still awaited......... 31
A NNEXURES
I. A copy of instructions issued for finalizing State
Development Reports ..................................................... 32
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on
8th December, 2010.......................................................... 34
A PPENDIX
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11)
of the Ministry of Planning............................................ 36

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Khagen Das
8. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
12. Smt. Jaya Prada Nahata
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Vacant*
16. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
17. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
18. Shri N. Dharam Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Dr. M. Thambidurai
21. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
(iii)
*Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, MP has resigned on 29 November, 2010.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh —Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar —Additional Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty-Eighth Report
on action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in
the Thirteenth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning.
2. The Thirteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010. Replies indicating action
taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished
by the Government on 19 August, 2010.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting
held on 8 December, 2010.
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of the
Committee is given in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
08 December, 2010 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with
action taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning, which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 19 April, 2010 and simultaneously laid in Rajya Sabha
on the same day.
2. Action taken notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the 12 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been analysed and categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by
the Government:—
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12
Total : 9
Chapter : II
(ii)Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:—
Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter : III
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:—
Recommendation Nos. 4, 10 and 11
Total : 3
Chapter : IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
Nil
Total : Nil
Chapter : V
1

3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Allocation to Social Sector Schemes
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
5. A total of Rs. 26,998.00 crore against the 11th Plan allocation of
Rs. 44,000 crore could be expended on the Integrated Child Development
Services (ICDS) Scheme in the first four years of the Eleventh Plan Period.
The Committee, apart from taking note of the fact that the balance plan
funds amounting to about 40% were likely to be expended only in the
fag end of the Plan period, laid stress on the need on the part of the
Government in ensuring that the shortcomings afflicting the ICDS scheme
which include, inadequacies of infrastructure, wages of workers etc. were
addressed. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the findings
of the evaluatory studies on the ICDS scheme and its contribution in
improving the nutritional and health status of children.
6. The Government, in their action taken reply, inter-alia stated as
follows:—
“For the first four years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, i.e. for
Annual Plan 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-2011 the total amount
allocated to ICDS is Rs. 26,998 crore which is 60.80% of the total
Eleventh Plan outlay of Rs. 44,400 crore.
Various measures have been taken to overcome shortcomings and
to improve effectiveness. An upward revision has been made in
financial norms of supplementary nutrition to Rs. 4 per child
per day for children 16 months to 72 months, Rs. 5 per beneficiary
per day for pregnant and lactating mothers and Rs. 6 per child
per day for severely malnourished children. An enhancement in
the honoraria of Anganwadi workers and helpers has also been
made.
A draft report on Evaluation of ICDS conducted by National Council
of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) released in May 2010 notes
that evidence of outcome and impact of ICDS on behavioural
changes in target groups, nutritional status of children, morbidity
and mortality is mixed with some states and some population
groups showing positive results while others do not.”
2

7. The Committee note with concern the revelation of the
evaluatory study that the ICDS Scheme has shown positive results
only in some States even after long years. Though the action taken
note indicates that measures have been taken for overcoming
shortcomings and improving the effectiveness of the Scheme, no specific
mention has been made or details furnished of the initiatives for
addressing inadequacies of infrastructure as well as building a road-
map for improving the implementation aspects of the Scheme in the
poor-performing States. The reply is also silent on the corrective
measures taken or proposed on the findings of the evaluatory studies
on the ICDS Scheme. Since the ICDS Scheme is expected to play a
key role in reducing the incidence of mortality, morbidity, malnutrition,
and school drop-outs, the Committee urge upon the need for formulating
a time-bound plan for addressing the shortcomings hampering the
Scheme in right earnest and thereby ensuring that the benefits of the
Scheme are percolated down to all intended beneficiaries.
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
8. There was a mismatch between the average construction cost
of a dwelling unit (from Rs. 77000 to Rs. 88000 for construction of
20 sq. mtr. house) and proposed raise in financial assistance from
Rs. 35,000/- per unit to Rs. 45,000/- in the plain areas and from
Rs. 38,500/- to Rs. 48,500/- in hill/difficult areas provided under Indira
Awaas Yojana (IAY). The Committee emphasized the need for raising the
financial assistance to cover the actual construction cost as it might not
be feasible for the poor to raise the balance construction cost by way of
loans. The Committee also desired enhancing the allocation under Health
Sector as per the commitment of earmarking of 2-3% of GDP over the
National Health Mission’s period (2005-2012).
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Planning have stated
as under:—
“The norms of financial assistance under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
have been revised during the recent past as under:—
Sl. No. Plain Areas Hilly and Difficult Areas w.e.f.
1. 25000 27500 1.4.2004
2. 35000 38500 1.4.2008
3. 45000 48500 1.4.2010
The Hon’ble Committee may appreciate that the last revision of
norms of assistance under the programme has been made effective
from the current financial year only.
3

In addition the Reserve Bank of India has advised the banks to
include the IAY houses under the Differential Rate of Interest (DRI)
schemes for lending upto Rs. 20,000/- per housing unit at interest
rate of 4%. Any further increase in the assistance at this juncture
may lead to reduction in number of beneficiaries under the scheme.
Health Sector
The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance.
However, the requisite enhancement in allocations for health sector
in the remaining period of eleventh Plan would be subject to (1)
availability of overall resources and (ii) absorptive capacity of
implementing agencies including States.”
10. During general discussion on Union Budget (2010-11), the
Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha) demanded raising the proposed
financial assistance under IAY suitably to cover the actual construction
cost.
11. The Ministry’s reply that any further increase in assistance
under the Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) programme for covering the
construction cost of dwelling units might lead to reduction in number
of beneficiaries is not convincing and is indicative of an indifferent
attitude towards addressing the problems of the poor. Considering the
burgeoning gap between the construction cost of dwelling units and
the financial assistance provided, as also emphasized upon in
Parliamentary debates, the Committee would strongly recommend the
Government to have a re-look into this issue so as to suitably enhance
the financial assistance provided under IAY programme to cover the
actual construction cost of dwelling units.
12. The Committee also feel it to be imperative on the part of
Government to evaluate the National Health Mission programme with
a view to taking corrective measures inter-alia for creating adequate
absorption capacity by the implementing agencies. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the measures taken in this direction,
mainly the enhancement in allocation to the health sector so as to meet
the commitment of earmarking 2-3% of GDP for the sector. The
Committee, in this regard, also expect to be furnished with specific
details of break-up of Public and Private Sector contribution in the
Health Sector during the 11th Plan and the planned contribution for
the 12th Plan period.
4

B. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS)
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
13. Out of the total available funds under the MGNREG Scheme
amounting to ` 46,502.52 crore, the usage by the States had only been
to the extent of ` 31,490.79 crore. The Average days of employment and
wages per household provided under the scheme worked out to only
51 days and ` 88.13 only, which was way below the mandate of providing
100 days of employment and a minimum wage of ` 100. Upon noticing
the recurrent problems afflicting the scheme, which included disparities
in different States, shortfall in budgeted days of employment, instances
of corruption and malpractices, lack of opportunities to educated persons
etc., the Committee had reiterated their recommendation made in their
earlier reports for taking appropriate corrective steps. The Committee
also desired that the status of the proposal to expand the scope of the
scheme to cover the poor in urban areas, permitting jobs in small and
medium enterprises etc. was appraised of.
14. In their action taken note the Ministry of Planning have
submitted as below:—
“Under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Act
(MGNREGA) funds are released to the States/Districts on submission
of a proposal by them along with documents indicating utilisation
of at least 60% of the available resources. Since MGNREGA is
demand driven, funds are to be kept upfront to meet any immediate
spurt in demand for wage employment. During the year 2009-10,
the utilisation of available funds was 76.6% at the national level.
However, some of the States like Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Goa etc., the utilisation
was low when compared to national average. The matter has already
been taken with Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) to take
steps for bringing improvement in financial performance. The
average number of days of employment availed by workers under
the Act depends on actual demand for employment and it varies
from State to State. Though the National average of number of
days worked under the Act per household is 51 days during
2009-10, however, in States like Mizoram and Nagaland, the
average days of employment per household is 81; in Rajasthan
68 days, Sikkim 64 days, Uttar Pradesh 63 days. The states
have been impressed upon from time to time to step up the
efforts through IEC campaign to generate demand for wage
employment.
5

As regards the daily earnings of a worker under Mahatma Gandhi
NREGA, wage payment is on task rate basis. The output of a worker
is measured and wage payment is made as per the schedule of
rates prepared by the concerned State.
In order to overcome the problems in implementation of
MGNREGA, the Ministry of Rural Development has put–in place
a comprehensive system of Monitoring and tracking the expenditure
through various mode which include utilisation of funds through
Periodical Progress Reports, Performance Review Committee
Meetings, Area Officer’s Scheme, Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees at the State and District levels with greater involvement
of members of Parliament, National level Monitors to monitor
quality of works etc. The measures of promoting transparency and
ensuring peoples’ participation are the other steps taken towards
improving the quality of implementation of the programme.
For poor in urban areas, the scheme titled “Swarnajayanti Shahari
Rozgar Yojana” is in operation with wage employment component.”
15. Issues of concern relating to the MGNREG Scheme highlighted
by the Committee for addressing by the Government mainly relate to
under utilization of the budgeted funds and inability to provide the
mandated level of employment and wages, which have not been clearly
addressed in the action taken note. The Committee feel constrained
to note that the reply is evasive in regard to the reasons for
under utilization of the earmarked funds, particularly on account of
non-payment of wages. The Ministry, instead of addressing the concern
expressed, have merely chosen to submit that the matter has been taken
up with the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) to take steps for
bringing improvement in financial performance. The Committee, once
again, feel the need to highlight a serious infirmity in regard to the
MGNREG Scheme, which is the inability to provide the mandated 100
days of employment. The submission made in the action taken note
that “the states have been impressed upon from time to time to step
up the efforts through IEC campaign to generate demand for wage
employment” is of a routine nature and not convincing to the
Committee, as the Scheme has failed to generate employment as
mandated and has also been witnessing non-utilization of the
earmarked funds. Although the Ministry of Rural Development is stated
to have put in place a comprehensive system of monitoring and tracking
the expenditure, the action taken note is devoid of details of outcome
of the monitoring, action taken thereof and improvements brought
about in the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, once again emphasize
the need for taking corrective steps for overcoming the infirmities
6

afflicting the Scheme. The Committee also expect to be furnished with
a detailed action taken note indicating the measures proposed and
undertaken for addressing the concerns expressed within two months
of the presentation of this report to Parliament. The Committee further
expect to be furnished with details of the assets created under the
MGNREG programme; and on account of MGNREG funds in
congruence with other programme funds.
C. New Initiative in Skill Development Through PPP
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 10 and 11)
16. Mainly on the basis of the budgetary allocation and expenditure
(provision of ` 300.00 crore remaining unspent in 2008-09, reducing the
budgetary provision of ` 15.00 crore to ` 0.047 crore with only
` 0.01 crore spent in 2009-10; and proposing a budget allocation of
` 10.00 crore for 2010-11), the Committee noted that there was lack of
clarity and ambiguity in conceptualizing the scheme “New Initiative in
Skill Development through PPP” for operationalisation with multiple
agencies involved at different levels i.e. PM’s National Council on Skill
Development at the apex level, the National Skill Development
Coordination Board (NSDCB) functioning under the Planning Commission
and the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) under the
Ministry of Finance. Noting the apparent lack of co-ordination among
these agencies, the Committee had reiterated their earlier recommendation
for having a formalized central structure for giving a well focused
approach to the skill development initiatives. The Committee also desired
that measures relating to skill development measures for augmenting
and benefiting the existing indigenous skill capacity were not lost
sight of.
17. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Planning have
furnished the following reply which is a reiteration of the information
furnished to the Committee earlier during the examination of the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning:—
“A three tier institutional structure have been created for the
National Skill Development Mission. The Prime Minister’s National
Council on Skill Development is as an apex body for policy direction
and review of activities and action taken on skill development. Its
main functions, inter-alia, are to lay down the macro level policy
objectives, to review the progress made so far and guide on mid
course corrections, etc. The Prime Minister’s National Council has
endorsed a Vision to create 500 million skilled people by 2022
through skill systems which must have high degree of inclusivity
7

in terms of gender, rural/urban organized/unorganized and
traditional/contemporary. Major core principles underlying the
vision on Skill Development include: (a) Decentralize; Encourage
and Incentivize States to form Skill Missions (22 States and 3 UTs,
have already set up the State Skill Development Mission (SSDMs),
(b) Separate financing from delivery; Make public money available
for private and public delivery, (c) Use Candidates as financing
vehicles rather than institutions; Create choice and competition;
(d) Create Infrastructure for Information Asymmetry; (e) Publicize
Rating and Outcome Information for Training Institutions;
(f) Infrastructure for Effective Entry/Exit gate; (g) Effective
Assessment and Credible Certification; and (h) Restructure
Employment Exchanges to Career Centers.
To actively support the PM’s Council the National Skill Development
and to implement their decisions, National Skill Development
Coordination Board (NSDCB), chaired by Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission, has been setup. The role of the NSDCB is
to coordinate and facilitate the work being done by different
Ministries so as to achieve the entire target of skilled manpower
of 50 crore by 2022. In the light of the limited role of the Board
as a facilitator and coordinator, a provision of Rs. 10.00 crore has
been kept in BE 2010-11. It is submitted that realistic allocation of
funds in the Budget of Planning Commission is a reflection of
prudent need-based planning.
The requirement of funds in 2010-11 in Planning Commission for
skill initiative will be subjected to periodic review so that timely
appropriate action takes place in consonance with established
principles of financial propriety. Keeping in view the role of the
NSDCB, Planning Commission surrendered the allocation of
Rs. 300.00 crore in 2008-09 to Ministry of Finance. Moreover, the
entire budget for 2008-09 was surrendered as the proposals of the
Ministries of Rural Development and Labour and Employment were
not intended for augmenting resources for the existing schemes
but for special initiatives on skill development under the PPP model.
The third tier, i.e. the National Skill Development Corporation
(NSDC), a non-profit company under section 25 of the Companies
Act under the Ministry of Finance. Its operating arm is National
Skill Development Fund (NSDF), a 100% Government owned trust,
to facilitate its mandate of coordinating and stimulating private
sector initiatives in the area of Skill Development with an enhanced
flexibility and effectiveness. The NSDF would provide funds to the
Corporation for furtherance of the objective on Skill Development
8

in accordance with the approved work and financial plan. The NSDC
will play the role of funding and incentivizing, enabling support
services and shaping and creating a momentum for large scale
participation by private sector in Skill Development. It will also
identify critical skill groups, develop models for skill development
and attract potential private players and provide support to their
efforts. Three major proposals viz. the Gems and Jewellery Export
Promotion Council, Confederation of Indian Industry and SEWA
which aim at providing skill training to about 23 lakh people by
the end of eight years with total outlay of about Rs. 246.00 crore
have been given an “in principle” approval by NSDC.”
18. Mainly on the basis of the trend of budget allocation and
utilization over the years, and the details furnished, the Committee
had emphasized the need for overcoming the problem of lack of
co-ordination amongst the varied agencies associated with the Scheme,
“New Initiative in Skill Development through PPP” i.e., the PM’s
National Council on Skill Development, the National Skill
Development Co-ordination Board (NSDCB) under the Planning
Commission, and the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC)
under the Ministry of Finance. Instead of addressing the concern
expressed by the Committee on the need for ensuring effective
co-ordination among the agencies involved in implementing the
Scheme, the Ministry have merely chosen to re-state the information
furnished earlier on the mechanism of conceptualising the ‘Skill
Development’ Scheme for implementation. Apparently, no tangible
progress has been made in implementing the Scheme, which envisages
creating a 500 million skilled work force by 2022 as the budgetary
allocation made over the years have remained unspent. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate the need expressed earlier for reviewing the Scheme
by having a nodal agency for channelizing funding, co-ordinating, and
facilitating the implementing agencies, both in public and private
sectors involved in the Scheme. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the measures taken in this direction and the additional
skilled force created under the Scheme within a time frame of two
months of presentation of this report to Parliament.
9

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2010-11)
The scrutiny of Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of
Planning revealed significant and persistent shortfall in utilization of the
Plan expenditure. Recurrent and substantial under-utilization of the funds
allocated at the stage of Budget Estimates (BE) as well as the Revised
Estimates (RE) occurred under various Heads of account. For instance,
in 2009-10, Rs. 120.00 crore allocated at the stage of BE for the Unique
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) was reduced substantially to
Rs. 30.92 crore at the stage of RE and only Rs. 7.85 crore expended upto
January, 2010. Similarly, despite incurring very little expenditure as
compared to the budgeted allocation for the scheme, “50th Year Initiative
for Planning” in the preceding years i.e. Rs. 5.42 crore in 2008-09 and
Rs. 4.28 crore in 2009-10, the allocation for the scheme had been increased
substantially to Rs. 14.00 crore in the current year 2010-11. For yet another
scheme, “Strengthening Evaluation Capacity in Government” the
budgetary allocation proposed in 2010-11 was to the tune of Rs. 10.00
crore though the amount expended in 2008-09 was to the extent of only
Rs. 1.40 crore; and Rs. 9.14 crore in 2009-10. On an even more serious
note, the budget provision of Rs. 200 crore made for the scheme, “Support
to Planning Process at National, State and District Level” for the year
2008-09 and 2009-10 was surrendered in toto. This trend was indicative
of serious shortcomings in formulating in Budget Estimates and
ineffectiveness in monitoring utilization of the budget funds for
implementing schemes and programmes. It was, therefore, imperative on
the part of the Ministry to take appropriate corrective measures to address
and overcome the problem of inappropriate projection of fund
requirements in formulating budget estimates for programmes and
scheme, which were left unutilised owing to factors such as lack of
approvals, delays in conceptualizing operationalising the schemes etc.
The Committee desired to be apprised of the corrective measures initiated
and pursued for ensuring an objective realistic formulation of the budget
requirements of the Ministry.
10

Action Taken by the Government
The observations of the committee have been noted for future
compliance. While preparing Budget Estimates for financial year 2010-11,
projects of fund requirement for schemes, was based on past trend of
expenditure, which resulted in reduction in total budget provision for
plan schemes, other than Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI),
in comparison to previous year. In addition, close watch is being kept
over timelines for necessary approvals; in respect of new schemes/projects
including UIDAI. Trends of expenditure of various schemes, is proposed
to be monitored closely during the year, to ensure timely utilisation of
budgeted allocations.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Allocation to Social Sector Schemes
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Aspects relating to budgetary allocations and implementation
of several social welfare oriented programmes revealed instances of
tardiness and inadequacies. While an amount of Rs. 44,000 crore had
been earmarked for the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)
Scheme for the 11th Plan period as a whole, the year wise allocation
made for the scheme till date total to Rs. 26,998.00 crore, thus leaving
about 40% of the funds to be expended in the remaining period of the
11th Plan. Though the allocation for the scheme had been increased
substantially to Rs. 8162 crore in the current year, 2010-11 as compared
to Rs. 6705.00 crore in 2009-10, there appeared to be an apparent move
to expend the balance plan funds at the far end of the plan period rather
than focusing on overcoming the shortcomings in ensuring the
effectiveness of the ICDS scheme, which included, inadequacies of
infrastructure, wages of workers etc. The Committee, therefore, laid stress
on the need on the part of the Government in ensuring that the
shortcomings afflicting the ICDS scheme are addressed. The Committee
also desired to be apprised of the findings of the evaluatory studies on
the ICDS scheme and its contribution in improving the nutritional and
health status of children.
Action Taken by the Government
For the first four years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, i.e. for Annual
Plan 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-2011 the total amount allocated
to ICDS is Rs. 26,998 crore which is 60.80% of the total Eleventh Plan
outlay of Rs. 44,400 crore.
11

However, for Annual Plan 2009-10, the Revised Estimated (RE)
amount for ICDS was Rs. 8,162 crore, as against Budget Estimate (BE)
of Rs. 6,705 crore. Thus, for Annual Plan 2007-10, the total funds allocated
for ICDS is Rs. 20,755 crore. The total expenditure for Annual Plan
2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 is Rs. 19,789.96 crore which is 95.35% of
the outlay allocated for these three years.
Various measures have been taken to overcome shortcomings and
to improve effectiveness. An upward revision has been made in financial
norms of supplementary nutrition to Rs. 4 per child per day for children
16 months to 72 months, Rs. 5 per beneficiary per day for pregnant and
lactating mothers and Rs. 6 per child per day for severely malnourished
children. An enhancement in the honoraria of Anganwadi workers and
helpers has also been made.
A draft report on Evaluation of Integrated Child Development
Services conducted by NCAER released in May 2010 notes that evidence
of outcome and impact of ICDS on behavioural changes in target groups,
nutritional status of children, morbidity and mortality is mixed with
some states and some population groups showing positive results while
other do not.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
As regards the scheme of providing financial assistance for
construction of dwelling units for the poor under Indira Awaas Yojana
(IAY), the Committee noted that while it had been proposed to raise the
assistance from Rs. 35,000/- per unit to Rs. 45,000/- in the plain areas and
from Rs. 38,500/- to Rs. 48,500/- in hill/difficult areas, a wide-gap would
continue to prevail between the average construction cost of a dwelling
unit (from Rs. 77000 to Rs. 88000 for construction of 20 sq. mtr. house)
and financial assistance provided. As it might not be feasible for the poor
to raise the balance construction cost by way of loans, the Committee
felt it to be imperative for raising the financial assistance to cover the
actual construction cost. The Committee also noted that, in a similar vein,
the expenditure incurred on health sector as a percentage of GDP had
remained between 1.23% and 1.45% during the period, 2007-08 to
2009-10, which was way below the committed earmarking of 2-3% of
GDP over the National Health Mission’s period (2005-2012).
12

Action Taken by the Government
The norms of financial assistance under Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)
have been revised during the recent past as under:—
Sl. No. Plain Areas Hilly and Difficult Areas w.e.f.
1. 25000 27500 1.4.2004
2. 35000 38500 1.4.2008
3. 45000 48500 1.4.2010
The Hon’ble Committee may appreciate that the last revision of
norms of assistance under the programme has been made effective from
the current financial year only.
In addition the Reserve Bank of India has advised the banks to
include the IAY houses under the Differential Rate of Interest (DRI)
schemes for lending upto Rs. 20,000/- per housing unit at interest rate
of 4%. Any further increase in the assistance at this juncture may lead
to reduction in number of beneficiaries under the scheme.
Health Sector
The observations of the Committee are noted for compliance.
However, the requisite enhancement in allocations for health sector in
the remaining period of Eleventh Plan would be subject to (i) availability
of overall resources and (ii) absorptive capacity of implementing agencies
including States.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para Nos. 11 and 12 of the Chapter-I)
Mid-term appraisal of 11th Plan
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Planning Commission was entrusted with responsibility of
appraising from time to time, the progress achieved in the execution
of each stage of the Plan and recommend adjustment of policies
and measures. The Committee, however, noted that the Mid-Term
Appraisal (MTA) of 11th Plan, which was expected in the year, 2009,
was yet to be finalised. Consequently, initiation of corrective steps
13

in regard to various schemes, which could have been undertaken in
the current financial year 2010-11 as a follow-up of the Mid-Term
Appraisal had been affected. While the delay in getting the requisite data
from the State Governments in particular had been cited as the reason
for the time taken in finalizing the MTA, this factor, which had been in
the know of the Planning Commission could very well had been addressed
before-hand inter-alia by maintaining up-to-date computerised data bases
for ready analysis. The Committee, while emphasizing the need for
completing the mandated tasks as per schedule, urged upon the Planning
Commission to ensure that the Mid-Term Appraisal of the 11th Plan,
which was overdue, was finalised and placed in the public domain without
any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
The exercise of the Mid-Term Appraisal (MTA) of 11th Five Year
Plan was initiated in July, 2009, just after completion of two and half
years of the Plan. It involves inter-Ministerial consultations wherein
detailed feedback from the Ministries regarding schematic appraisal
including scheme-wise physical and financial targets/outlays and
achievements are obtained. Consultations are also held with the officials
of State Governments, academia, researchers and Non-Governmental
Organisations (NGOs) to obtain their perspectives on the schemes. The
entire process is an elaborate one involving coordination with different
agencies at different levels. The Mid-Term Appraisal for the 11th Plan
has been completed. The document has been approved by the full
Planning Commission in its meeting held on 23rd March, 2010 and by
the Cabinet in its meeting on 10th June, 2010. It would be placed in
public domain soon after its approval by the National Development
Council (NDC). The meeting of the NDC is scheduled to be held on
24th July, 2010.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Unique Identification Scheme
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
While a budgetary allocation of Rs. 120.00 crore was made for the
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) in 2009-10, the amount
was subsequently lowered down to Rs. 30.92 crore at the stage of Revised
Estimates, and only about Rs. 7.85 crore expended upto January, 2010.
The downward revision of the budgeted funds and low utilization had
been attributed to delays in appointment of the personnel required and
finalizing the project schemes.
14

Action Taken by the Government
Out of the total Revised Estimates of Rs. 30.92 crore for the year
2009-10, the total expenditure till 31st March, 2010 was Rs. 26.21 crore.
An amount of Rs. 4.54 crore being the savings in the heads Establishment,
RRT, OAE and Other Charges was surrendered as some of the posts
could not be filled and regional offices could not be set up due to non-
identification of suitable office space by the end of the Financial Year.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee also noted from the information furnished that the
risk factors associated with the Unique Identification Scheme include
inter-alia involvement and cooperation of State Governments, financial
incentives for the Registrars for enrolment as well as issues related to
ownership and technology for mitigating which, strategies were being
worked out. The Committee expected that the risk factors and the measures
of mitigation were well identified and implemented, while adhering to
the time schedules for completion of project schemes. As also touched
upon in their Third Report on the Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry, the Committee felt the need to once again urged upon the
Government to ensure that the UIN Scheme did not, in any way, lead
to misuse or work out in the gain of illegal migrants who might be
residing in country.
Action Taken by the Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
50th Year Initiative for Planning
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee noted with serious concern that only one of the
objectives with which the scheme “50th Year Initiative for Planning”,
initiated in the 9th Plan (in 2000-01) i.e. Total Transport System Study
could be achieved and the remaining objectives of the scheme i.e.
Preparation of State Development Reports (SDRs) and Financial Assistance
in the form of grant-in-aid from the Planning Commission’s Project
Preparation Facility (PCPPF) etc., remaining as more paper propositions.
The budget provision for the scheme was reduced from Rs. 7.40 crore
to Rs. 4.20 crore in 9th Plan, from Rs. 44.72 crore to Rs. 26.66 crore in
15

the 10th Plan and from Rs. 58.31 crore to Rs. 29.00 crore in 11th Plan.
The utilisation of the budgeted funds also went down from 71.90 per cent
in the 9th Plan period to 54.28 per cent in the 10th Plan period and to
42.80 per cent in the 11th Plan period. The inability in achieving the
intended objectives of the scheme had been attributed inter-alia to delays
in finalizing the State Development Reports (SDRs) and lack of interest
of the State Government in receiving grants for preparation of projects.
It was indeed saddening to note that the scheme, which was
conceptualized near about 10 years back with the intention of building
up of a comprehensive and complete data bank covering all the important
sectors reflecting the nation’s development had not been a success. The
Committee expected that the factors attributable to the failure of the
scheme were gone into detail and corrective measures taken so that the
objective of having a complete data bank covering all important sectors
of the nation was achieved.
Action Taken by the Government
The concern of the Committee has been noted and detailed review
has been carried out for each and every item. The details of action taken
report are indicated below:—
1. All relevant factors were considered at the time of finalizing
the Budget provision for 2010-11and a realistic view was taken
in the light of past experience and the observations made by
the Standing Committee on Finance of Parliament.
2. Planning Commission’s Project Preparation Facility (PCPPF)
was offered to assist the State Governments to engage
professional consultants for preparation of Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) specifically for projects proposed to be funded
from external and institutional sources. This facility was
offered in the context that some State Governments did not
have the wherewithal to prepare DPRs for viable projects
which would be funded from non-Governmental sources and
conform to lenders expectations. The States were informed
about the scheme and its guidelines by the Secretary, Planning
Commission in 2000 , the guidelines were placed on the web-
site of the Planning Commission, they were reminded in 2002
to pose proposals for availing assistance under the facility
and in 2003 the Chief Ministers were requested to utilize the
facility and arrange to send proposals for considering their
funding. Considerable efforts were made to make the PCPPF
popular among the States. However, only eight proposals
conforming to the guidelines were approved for funding the
preparation of DPRs.
16

3. It is felt that the main reason for lack of takers for the PCPPF
was the introduction of Viability Gap Funding Scheme (VGF)
to support Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure. The
guidelines for financial support to PPPs in infrastructure were
notified by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic
Affairs in January, 2006. The VGF scheme provides for
financial support in the form of a capital grant and is more
attractive than the PCPPF which supports the payment of
only preparation of a DPR subject to a ceiling of Rs. 25 lakh.
It is, therefore, decided to close the PCPPF component on
account of inadequate by States.
4. As on date, 20 State Development Reports (SDRs) have been
released. Eight SDRs have been identified for finalization
and release in 2010-11. Member, Planning Commission in
charge of the States whose SDRs are identified for finalization
and release in 2010-11 have been requested to review their
preparation and get them finalized as soon as possible so as
to avoid any critical observations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee. A copy of the Planning Commission’s
U.O. dated 7.4.2010 addressed to the members containing
instructions of Deputy Chairman for finalizing SDRs as soon
as possible, is enclosed at Annexure I.
5. Necessary arrangements have been made to develop various
web-based monitoring systems to review physical and
financial performance of flagship programmes and software
applications relating to e-Governance for annual Central Plans
exercised by the Planning Commission under the technical
guidance of the Yojana Bhavan unit of the National Informatics
Centre, as per details given below:—
I. MIS for Left Wing Extremism Districts pertaining to 09
States and 35 districts (100% online updation every month
online from districts and States); the project is being
monitored by Cabinet Secretary and Secretary, PC along
with other Ministries/Departments.
Description about MIS on Left Wing Extremism (MIS-LWE)
The MIS on Left Wing Extremism Districts is a web-based
application to facilitate online monitoring of various
programmes. It may be mentioned that a Task Force on Left
Wing Extremism (LWE) was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 12th February, 2008 to
promote coordinated efforts across a range of development
and security activities to tackle the naxal problems in a more
17

comprehensive manner. Planning Commission is going to
expedite finalization of integrated action plans for 35 LWE
affected districts. The sectors identified by the Task Force
were:
(i) Road Connectivity
(ii) Education
(iii)Health
(iv)Electrification
(v) Other 10 sectors identified by district officials depending
upon local needs.
In respect of sector (v) above, the districts have identified
projects/works relating to drinking water supply, building of
anganwadi centres, construction of staff quarters for police
and housing of staff at district/block levels, construction of
panchayat buildings, etc. The MIS has been updated
periodically about monthly progress.
The system has been studied, designed, developed and
implemented by the NIC – Planning Commission Unit. The
MIS Portal for monitoring the progress of sectoral schemes
for 35 LWE districts have been fully developed and has been
implemented successfully. System provides district-wise
physical and financial progress in respect of 12 sectors
identified for intensive monitoring needs to be monitored on
monthly basis. MIS portal can be accessed online at
http://pcserver.nic.in/lwe.
The system provides district and village level information
relating to nine types of basic amenities such as Education,
Health, Drinking Water, Communication, Recreational
Facilities, Banking, Post Telegraph and Telephone, Electrical
Supply and Connectivity in 35 Left Wing Extremism affected
districts. System has been developed basing on the non-
Census data as on 31.03.99 compiled with Census 2001 data.
The site was security audited to remove any security
vulnerabilities.The names of Schemes being monitored are as
follows:—
Supplementary Nutrition (ICDS), Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
(SSA), Road Connectivity (PMGSY), MGNREGA, Housing
(Indira Awas Yojana), Health (NRHM), Electrification (PMGSY),
Drinking Water Supply (DWS), Ashram Schools, Forests Right
Act and National Highways/State Highways.
18

I. MIS for North-Eastern Regions (MIS-NER) – pertaining
to eight States and 77 districts, being replicated as in case
(a) above after the successful implementation of above
project.
II. MIS on Central Plan (MIS-CPLAN) – successfully
implemented for the annual exercise and all 62 Ministries/
Departments uploaded information ONLINE for the GBS
exercise every year.
Description about MIS on Central Plan (MIS-CPLAN)
It is a web-based Monitoring Information System that
has been assigned to NIC, Yojana Bhavan Unit by the
Planning Commission for development so that the online-
data entry/updation can be done by all Ministries/
Departments for the Annual Plan discussion of Central
Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes for 2010-11 and
for the Eleventh Plan. Statement of Outlays and
Outcomes/Targets (2009-10) as per the Outcome Budget
2009-10 and Up-to-date Actual Achievement; Particulars
for Programmes/Projects to be Financed wholly by
domestic resources or by externally aided projects; details
of schemes that have been weeded out or have been
merged etc. will be generated through this MIS. For
this, a web based MIS has been designed and developed,
URL—http://pcserver.nic.in/cplan.
III. MIS – National Human Development Report 2010, under
development on various sectoral input district-wise.
IV. PEO Evaluation Studies like Cooked Mid Day Meals
(CMDM), Rural Roads, SSA and Total Sanitation
Campaigns.
V. Asset Management System for the Administration and
General Section of the Planning Commission, etc.
Creation of a Database and Cell for monitoring and review
of Utility Operations in the country—Power Sector.
6. In order to have an independent monitoring system in place
for periodic review of the implementation of generation
projects which could be helpful in comparing the current
status of the projects vis-à-vis the final implementation
schedule based on the inputs from Ministry of Power, Central
Electricity authority, Central and State PSUs and the private
developers, a Database is being created through outsourcing.
19

This will help in identifying the nature of delay in achieving
the milestones; analyze the reasons for the delays in various
projects; and make an assessment of expected capacity
addition in the Five Year Plan as against the plan targets with
specific reasons for slippage. The consultant has been
appointed who is assisting the Planning Commission in
developing such a database for monitoring the power
generation projects implementation so that corrective actions
are taken where necessary. Creation of this database will
enable Planning Commission to assess the operational and
financial performance of State power utilities and take
appropriate policy decision to address the critical issues.
7. Model Documents
1. PPP projects typically involve transfer or lease of public
assets, delegation of governmental authority for recovery
of user charges, operation and/or control of public
utilities/services in a monopolistic environment and
sharing of risk and contingent liabilities by the
Government. The terms of the project agreements as well
as the bidding process for award of concessions are
usually complex because of the nature of risks and
involvement of many stakeholders such as project
sponsors, lenders, Government agencies, users and
regulatory authorities.
2. The use of standard documents streamlines and expedites
decision-making by the authorities in a manner that is
fair, transparent and competitive. The adoption of model
documents such as concession agreements and other bid
documents for award of PPP projects has, therefore, been
mandated as the preferred approach. All projects that are
based on model documents benefit from fast-track
appraisal and approval. The Model Concession
Agreements (MCAs) published by the Planning
Commission for various sectors are listed below:—
Model Concession Agreements
National Highways
State Highways
Operation and Maintenance of Highways
National Highways (six Laning)
Urban Rail Transit Systems
Operation of Container Trains
Non-metro Airports
20

Greenfield Airports
Re-development of Railway Stations
Port Terminals
Procurement-cum-Maintenance Agreement for
Locomotives
3. Standardised guidelines and model documents that
incorporate key principles and best practices relating to
the bid process for PPP projects have also been developed.
Guidelines for the pre-qualification of bidders along with
a Model Request for Qualification (RFQ) document have
been approved by the Committee on Infrastructure and
issued by the Ministry of Finance for application to all
PPP projects. Guidelines for inviting financial bids on
the basis of a Model Request for Proposal (RFP) document
have also been published. Similar model documents for
procuring the services of consultants and advisers have
also been published. The model bidding documents
approved and published so far are listed below:—
Bidding Documents
Model Request for Qualification (RFQ) for PPP projects
Model Request for Proposal (RFP) for PPP projects
Model Request for proposal (RFP) for Appointment of
Technical Consultants
Model Request for Proposal (RFP) for Appointment of
Legal Advisers
Model Request for Proposal (RFP) for Appointment of
Financial Consultant and Transaction Advisers
Model Request for Proposal (RFP) for Appointment of
Technical Consultants for Transmission Projects
4. The Government has identified several areas for reform
of policies and processes. A number of Guidelines, reports
and Manuals have been issued in pursuance of the
initiatives described above. The Guidelines are listed
below:—
Guidelines
Financial Support to PPPs in Infrastructure (VGF Scheme)
Formulation, Appraisal and Approval of PPP Projects
(PPPAC)
Financing Infrastructure Projects through the India
Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd.
21

Based on inter-ministerial deliberations, a number of
Reports have been prepared and their recommendations
adopted. These are listed below:—
Reports
Financing of the National Highways Development
Programme
Financing Plan for Airports
Financing Plan for Ports
Restructuring of NHAI
Monitoring of PPP projects
Projections in the Eleventh Five Year Plan: Investment in
Infrastructure
Delhi-Mumbai and Delhi-Howrah Freight Corridors
Road Rail Connectivity of Major Ports Customs
Procedures and Functioning of Container Freight Station
and Ports
Simplification of Customs Procedures in Air Cargo and
Airports
Measures for Operationalising Open Access in the Power
Sector
Tariff setting for Port Terminals
Reducing Dwell Time in Ports
Norms and Standards for capacity of Airport Terminals
Road Safety and Traffic Management Selection of
Consultants: Best Practices
An Approach to Regulation in Infrastructure
Frequently Asked Questions on RFQ Documents
Approach to Regulation
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Compendium of PPP infrastructure projects
Compendium of State Highway projects
The MCAs specify the Standards and Specifications to which
the projects should be constructed and maintained. These are
contained in Manuals for Standards and Specifications.
22

Planning Commission has published Manuals of Specifications
and Standards for Two-Laning of Highways and for Four-
Laning of Highways through PPPs.
5. The entire effort, as brought out in the paragraphs above,
has been towards creation of an enabling framework within
which PPP projects can be awarded and implemented
smoothly without compromising on Government and user
interests. The progress of private participation in various
infrastructure sectors is briefly described in the sections
that follow.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Support to Planning Process at National, State and District Level
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee had, in their 3rd Report on Demands for Grants
(2009-10) of the Ministry inter-alia taken note of the fact that while
budgetary allocation of Rs. 200 crore made in 2008-09 for the scheme
“Support to Planning Process at National, State and District Level” had
remained unspent, an allocation of an equal amount (of Rs. 200 crore)
was proposed for 2009-10. Though the Committee were informed in the
previous year that the scheme was slated to be placed before the
Expenditure Finance Committee for approval regrettably the budgeted
amount had remained unspent once again, and the scheme was proposed
to be shifted to the Ministry of Panchayati Raj. What the Committee
found to be surprising to note was that the scheme, intending to support
the planning process at the district level and contribute in achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) continued to be devoid of any
planning and had received budgetary allocation that had remained
unspent. The Committee deplored the casual approach adopted in
formulating the scheme. Aiding the planning process at the decentralized
level being of vital importance, the Committee recommended that every
effort would be made in conceptualizing and operationalising the scheme
without any further delay.
Action Taken by the Government
The Planning Commission has noted the point for compliance.
Presently, the scheme is in the process of being transferred to the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
.23

Estimation of BPL
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The estimates of poverty made by different expert groups and
Government agencies range from 77% (NCEUS—Arjun Sengupta
Commission), 50% (NC Saxena Committee—Ministry of Rural
Development),  37.2%  (Prof. Tendulkar Committee) and 27.5% (Planning
Commission). The Committee had in their 3rd Report on Demands for
Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry inter-alia emphasized on the need for
overcoming the shortcomings in the estimation of BPL population, and
more particularly the divergence in the estimates of BPL population/
poverty levels brought out by the Planning Commission and State
Governments. Regrettably, no efforts appeared to have been made in this
direction. Also, surprisingly while the Planning Commission remained
to take a decision on the findings/recommendations of the Expert Group
on Estimation of Poverty headed by Prof. Tendulkar, the survey for
identifying BPL households was said to be in the anvil. Having an
empirically correct and objective assessment of the BPL population was
a necessity for the success of the social welfare oriented programmes and
the proposed legislation on food security. It would, therefore, be imperative
on the part of the Government to take appropriate and concrete measures
for overcoming the problem of divergent approaches and variation in the
estimates of the BPL population in the Country. The Committee desired
to be apprised of the measures taken and developments in this direction.
Action Taken by the Government
The National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector
(NCEUS) referred to as Arjun Sengupta Committee brought out a report
on Conditions on Work and Promotion of Livelihoods in the Unorganised
Sector. In this report, it was brought out that 77% of the population was
with a per capita daily consumption of upto Rs. 20 in 2004-05. This
section of the people was called poor and vulnerable. However, the
Economic Survey 2008-09, brought out that based on the calculations on
data on household consumption expenditure for 2004-05 (NSS 61st round-
2004-05), the population with less than Rs. 20 per day per capita
consumption expenditure was 60.5% only. In any case, the above
observation in the report of National Commission for Enterprises in the
Unorganised Sector (NCEUS) is based on the criterion which is different
from the poverty line adopted by the Planning Commission. The Saxena
Committee constituted by the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD)
to recommend a suitable methodology for identification of rural poor
suggested assuming poverty ratio at national level as 50% merely relying
on the criteria of calorie intake. As there are changes in the calorie intake
24

among all the sections of the society over the years, merely relying on
the criteria of calorie intake for defining a poverty line is a debatable
issue. It is submitted herein that the Planning Commission is the nodal
agency in the Government of India to estimate poverty based on a defined
methodology. Since 1997, the Poverty estimates have been based on the
methodology contained in the Expert Group Report on ‘Estimation of
proportion and number of poor’ (Lakdawala Committee). An Expert
Group under the chairmanship of Prof. Suresh D. Tendulkar was
constituted in 2005 to review the methodology of estimation of poverty
and it has submitted its recommendations in December 2009. Tendulkar
Committee has recommended the revised poverty lines and on the basis
of which the poverty in the country has been estimated as 37.2% as
against the official estimates of 27.5% for 2004-05. The Mid Term Appraisal
Document of Eleventh Five Year Plan indicates that the revised poverty
lines recommended by the Tendulkar Committee have been accepted by
the Planning Commission for 2004-05. Tendulkar Committee has
specifically pointed out that the upward revision in the poverty ratio in
2004-05 resulting from the application of new poverty lines should not
be interpreted as implying that the extent of poverty has increased over
time.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
25

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
– NIL –
26

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
As regards the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), the Committee noted from the
data furnished that of the total available funds amounting to
Rs. 46502.52 crore, the usage by the States had only been to the extent
of Rs. 31490.79 crore. The Average days of employment and wages
per household provided under the scheme worked out to only 51 days
and Rs. 88.13 only, which was way below the mandate of providing
100 days of employment and a minimum wage of Rs. 100. As emphasized
upon by the Committee in their report presented earlier, the problems
afflicting the scheme, which included disparities in different States,
shortfall in budgeted days of employment, instances of corruption and
malpractices, lack of opportunities to educated persons etc., need to be
thoroughly looked into for taking appropriate corrective steps. The
Committee also desired to be apprised of the status of the proposal to
expand the scope of the scheme to cover the poor in urban areas,
permitting jobs in small and medium enterprises etc.
Action Taken by the Government
Under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Act
(MGNREGA) funds are released to the States/Districts on submission of
a proposal by them along with documents indicating utilisation of at
least 60% of the available resources. Since MGNREGA is demand driven,
funds are to be kept upfront to meet any immediate spurt in demand
for wage employment. During the year 2009-10, the utilisation of available
funds was 76.6% at the national level. However, some of the States like
Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Sikkim
and Goa etc., the utilisation was low when compared to national average.
The matter has already been taken with Ministry of Rural Development
(MoRD) to take steps for bringing improvement in financial performance.
The average number of days of employment availed by workers under
the Act depends on actual demand for employment and it varies from
27

State to State. Though the National average of number of days worked
under the Act per household is 51 days during 2009-10, however, in
States like Mizoram and Nagaland, the average days of employment
per household is 81; in Rajasthan 68 days, Sikkim 64 days, Uttar Pradesh
63 days. The States have been impressed upon from time to time to step
up the efforts through IEC campaign to generate demand for wage
employment.
As regards the daily earnings of a worker under Mahatma Gandhi
NREGA, wage payment is on task rate basis. The output of a worker is
measured and wage payment is made as per the schedule of rates prepared
by the concerned State.
In order to overcome the problems in implementation of
MGNREGA, the Ministry of Rural Development has put–in place a
comprehensive system of Monitoring and tracking the expenditure
through various mode which include utilisation of funds through
Periodical Progress Reports, Performance Review Committee Meetings,
Area Officer’s Scheme, Vigilance and Monitoring Committees at the State
and District levels with greater involvement of members of Parliament,
National level Monitors to monitor quality of works etc. The measures
of promoting transparency and ensuring peoples’ participation are the
other steps taken towards improving the quality of implementation of
the programme.
For poor in urban areas, the scheme titled “Swarnajayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana” is in operation with wage employment
component.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of the Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Serial Nos. 10 and 11)
The Committee regreted to note that no tangible progress had been
made in implementing the Scheme “New Initiative in Skill Development
through PPP” which was launched in 2008-09. While the entire budgetary
provisioning of Rs. 300.00 crore made for the scheme in 2008-09 remained
unspent and therefore surrendered, the allocation for 2009-10 was reduced
from Rs. 15.00 crore to Rs. 0.47 crore of which only Rs. 0.01 crore was
utilised. For the current year 2010-11 a budgetary provisioning of
Rs. 10 crore had been proposed for the scheme.
28

The trend of budgetary allocation and the information on the scheme
furnished to the Committee made apparent the lack of clarity and
ambiguity in conceptualizing the scheme for operationalisation with
multiple agencies involved at different level i.e. PM’s National Council
on Skill Development at the apex level, the National Skill Development
Coordination Board (NSDCB) functioning under the Planning Commission
and the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) under the
Ministry of Finance. Also, the submission of the Ministry of Finance that
the role of the Ministry was mainly confined to equity financing of the
corporation and did not extend to skill development activities and
programmes gave credence to the belief that there was serious lack of
coordination among the agencies concerned in implementing the scheme.
Given the facts relating to the scheme, the Committee reiterated the need
expressed in their earlier report i.e. the 3rd Report on Demands for Grants
(2009-10) of the Ministry for having a formalized central structure for
giving a well-focused approach to the skill development initiatives. The
Committee also reiterated the need expressed earlier for ensuring that
in initiating the policy measures relating to skill development measures
for augmenting and benefiting the existing indigenous skill capacity were
not lost sight of.
Action Taken by the Government
A three tier institutional structure have been created for the National
Skill Development Mission. The Prime Minister’s National Council on
Skill Development is as an apex body for policy direction and review
of activities and action taken on skill development. Its main functions,
inter-alia, are to lay down the macro level policy objectives, to review
the progress made so far and guide on mid course corrections, etc. The
Prime Minister’s National Council has endorsed a Vision to create
500 million skilled people by 2022 through skill systems which must
have high degree of inclusivity in terms of gender, rural/urban organized/
unorganized and traditional/contemporary. Major core principles
underlying the vision on Skill Development include: (a) Decentralize;
Encourage and Incentivize States to form Skill Missions (22 States and
3 UTs) have already setup the State Skill Development Mission (SSDMs),
(b) Separate financing from delivery; Make public money available for
private and public delivery, (c) Use Candidates as financing vehicles rather
than institutions; Create choice and competition, (d) Create Infrastructure
for Information Asymmetry, (e) Publicize Rating and Outcome Information
for Training Institutions, (f) Infrastructure for Effective Entry/Exit gate,
(g) Effective Assessment and Credible Certification, and (h) Restructure
Employment Exchanges to Career Centres.
29

To actively support the PM’s Council the National Skill Development
and to implement their decisions, National Skill Development
Coordination Board (NSDCB), chaired by Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission, has been setup. The role of the NSDCB is to coordinate and
facilitate the work being done by different Ministries so as to achieve
the entire target of skilled manpower of 50 crore by 2022. In the light
of the limited role of the Board as a facilitator and coordinator, a provision
of Rs. 10.00 crore has been kept in BE 2010-11. It is submitted that realistic
allocation of funds in the Budget of Planning Commission is a reflection
of prudent need-based planning.
The requirement of funds in 2010-11 in Planning Commission for
skill initiative will be subjected to periodic review so that timely
appropriate action takes place in consonance with established principles
of financial propriety. Keeping in view the role of the NSDCB, Planning
Commission surrendered the allocation of Rs. 300.00 crore in 2008-09 to
Ministry of Finance. Moreover, the entire budget for 2008-09 was
surrendered as the proposals of the Ministries of Rural Development and
Labour and Employment were not intended for augmenting resources
for the existing schemes but for special initiatives on skill development
under the PPP model.
The third tier, i.e. the National Skill Development Corporation
(NSDC), a non-profit company under section 25 of the Companies Act
under the Ministry of Finance. Its operating arm is National Skill
Development Fund (NSDF), a 100% Government owned trust, to facilitate
its mandate of coordinating and stimulating private sector initiatives in
the area of Skill Development with an enhanced flexibility and
effectiveness. The NSDF would provide funds to the Corporation for
furtherance of the objective on Skill Development in accordance with the
approved work and financial plan. The NSDC will play the role of funding
and incentivizing, enabling support services and shaping and creating
a momentum for large scale participation by private sector in Skill
Development. It will also identify critical skill groups, develop models
for skill development and attract potential private players and provide
support to their efforts. Three major proposals viz. the Gems and Jewellery
Export Promotion Council, Confederation of Indian Industry and SEWA
which aim at providing skill training to about 23 lakh people by the end
of eight years with total outlay of about Rs. 246.00 crore have been given
an “in principle” approval by NSDC.
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 28/6/2010/Parl./dated 19.8.2010]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of the Chapter-I)
30

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE
STILL AWAITED
– NIL –
N EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
08 December, 2010 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
31

ANNEXURE I
 PLANNING COMMISSION
(STATE PLANS DIVISION)
Subject:— State Development Reports
The status of SDRs as on 1.4.2010 is given below.
(i) SDRs released (17) :Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu
and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala,
Lakshadweep, Maharashtra,
Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh
(ii)SDRs awaiting :Haryana, West Bengal, Uttarakhand
release (3)
(iii)SDRs under print (3) : Goa, Puducherry, Madhya Pradesh
(iv)SDRs awaiting : Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
finalization (9) Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Tripura
The preparation and printing of SDRs is funded by the scheme
50th Year Initiative for Planning. In the Outcome Budget (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Planning, finalization and release of 8 SDRs has been identified
as one of the quantifiable deliverables under the aforesaid scheme. The
8 SDRs are Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Puducherry, Madhya Pradesh,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura.
The Standing Committee of Parliament for examining the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning: has observed that lack
of timely preparation of the SDRs has resulted in blockage and surrender
of funds under the above scheme.
The 8 SDRs identified for finalizations and release in 2010-11 have
been under preparation for over five years each. Funds have been budgeted
32

in 2010-11 under the above scheme for the finalization and printing of
the 8 SDRs.
Members incharge of the States whose SDRs are identified for
finalization and release in 2010-11 are requested to kindly review their
preparation and get them finalized as soon as possible so as to avoid
any critical observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee.
This issues with the approval of Deputy Chairman.
(T.K. Pandey)
Joint Secretary (State Plans)
All Members, Planning Commission
Principal Advisers/Senior Consultants/Senior Advisers/Advisers/
Consultant—State Plans Units
Planning Commission U.O. No.O-13013/1/2005-SP.CO. dated 7.4.2010.
Copy to:
PS to Deputy Chairman
PS to Secretary
Director/Deputy Adviser—State Plans Units
33

ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 8th December, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
5. Shru Gurudas Dasgupta
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Manicka Tagore
11. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
14. Shri Moinul Hassan
15. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
16. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
17. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
34

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar —Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan —Deputy Secretary
2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs,
Financial Services, Expenditure and Disinvestment);
(ii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(iii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Planning;
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports with minor
modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to present
all the Reports to Parliament in the current session.
The Committee adjourned at 1550 hours.
35

APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2010-11) OF THE
MINISTRY OF PLANNING
Total % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations 12 —
(ii)Recommendations/observations which have
been accepted by the Government
(Vide Recommendations at Serial Nos. 1,  2, 3,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12) 09 75.00
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government‘s replies Nil 0.00
(iv)Recommendations/observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Serial Nos. 4,
10 and 11) 03 25.00
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited Nil 00.00
36