19
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-10)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF  STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourth
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation)
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2010/ Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

NINETEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF  STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
(Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants
(2009-10) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  19  April, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
     April, 2010/ Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................……….………… (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................……………………......  (iv)
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................………….....      1
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................………………..      14
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies .........................................………….       24
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ................................…………......        25
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of
which final reply of the Government is still
awaited ........................................................................……….         30
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 15  April, 2010                  31
APPENDIX
Analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the          33
Recommendations contained in  the Fourth Report of
the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman
MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara*
RAJYA SABHA
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh   -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  -  Additional Director
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP
(iii)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

INTRODUCTION
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised by
the Committee, present this Nineteenth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
 2. The Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 2 December, 2009.  Replies indicating action taken on all the
recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 8
January, 2010.
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on
15 April, 2010.
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
New Delhi;       DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15 April, 2010                                      Chairman,
 25 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)                Standing Committee on Finance.
(iv)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Fourth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 December, 2009 and simultaneously
laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day.
2.  The Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all
the 8 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analysed and categorised
as follows:
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos.2, 3, 4, 6 and 8
             (Total: 5)
(Chapter-II)
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
   Nil
          (Total : Nil)
        (Chapter-III)
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos.  1, 5 and 7
           (Total: 3)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
     Nil
       (Total : Nil)
(Chapter-V)
3.  The Committee desire that the replies of the observations contained in Chapter I
be furnished to them expeditiously.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some
of their recommendations.
A. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (Sl. No.1)
5.   There was a huge shortfall in utilization of the budgeted expenditure of the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation in the last three years.  The shortfall witnessed
in the Plan Expenditure as compared to the budgeted estimates was to the extent of Rs.
27.76 crore (33%) in 2006-2007, Rs.22.01 crore (24%) in 2007-2008 and Rs.54.60 crore
(42% - anticipated) in 2008-2009.  What the Committee found to be worrisome was that the
under utilization of the budgeted plan funds of the Ministry has been mainly on account of
slippages in implementing schemes that have a significant bearing on improving the reliability
and adequacy of statistics.  Emphasizing that it was necessary on the part of the Government
to undertake an effective exercise for identifying the shortcomings in the mechanism of
budgetary planning and ensuring proper utilization of funds so as to avoid large variations in
the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and actual expenditure, the Committee wanted to
be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this direction and their effectiveness in overcoming
the shortcomings in a time bound programme.
      6.    The Government in their action taken reply stated as under :-
“The delay in operationalising the Central Training Facility at Greater Noida
was entirely due to delay on the part of CPWD in handling over the building to
this Ministry.  The building was supposed to be handed over to the Ministry by
the CPWD in October 2008 but the handling over after rectification of all
defects was finally done by the CPWD only in Feb. 2009.
The Plan scheme “India Statistical Strengthening Project” could not be taken
up for implementation in 2007-08 & 2008-09 due to procedural delays which
came in the way of EFC approval of the scheme.
The Planning Commission did not accord clearance for operationalising the
proposed Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) ‘Basic Statistics for Local Level
Development’ as a full fledged scheme in the 11 th Plan.  As per the advice of
the Planning Commission, instead a pilot scheme was implemented with the
same name with the objective of identifying the data sources at village level.
This was launched in 2008-09 and was implemented in 32 States/UTs.  The
outlay provided by Planning Commission was Rs. 5.00 Crore during 2008-09,
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

which was revised to Rs. 4.09 Crore in the RE Stage.  Actual expenditure was
Rs. 3.20 Crore.
It is submitted to the Hon’ble Committee that in spite of the best efforts by this
Ministry to adhere to stipulated schedules and ensure optimum utilization of
plan funds, slippages which have occurred are entirely beyond the control of
this Ministry.”
7.  The emphasis made by the Committee has been on identifying and
overcoming the shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning in a time
bound manner so that the under-utilization of budgeted funds for plan projects and
wide variations in the budget estimates, revised estimates and actual expenditure
being witnessed do not continue to recur.  Instead of highlighting the measures
taken or proposed for ensuring that the plan projects are taken up for
implementation as scheduled, the Ministry have chosen to attribute the delays and
the consequent underutilization of budgeted funds to the want of necessary
approvals.    The Committee do not find the tenor of the action taken note of the
Ministry which is inclined towards absolving themselves of the responsibility for
delays in project implementation to be acceptable.  The fact that the shortfall in the
plan expenditure of the Ministry has been to the extent of 33% in 2006-07, 24% in
2007-08 and as much as 42% in 2008-09 calls for initiating immediate and concrete
measures by the Ministry for ensuring that the budgeted funds are not locked up
because of want of approvals as in the case of India Statistical Strengthening Project
and the Scheme, Basic Statistics for Local Level Development.   Delay in handing
over the Central Training Facility by CPWD which has been cited as a contributory
factor for underutilization of the budgeted funds is also untenable as the building
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

works were completed within the financial year, 2009-10, with a time lag of a few
months.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for initiating appropriate
remedial measures for overcoming the shortcomings in the budgetary planning
which could inter-alia include, proposing budget allocations for projects only after
obtaining all necessary clearances so that the scarce resources do not remain
blocked.  The Committee desire that a detailed account of the measures to be taken
up by the Ministry for ensuring that the budgeted funds are not locked up and
surrendered later on, may be furnished.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

B. India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP)
        Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
 8.   Significant budgetary allocations being made for the World Bank aided India
Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP) each year continued to remained underutilized and
later surrendered due to the frequent rescheduling of the project.  While the actual amount
expended on the project was only Rs. 55.90 lakh during 2007-08, the budgeted amount was
raised to Rs. 30 crore in 2008-09, which was left unutilized.  Although the necessary approvals
remained to be obtained for implementing the project, the budget allocation for the year, 2009-
10 was enhanced to as much as Rs. 100 crore.  The Committee were of the considered view
that the project, with an approximate cost of Rs. 700-750 crore could very well have been
financed by the Government thereby avoiding the prolonged and procrastinated discussions
with the World Bank, a fact also agreed to by the Secretary.  The ISSP being conceived with
the aim of developing and strengthening the State statistical systems in terms of infrastructure
facilities and providing reliable, timely and credible socio-economic statistics, the Committee
expected the Ministry to urgently address the pending issues pertaining to conceptualizing the
same for implementation with clarity, obtain necessary approvals, and ensure that the project
was taken up for implementation without any further delay.  The Committee desired to be kept
apprised of the progress made in this direction.  The Committee also expected that
dependence on foreign or World Bank loans for such an important project should be avoided
particularly in view of the fact that correct statistical data were extremely important for
economic, social and strategic planning.
 9.   The Government in their Action taken reply stated as under :-
“The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of the Government of India has
since recommended ‘India Statistical Strengthening Project’ (ISSP) as a
centrally sponsored scheme during the remaining part of the Eleventh Plan
period (2007-12), at an estimated cost of Rs. 650.43 crores (Rupees six
hundred and fifty cores and forty three lakhs only), of which 80% would be
funded through a World Bank loan and 20% would be borne by the
Government of India.  Thereafter, the requisite approval for the scheme has
been accorded by the Hon’ble Finance Minister, Government of India.  This
apart, the required negotiations for the project between the Government of
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

India and the World Bank were completed during the period September 14-16,
2009 at New Delhi.  Presently, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation is awaiting the approval of the full Planning Commission
response and subsequently the approval of CCEA will be sought.
 The World Bank was approached by the Government of India earlier for
providing assistance to ISSP not only in terms of financial support but also,
equally importantly, with a view to benefiting optimally from the rich experience
which has been acquired, over the years, by the World Bank in terms of
technically assisting several countries world-wide through their STATCAP
(Statistical Capacity Building) Programme to help them develop professionally
sound and sustainable National Statistical System which can adequately and
effectively take  care of meeting not only the current unmet demands and
requirements for data but also the emerging/future requirements for statistical
services and products.”
10.   The Committee feel constrained to note that the World Bank aided India
Statistical Strengthening Project estimated to cost Rs. 650 crore is yet to be cleared
by the Planning Commission and the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA).  Consequently, as in the year 2008-09, the Budget allocation of Rs. 100 crore
made for the project during the year 2009-10 is likely to remain unutilized.  Also,
while the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation had
submitted to the Committee that the project could very well have been financed by
the Government without dependence on World Bank aid, as per the action taken
note, the World Bank assistance is expected to help in developing professionally
sound and sustainable National Statistical System.  The Committee are further
constrained to note that even after the completion of 10 th Five Year Plan the
Government do not have a rigorous and reliable statistical system.  In the absence of
reliable data, which is extremely essential for framing any policy and plan
documents, all plan projections will become uncertain or even unreliable.
Considering the fact that the project has been languishing since long with the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

budgeted funds surrendered year after year, the Committee desire to be furnished
with a factual note detailing the nature and conditionalities of the World Bank
assistance for the project, the benefits that have accrued and are likely to accrue
with the assistance, the current status of the project and the Ministry’s plan of action
for implementing the project within one month of the presentation of this report to
Parliament.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C. Shortage of Manpower
Recommendation (Sl. No.3)
 11.  The Committee noted with serious concern that the sample size for NSSO
Surveys has remained unchanged in the last 20 years despite the manifold increase in
population.  As per the Secretary, MOSPI’s submission, shortage of manpower was the main
reason for the inability in increasing the sample size of the surveys. The Committee
recommended that for overcoming the problem, the desirability of appropriately revising the
methods and conditions of recruitment without compromising the requisite standards and
relaxing the limit on filling the number of direct vacancies in a year needed to be taken up by
the Ministry with the Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT).   The Committee
expressed trust that these measures combined with the policy of engaging qualified and
trained investigators on contract would address the problem of shortage of manpower for
carrying out the NSSO field surveys.
      12.   The Government in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under :
“The no. of vacancies in Statistical Investigation Grade I (filled through
promotions) and Grade II (filled through recruitment) are 102 and 892,
respectively as on1.12.2009.
The recruitment / promotion of these officials are done by the Subordinate
Statistical Service Cadre Control Authority (SSS CCA).  As such, NSSO (FOD)
has no role in this regard.
Amendment of RRs can be a solution to enable overcoming the problems which
is also the responsibility of the Cadre Controlling Authority of the SSS.
Meanwhile, measures have been taken to recruit contract investigators for
addressing the problem of acute shortage of manpower recently for carrying out
various field surveys.  IN the current year 600 investigators for UFS, 616
investigators for SE, 126 investigators for NREGA and 227 investigators for WPI
have been recruited on contract basis through campus interview conducted in the
state capitals.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13.   While, as per the action taken note, amending the rules relating to
recruitment of statistical investigators is agreed to as being an effective measure for
overcoming the problem of shortage of manpower, the Ministry does not seem to
have taken any initiatives towards this end.  Though the recruitment rules and the
amendments thereto are in the administrative domain of the Subordinate Statistical
Service Cadre Control Authority (SSS CCA), it is imperative on part of the Ministry to
take up the matter of amendments required thereto with the Cadre Controlling
Authority so as to enable in overcoming the problem of shortage of manpower,
which is presently said to be hindering the work of NSSO with the sample size of the
Surveys remaining unchanged in the last 20 years despite the manifold increase in
population.  The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to take up the matter with
the cadre controlling authority concerned as well as the Department of Personnel
and Training and apprise them of the outcome thereof.  The Committee also express
trust that filling up the vacant positions of statistical investigators by amending the
recruitment rules combined with the policy of recruiting contract investigators will
enable in addressing the problem of shortage of manpower.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

        D. Monitoring of Projects
       Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
 14.   In the context of delay and cost escalation in implementation of the 232 Central
Sector Projects scheduled for completion in 2008-09, the Committee had recommended that
appropriate corrective steps should be taken for addressing issues contributing to delays and
cost escalation in implementing projects.  The Committee also desired to be apprised of the
action taken against those held responsible for the lapses which led to cost escalation and
time overrun of the projects.
15.   The Govt. in their Action taken reply have inter-alia stated as under :-
“In view of the changed facts the Hon’ble Committee is hereby informed that
as on 30.6.2009, 951 Central Sector Projects costing Rs. 20 crore and above
are on the monitor of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
466 projects with respect to their approved completion schedule.  The cost
overrun of these delayed projects is of the order of Rs. 37,693 crore which is
only 11.97% of the approved cost.  It is also informed that overall cost overrun
in all projects together has been continuously declining from 62% in March
1991 to 12.10% in June, 2009 which is the lowest so far.  As already informed
earlier, appropriate corrective measures have been taken by the Government
to eradicate deficiencies in project formulation and implementation, obtain all
clearances and acquire land as far as possible to avoid delays in
implementation…..  In regard to the fixation of responsibility for time and cost
overruns in projects, it is again being informed that a mechanism of Standing
Committees has been set up in the Ministries chaired by the Secretary or
Additional Secretary of the concerned administrative Ministry with members
drawn from the Planning Commission, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation and Ministry of Finance.  The Committee goes into the
reasons and the factors and identifies individual or the agencies responsible
for causing delays and cost overrun.  The recommendations of the Committee
are implemented by the administrative Ministries and thereafter the revised
cost estimates are submitted for approval of the Government.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16.   The Committee note that the Ministry in their action taken note have
simply detailed the procedure in regard to fixing responsibility for time and cost
over-runs in projects.   Nothing has been mentioned by the Ministry about the
action taken against those held responsible for the lapses which led to cost
escalation and time overrun of the projects.  The Ministry do not appear to have
taken the matter seriously and have rather chosen to remain silent on the issue.
The Committee are constrained to note that as on 30.6.2009 out of 951 Central
Sector Projects, implementation of about 485 projects has been delayed with
concurrent cost overruns, amounting to more than 50% of the total Central Sector
projects, despite the corrective measures informed to have been taken by the
Ministry.  While taking a serious view in the matter, the Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation and desire that corrective steps be taken for addressing
the recurring problem of delays and cost escalation in implementation of
projects.  The Committee also expect to be apprised of the action taken against
those responsible for the lapses which led to cost escalation and time overrun of
the projects within one month of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

E.                 Price Indices
                          Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
17.  The Committee were constrained to note that despite the repeated assurance given
to the Committee by the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, the
process of compiling and bringing out separate Consumer Price Indices for urban and rural
areas [CPI (Urban) and CPI (Rural)] was yet to materialize.   The inordinate delay in formulating
the Consumer Price Indices and the abnormal variations witnessed in the prices of food items in
particular had necessitated shifting the base year of the proposed indices to 2009.  Having a
realistic projection of the consumer inflation in the country being an urgent necessity, the
Committee expected that the Ministry would, at least now, take stringent measures for
expediting the work of compilation of the separate Consumer Price Indices for urban and rural
areas.
18.   The Govt. in their Action taken reply stated as follows :-
“CPI (Urban) would be compiled for each State/UT as well as at all India level.
Weighting diagrams (consumption pattern) of the CPI (Urban) have been
derived from the results of the NSS 61 st round of Consumer Expenditure
Survey (2004-05).  All cities/towns having population (2001 Population
Census) more than 9 lakh and all state/UT capitals not covered therein were
selected purposively.  In all 310 towns have been selected either on
purposive or random basis from which 1114 quotations (price schedules) are
canvassed every month.
Regular price and rent data are being collected by the NSSO (FOD).  After
selection of base year and also compilation of base year prices, new series of
CPI (Urban) would be compiled.  It is expected that trial indices of CPI
(Urban) would be available in 2010.
CPI (Rural) would also be compiled for all states/UTs and all India.  Weighting
diagrams of the CPI (Rural) have also been derived from the results of the
NSS 61st round of Consumer Expenditure Survey (2004-05).  With a view to
have a workload within manageable limits and considering the fact that the
CPI (Rural) would provide the price changes for the entire rural population of
the country, a total of 1183 villages have been selected at all India level.  The
broad criterion of selection of villages is to have representation of all the
districts with in State/UT and therefore two villages from each district adjusted
on the basis of rural population of the State/UT have been selected randomly
from different tehsils.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

As field investigators of NSSO (FOD) were not available for price collection in
the rural areas, this work has been entrusted to the Department of Posts.
After training by NSSO (FOD), price data collection work has started from
October 2009.  It is expected that trial indices of CPI (Rural) would be
available in the beginning of 2011.”
19.   The Committee regret to note that there has been an inordinate delay
in formulating the new series of Consumer Price Indices, despite the repeated
assurance given in the matter by the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation.  While the Ministry, in the information furnished to
the Committee in the course of examination of the Demands for Grants (2009-10)
had stated that it has been agreed in principle to have 2009 as the base year for
CPI (Urban) and CPI (Rural) subject to further examination of price data pertaining
to 2009 as per the action taken note, the base year for the revised price indices
remains to be finalized.  The Committee had also, in their 6 th Report on ‘Inflation
and Price Rise’, inter-alia recommended that the Government should expedite the
work of compilation of new series of nation-wide Consumer Price Index (CPI) for
urban and rural areas as a prelude to formulating a national CPI.   Evidently, the
Ministry has been lagging on this issue.  The Committee, therefore, expect that
the Ministry takes serious efforts in concretizing the work of compilation of
separate Consumer Price Indices for urban and rural areas without any further
delay.  The Committee desire to be apprised with a detailed account of the
progress made in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 2
INDIA STATISTICAL STRENGTHENING PROJECT (ISSP)
Significant budgetary allocations being made for the World Bank aided India Statistical
Strengthening Project (ISSP) each year continue to remain underutilized and later surrendered
due to the frequent rescheduling of the project.  While the actual amount expended on the project
was only Rs. 55.90 lakh during 2007-08, the budgeted amount was raised to Rs. 30 crore in
2008-09, which was left unutilized.  Surprisingly, although the necessary approvals remain to be
obtained for implementing the project, the budget allocation for the current year, 2009-10 has
been enhanced to as much as Rs. 100 crore.  Earlier, the Committee had, in their 70 th Report on
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry (2008-09) stressed on undertaking the project for
implementation in right earnest.  Lack of clarity on the part of the Ministry on the nature of
intervention required for strengthening the Statistical systems of the States, and unfamiliarity of
the World Bank in extending loans to such projects have been cited by the Secretary, MOSPI as
the factors responsible for the undue delay in implementing the project.  The Committee are of
the considered view that the project, with an approximate cost of Rs. 700-750 crore could very
well have been financed by the Government thereby avoiding the prolonged and procrastinated
discussions with the World Bank, a fact also agreed to by the Secretary.  The ISSP being
conceived with the aim of developing and strengthening the State statistical systems in terms of
infrastructure facilities and providing reliable, timely and credible socio-economic statistics, the
Committee expect the Ministry to urgently address the pending issues pertaining to
conceptualizing the same for implementation with clarity, obtain necessary approvals, and ensure
that the project is taken up for implementation without any further delay.  The Committee desire
to be kept apprised of the progress made in this direction.  The Committee also expect that
dependence on foreign or World Bank loans for such an important project should be avoided
particularly in view of the fact that correct statistical data are extremely important for economic,
social and strategic planning.
Reply of the Government
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of the Government of India has since
recommended µIndia Statistical Strengthening Project ¶ (ISSP) as a centrally sponsored scheme
during the remaining part of the Eleventh  Plan period (2007-12) , at an estimated cost of
Rs.650.43 crores (Rupees six hundred and fifty crores and forty three lakhs only), of which 80%
would be funded through a World Bank loan and 20% would be borne by the Government of
India. Thereafter, the requisite approval for the  scheme has been accorded by the Hon ¶ble
Finance Minister, Government of India.  This apart, the required negotiations for the project
between the Government of India and the World Bank were completed during the period
September 14-16, 2009 at New Delhi.  Presently, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Implementation is awaiting the approval of the full Planning Commission response and
subsequently the approval of CCEA will be sought.
 The World Bank was approached by the Government of India earlier for providing
assistance to ISSP not only in terms of financial support but also, equally importantly, with a
view to benefitting optimally from the rich experience which has been acquired, over the years,
by the world Bank in terms of technically assisting several countries world-wide through their
STATCAP (Statistical Capacity Building) Programme to help  them develop professionally
sound and sustainable National Statistical Systems which can adequately and effectively take
care of meeting not only the current unmet demands and requirements for data but also the
emerging/future requirements for statistical services and products.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Recommendation no. 3
SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER
 It is a matter of surprise and serious concern that the sample size for NSSO Surveys has
remained unchanged in the last 20 years despite the manifold increase in population.  As per the
Secretary, MOSPI¶s submission, shortage of manpower has been cited as the main reason for the
inability in increasing the sample size of the surveys. As stated by the Secretary, of the total staff
strength of 3200, the existing vacancies were around 800, which amount to about 25% of the total
sanctioned posts.  The Committee had, in their 70 th Report on the Demands for Grants of the
Ministry (2008-09) taken cognizance of the issue of shortage of manpower, for overcoming which,
it was inter-alia suggested that the method of campus recruitment needs to be considered, and the
issue of filling up the vacant posts pursued with the Staff Selection Commission.  Apart from
pursuing these approaches, the Committee would recommend that for overcoming the problem, the
desirability of appropriately revising the methods and conditions of recruitment without
compromising the requisite standards and relaxing the limit on filling the number of direct
vacancies in a year need to be taken up by the Ministry with the Department of Personnel and
Training (DOPT).   The Committee trust that these measures combined with the policy of engaging
qualified and trained investigators on contract would address the problem of shortage of manpower
for carrying out the NSSO field surveys.
Reply of the Government
1)      The no. of vacancies in Statistical Investigators Grade I (filled  through promotions) and
Grade II (filled  through recruitment) are 102 and 892, respectively as on 1.12.2009.
2)      The recruitment / promotion of these officials are done by the Subordinate Statistical
Service Cadre Controlling Authority (SSS CCA). As such. NSSO (FOD) has no role in this
regard.
3)      Amendment of RRs can be a solution to enable overcoming the problems which is also the
responsibility of  the Cadre Controlling Authority of the SSS.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4)      Meanwhile, measures have been taken to recruit contract investigators for addressing the
problem of acute shortage of manpower recently for carrying out various field surveys. In
the current year 600 investigators for UFS, 616 investigators for SE, 126 investigators for
NREGA and 227 investigators for WPI have been recruited  on contract basis through
campus interview conducted in the state capitals.
 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Recommendation No. 4
COLLECTION OF TIMELY UPDATED QUALITY STATISTICS
The Committee feel concerned to note that there is no efficient on-board system in the
MOSPI for having quality and concurrent statistical data immediately.  The entire planning
process envisaged for the growth of the country becomes futile if the data is outdated, as the
Planning Commission relies on the statistical data given by the MOSPI.  With the information
technology resources currently available, developing an effective system of coordination among
various Ministries and State Governments for providing quality, reliable and concurrent data
instantaneously would not be a difficult task.  Building a strong statistical infrastructure with the
national statistical system being in sync with the Central Ministries concerned and the State
Governments, without any vested interest in the administrative system, is an imminent necessity
in the interest of the overall development and growth of the country. The Committee, therefore,
urge the MOSPI to formulate a concrete and time bound action plan for developing a unified,
effective and efficient system of collection of quality statistics and dissemination of data.   The
Committee desire to be apprised of the policy measures taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
 The Hon ¶ble Committee  may be aware that statistics is a subject in the concurrent list of
the Constitution.  The Collection of Statistics Act, 1953  has been repealed and a new Collection
of Statistics Act, 2008 is planned to be enforced shortly, to facilitate the collection of statistics on
economic, demographic, social, scientific and environmental aspects through a statistical survey
or otherwise (e.g. through the use of the administrative records).  This Act shall apply to any
Ministry or Department in the Central Government or to any Ministry or Department in a State
Government or Union Territory Administration or any local Government such as Panchayats or
Municipalities as the case may be in relation to the collection of Statistics for which a new set of
provisions have been included in the Act.  The Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation with the help of its Statistical organs, namely, the Central Statistical
Organisation(CSO) and the National Sample Survey Organisation(NSSO), provides the technical
resources and manpower support for coordination among various Ministries and State
Governments in respect of production and dissemination of quality statistics on most of the areas
of current and likely future concern for planned development and policy initiatives. The
following are some of the policy measures and actions which have been initiated by the Ministry
of Statistics & Programme Implementation in order that the administrative system as well as the
policy makers can  rely upon both the survey based statistics and the administrative statistics for
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

the purpose of objective viz. data based/data aided planning at different levels of Governance,
under the federal system of the country, right from the levels of local governments and stretching
up to the central government.
(i) In 2008, a medium term Vision, Policy and Strategic framework viz. National
Strategic  Statistical Plan (NSSP) has been formulated based on an extensive
process of consultations with all the concerned stakeholders, especially the
(ii) State/UT Governments and the same has been adopted for facilitating an integrated
and coherent development of statistical systems and the data /statistics produced by
them, across the country and at all levels of administrative functions.
(iii) This Ministry is in the process of having intensive interactions with the State/UT
Governments for evolving and developing effective and appropriate strategies and
instruments at the State/UT level,  in the form of   state-specific State Strategic
Statistical Plans (SSSPs)  to accomplish convergence between the national
mechanism and State level mechanisms for collection and compilation of statistics
under common standard statistical framework.
(iv) The Ministry is actively engaged in strengthening of the State Statistical Bureaus
and the Directorates of Economics & Statistics to function effectively and in a real
viz. functional sense as the designated nodal statistical agencies in the States/UTs in
respect of collection, compilation and dissemination of statistics in a timely,
updated and qualitatively sound manner inter-alia through the optimal utilization of
the power and potentials of Information and Technology  and use of the state of the
art technologies for speedy, error-free and cost effective transmission  and passage
of data through different levels of administrative set up. The India Statistical
Strengthening Project (ISSP) envisaged and designed for the purpose by the
Ministry is awaiting approval  of the Government of India.
(v) For effective use of registers ¶ based Statistics available with the Local Government
Institutions, a High level expert Committee headed by Member, Planning
Commission, has submitted  a detailed report on Basic Statistics for Local Level
Development. The report envisages inter-alia the collection, compilation and
transmission  of data  from the Panchayati Raj institutions in-charge of local
governance in the rural areas  for micro and local level planning needs of the
District and Sub-District level administration in the States. The Ministry is currently
engaged in conducting a pilot project in 32 States/UTs as a prelude to introducing a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Basic Statistics for Local Level Development.
(vi) This Ministry has posted senior level statistical officers as Statistical Advisors in
the Central Ministries for coordination and significant improvement in the
Statistical activities of Central Ministries and Departments.  They are also
responsible for standardization of statistical protocols under the overall framework
of the national system.  Similarly, a number of senior statistical officers have been
posted in the regional and zonal offices of the Field Operations Division(FOD),
NSSO inter-alia to ensure effective implementation of   central initiatives on
statistical matters in their respective/designated States and UTs.
(vii) Under the proposed India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP), as per the
stipulated requirements, the participating States/UTs  have either already
constituted or else, are in the process of constituting High Level Steering
Committees for the purpose under the Chairpersonship of the concerned Chief
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Secretaries/Administrators, with the MOSPI, Government of India as also the senior
functionaries in-charge of other key line Ministries/Departments of the concerned
State/UT being also included in that Committee as members. The said Committee is
vested inter-alia with the responsibility to provide the required leadership, direction
and guidance to the issue of  formulation  and implementation of the respective
SSSP in the State/UT, under the ISSP.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Recommendation no. 6
6. The Committee also feel distressed to note that despite repeated requests of the
Ministry, eliciting information from NHAI in respect of the budgetary outlays for individual
NHDP packages, the organization has failed to furnish the requisite information in this regard.
The Committee desire that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation conveys the
Committee¶s displeasure in this regard to the nodal Ministry of the NHAI i.e. the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways.  The Committee expect a detailed explanation from the nodal
Ministry of NHAI for not furnishing the information essential for monitoring implementation of
the projects.
Reply of the Government
The National Highway Authority of India does not fall under the Annual Budgetary
mechanism for projects as is the case in respect of all other Ministries.  The cost estimates of
projects are approved by the Board and funds are provided from various resources including
petroleum cess, loan etc..  The allocation of funds to projects is contract based depending upon
the nature of the project.  In case of traditional contract-based projects, the payments are made on
the basis of progress made by the Contractors and in case of Build, Own  Operate and Transfer
(BOOT) on Build Own and Operate (BOO)/Build, Operate & Transfer (BOT) projects the funds
are brought in by the private sector partners.
According to NHAI, work plans have been prepared for 2009-10 and   2010-11 which
seeks target award of project of approximately 12000 KM length costing approximately
Rs.1,00,000 crore each year.  The Government recently accepted the recommendations of
B.K.Chaturvedi Committee regarding funding of NHDP projects under SARDP-NE and in J&K
with additional budgetary support over and above the cess that Government provide to NHAI on
Yearly basis.  The status of National Development Highway Programme (NHDP) is furnished by
NHAI is submitted for information of the Committee in Annexure-I.  However, in order to get
information regularly, this Ministry is taking up the matter with Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, as suggested by the Committee.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Annexure±I
  STATUS OF NHDP
The National Highways have a total length of 70,548 km to serve as the arterial network of the
country. The Government of India launched National Highways Development Project (NHDP) to
upgrade and strengthen National Highways through various phases of National Highway
Development project (NHDP).  Overall status of NHDP, as on 31 October 2009 is as under:
* Not being implemented by NHAI
Phases Total
Length
in km
Date of
Approval
Approved Cost
(Expenditure
till
31.10.2009) in
Rs Crore
Length
Completed
in km
Length
under
Imp.
To be
awarded
Likely date
of
Completion
I
GQ,EW-NS corridors,
Port connectivity &
others
7,498 12.12.2000 30,300
(36009.16)
7240 252 6 99% of GQ
will
be completed
by Mar -10
II
4/6-laning  North South-
East West Corridor,
Others
6,647 18.12.2003 34,339
(34080.83)
3764 2227 657 Dec - 2010
III  A
Upgradation, 4/6-laning
4,815 05.03.2005,
27.10.2006
& 12.4.2007
33,069 1045 2605 1165 Dec-2013
III  B
Upgradation, 4/6-laning
7,294 12.4.2007 47,557 - - 7294 Dec-2013
Total phase III (phase III
A + III B)
12,109 - 80,626
(11051.97) 1045 2605 8459 Dec. 2013
IV
2 - laning with paved
shoulders*
20,000 July -2008
for 5000 km
27,800
- - -
Dec. 2015
(as per
financing
plan)
V
6-laning of GQ and High
density corridor
6,500 05.10.2006 41,210
(1725.86) 148 882 5470 Dec - 2012
VI
Expressways
1000 02.11.2006 16,680
(NIL)
NIL NIL NIL Dec - 2015
VII
Ring Roads, Bypasses
and flyovers and other
structures
700 km
of ring
roads/
bypass +
flyovers
06.12.2007 16,680
(NIL)
- 19 681 Dec-2014
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Overall Status of GQ, NS-EW Corridors:
NHDP Phase I : NHDP Phase I was approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) in December 2000 at an estimated cost of Rs.30,000 crore  comprises mostly of GQ
(5,846 km) and NS-EW Corridor (981km), port connectivity (356 km) and others (315 km).
Status of NHDP Phase-I is as under:
Corridors Total
Length
(in km)
Length
Completed
(in km)
Length Under
implementation
(in km)
Achievement
2009-10
(upto Oct,
2009)
Golden
Quadrilateral
5846 5736 110
North-South
& East-West
981 947 34
Port
Connectivity
356 242 108
Others  315 315
TOTAL 7498 7240     252
51
Under implementationSr.
No.
NHDP
Component
Total
Length
(km)
Completed 4
lane
(km) Length
(km)
No. of
contracts
Balance
for award
of civil
works
(km)
1 GQ 5846 5736(98.11%)  110 15 -
2 NS-EW 7300 4315 2189 118 637
3 Port
connectivity
380 241 133 6 6
4 Other NHs 965 841 104 6 20
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

NHDP Phase II :  NHDP Phase II was approved by CCEA in December 2003 at an estimated
cost of Rs.34,339 crore (2002 prices) comprises mostly NS-EW Corridor (6,161 km) and other
National Highways of 486 km length, the total length being 6,647 km. The total length of Phase
II is 6,647 km.
Status of NHDP Phase-II is as under:
Status of AwardCorridor Total
Length
(in km)
Length
Completed
(in km)
Under
Implementa
tion
(in km)
Length
Awarded
(in km)
No . Of
Contracts
Balance
for award
North -
South
3010 1625 980 2605 63 405
East-west 3151 1742 1178 2920 78 232
North-
South &
East-West
6161 3367 2158 5525 141 637
Others  486 397 69 466 10 20
TOTAL 6647 3764 2227 5991 151 657
NHDP Phase-III: Government approved 4 laning of 12109 kms of highways under NHDP Phase
III at a total estimated cost of Rs. 80626 crs. NHDP Phase III was targeted for completion by
Dec 2013.
Status of NHDP Phase-III is as under:
Status of AwardCorridors Total
Length
(in km)
Length
Completed
(in km)
Under
Implementati
on
(in km)
Length
Awarded
(in km)
No. of
Contrac
ts
Balance
for award
NHDP Phase III 12109 1045 2605 3650 48 8459
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

NHDP Phase IV: CCEA in the month of July-2008 approved 2 Laning with paved shoulders of
5000 km of highways all over India. .
NHDP Phase V:. CCEA approved on 5.10.2006, six laning of 6,500 km includes 5,700 km of
GQ and other(800 km) stretches under Phase V at a cost of Rs. 41,210 crore on Design Build
Finance and operation (DBFO) basis.
• Six laning of one section of 148 km, viz Vadodra - Surat section of NH-8 falling on GQ
has already been awarded on BOT basis during 2006-07.Both the stretches were
completed.
• During 2007-08 (concession of 882 km) has been awarded. Total 1030 km is under
implementation. Remaining 5470 km to be awarded.
• Phase ± V is targeted for completion by December 2012.
NHDP Phase VI: Govt. approved construction of 1000 km of Expressway under NHDP Phase-
VI at a cost of Rs. 16,680 crore on DBFO basis. NHDP Phase-VI is targeted for completion by
December, 2015.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Recommendation No. 8
ECONOMIC CENSUS
The Committee note that too much time is taken in releasing the final results of the
Economic Census Surveys.  While the 5 th Economic Census was conducted during 2005, the
final results of the survey were released only during May, 2008.  A long time lag in releasing the
results of the economic census would defeat the essence and purpose of the survey data by
making it outdated.   As the data is used in formulating developmental/welfare oriented plans and
programmes, the Committee recommend that the process of releasing the economic census
should be done as early as possible. The Committee hope that the 6 th Economic Census which is
currently being undertaken would be expedited and completed during the 11 th Five Year Plan
itself.
Reply of the Government
The Sixth Economic Census is proposed to be conducted by the CSO during XI five year
plan.  Based on the experience in the 5th Economic Census and past trends, it is estimated that the
6th Economic Census will involve enumeration of around 45 million establishments spread
across all the States and Union Territories.    More than 4 lakh enumerators will have to be
engaged for carrying out the field work. The Planning and designing of the survey,  imparting of
training to more than 4 lakh field enumerators and a few thousand supervisors  both from the
Centre and the States, will take, at least 6 months.  The  survey work,  as per the experience of 5th
Economic Census, will take about a year.  After collection of the data, the scrutiny of schedules,
scanning of the schedules, processing of the data, table generation and preparation of the report
would require at least 6 months time.  In view of this the entire operation starting from planning
and design of the census to release of the final results may take two to three years.
Field work for the census is expected to be completed by the end of XI Five Year Plan.
However, processing of data and release of the results may spill over to the first year of the 12 th
Five Year Plan.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT¶S REPLIES
-NIL-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation No. 1
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
There has been a huge shortfall in utilization of the budgeted expenditure of the Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation in the last three years.  The shortfall witnessed in
the Plan Expenditure as compared to the budgeted estimates has been to the extent of Rs. 27.76
crore (33%) in 2006-2007, Rs.22.01 crore (24%) in 2007-2008 and Rs.54.60 crore (42% -
anticipated) in 2008-2009.  Acknowledging that the Ministry had difficulties in absorbing the
allocated funds, the Secretary, MOSPI attributed the problem faced in the recent period in
particular, inter-alia to the delay in establishing the Central Training Academy for Statistics, and
in implementing the World Bank aided programme for strengthening the statistical agencies of
the States / Statistical system of the country i.e. India Statistical Strengthening Project (ISSP).
What is worrisome to note is that the under utilization of the budgeted plan funds of the Ministry
has been mainly on account of  slippages in implementing schemes that have a significant
bearing on improving the reliability and adequacy of statistics.  There has been recurring and
substantial under-utilisation of the Budget allocations under the plan head, Strengthening of Data
Processing and Storage and Dissemination of Computer Centre,  the entire allocated amount of
Rs. 30 crore for the India Statistical Strengthening Project was surrendered in the last year; and
the scheme, Basic Statistics for Local Level Development could not be taken up for effective
implementation, despite the substantial budgetary allocation made in the last two years i.e. 2007-
08 and 2008-09. Given these facts, it is an imminent necessity on the part of the Government to
undertake concerted action for ensuring timely completion of projects and schemes.  It is also
necessary on the part of the Government to undertake an effective exercise for identifying the
shortcomings in the mechanism of budgetary planning and ensuring proper utilization of funds
so as to avoid large variations in the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and actual
expenditure.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this
direction and their effectiveness in overcoming the shortcomings in a time bound programme.
Reply of the Government
  The delay in operationalising the Central Training Facility at Greater Noida was entirely
due to delay on the part of CPWD in handing over the building to this Ministry. The building
was supposed to be handed over to the Ministry by the CPWD  in October 2008 but the handing
over after rectification of all defects was finally done by the CPWD only in Feb 2009.
The plan scheme ³ India Statistical Strengthening Project ³  could not be taken up for
implementation in 2007-08 & 2008-09 due to procedural delays which came  in the way of EFC
approval of the scheme.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

The Planning Commission did not accord clearance for operationalising the proposed
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS)  µBasic Statistics for Local Level Development ¶ as a full
fledged scheme in the 11 th Plan . As per the advice of the Planning Commission, instead  a pilot
scheme was implemented with the same name with the objective of   identifying the data sources
at village level . This   was launched in 2008-09 and was   implemented in 32 States/UTs. The
outlay provided by Planning Commission was Rs.5.00 Crore during 2008-09, which was revised
to Rs.4.09 Crore in the RE Stage.  Actual expenditure was Rs.3.20 Crore.
          It is submitted to the Hon ¶ble Committee that in spite of the best efforts by this Ministry
to adhere to stipulated schedules and ensure optimum utilization of plan funds, slippages which
have occurred are entirely beyond the control of this Ministry.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Recommendation No. 5
MONITORING OF PROJECTS
As per the information furnished to the Committee by the Ministry, 232 Central Sector
Projects, scheduled for completion in 2008-09 have witnessed time-overruns ranging from 1 to
180 months, with substantial concurrent  cost overruns as compared to the initially estimated
project costs.    Non-availability of adequate land and funds, issues relating to rehabilitation of
the displaced etc., which have been mentioned as contributory factors to the delays in
implementing projects is indicative of shortcomings in the pre-approval stage of the projects.
These issues need to be addressed in the project conceptualization and approval stage.  Other
issues, which include, law and order problems, slow progress made by contractors, lack of proper
response from the State Governments, etc. which have led to time-overruns and cost escalation
of projects can be resolved by ensuring effective monitoring and initiating appropriate corrective
measures, and by taking periodic and regular follow up action with the State Governments on
issues concerning the States.  Apparently, there are serious shortcomings in the mechanisms of
inter-ministerial as well as inter-state co-ordination for resolving the problems in implementing
projects. The Committee desire that appropriate corrective steps are taken for addressing issues
contributing to delays and cost escalation in implementing projects.  The Committee also desire
to be apprised of the action taken against those held responsible for the lapses which led to cost
escalation and time overrun of the projects.
Reply of the Government
In view of the changed facts the Hon ¶ble Committee is hereby informed that as on
30.6.2009, 951 Central Sector Projects costing Rs. 20 crore and above are on the monitor of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 466 projects with respect to their
approved completion schedule. The cost overrun of these delayed projects is of the order of Rs.
37,693 crore  which is only 11.97% of the approved cost. It is also informed that overall cost
overrun in all projects together has been continuously declining from 62% in March 1991 to
12.10% in June, 2009 which is the lowest so far. As already informed earlier, appropriate
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

corrective measures have been taken by the Government to eradicate deficiencies in project
formulation and implementation, obtain all clearances and acquire land as far as possible to
avoid delays in implementation. The major land acquisition problems are being experienced by
the national highway projects for which the following steps have been initiated at the level of
Ministry of Surface Transport /NHAI
a. Regional offices of NHAI have been set up at 10 different locations in the country to
look after implementation of projects. Necessary powers have been delegated to the
Regional Officers for this purpose.
b. The Contracts are regularly monitored at various levels such as by Supervision
Consultant, Regional Officers, Project Directors, Senior officers of NHAI.  Progress
reviews are also held at the level of Chairman, NHAI, Secretary, Department of Road
Transport & Highways and Minister, Shipping Road Transport & Highways.
c. State Governments have appointed Senior officers as nodal officers for resolving
problems associated with implementation of the NHDP such as land acquisition,
removal of utilities, forest / pollution / environment clearances etc.  These nodal
officers hold periodic meetings to review the projects and take action to resolve the
problems.
d. A Committee of Secretaries has been constituted under Cabinet Secretary to address
inter-ministerial and Centre - State issues such as land acquisition, utility shifting,
environment approvals, clearance of ROBs .
e. The procedure for issue of Land Acquisition notifications was simplified.  Earlier all
the notification under NH Act were vetted by the Ministry of Law.  An amendment was
made in the Allocation of Business Rules by which these notifications are not required
to be sent to the Ministry of Law.  The Ministry of Law approved standard formats of
various notifications keeping in view the similar nature of the notifications of Land
Acquisition.
f. Special land acquisition units are being set up to expedite land acquisition for various
projects. In order to expedite land acquisition, policy has been introduced empowering
Regional CGMs of NHAI to accept awards passed by competent authority for land
acquisition under section 3(G) of NH Act for amount upto Rs. 10 crore per case.
g. To expedite the construction of ROBs an officer of the Railways has been posted to
NHAI to coordinate with Ministry of Railways.  MOU has also been signed with M/s.
IRCON for construction of some of the ROBs. A system of monthly coordination
meeting between Nodal Officers of NHAI and Railways was introduced to expedite
clearances.
h. Action has been taken against non performing contractors and they are not allowed to
bid for future projects unless they improve the performance in existing contracts.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

i. Steps have been taken to improve cash flow problems of contractors by granting
interest bearing discretionary advance at the request of contractor, release of retention
money against bank guarantee of equal amount, deferment of recovery of advances ( on
interest basis) and relaxation in minimum IPC amount.
In regard to the fixation of responsibility for time and cost overruns in projects, it is again
being informed that a mechanism of Standing Committees has been set up in the Ministries
chaired by the Secretary or Additional Secretary of the concerned administrative Ministry with
members drawn from the Planning Commission, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation and Ministry of Finance. The Committee goes into the reasons and the factors
and identifies individual or the agencies responsible for causing delays and cost overrun. The
recommendations of the Committee are implemented by the administrative Ministries and
thereafter the revised cost estimates are submitted for approval of the Government.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Recommendation No. 7
PRICE INDICES
Despite the repeated assurance given to the Committee by the Secretary, Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation, the process of compiling and bringing out separate
Consumer Price Indices for urban and rural areas [CPI (Urban) and CPI (Rural)] is yet to
materialize.     Earlier, in 2007, the Secretary, MOSPI had assured the Committee that the indices
would be readied for release by the end of the year, which was later shifted to end of 2008.
Now, as per the information furnished by the Ministry, the indices are expected to be brought out
in 2010-11.  The inordinate delay in formulating the Consumer Price Indices and the abnormal
variations witnessed in the prices of food items in particular has necessitated shifting the base
year of the proposed indices to 2009.  Evidently, no serious efforts appear to have been made for
overcoming the problem of shortage of manpower for carrying out the market surveys for
collecting data for creating the indices.  Having a realistic projection of the consumer inflation in
the country being an urgent necessity, the Committee expect that the Ministry would, at least
now, take stringent measures for expediting the work of compilation of the separate Consumer
Price Indices for urban and rural areas.
Reply of the Government
CPI for urban areas
CPI (Urban) would be compiled for each State/UT as well as at all India level.
Weighting diagrams (consumption pattern) of the CPI (Urban) have been derived from the
results of the NSS 61st round of Consumer Expenditure Survey (2004-05). All cities/towns
having population (2001 Population Census) more than 9 lakh and all state/UT capitals not
covered therein were selected purposively. In all 310 towns have been selected either on
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

purposive or random basis from which 1114 quotations (price schedules) are canvassed every
month.
Regular price and rent data are being collected by the NSSO (FOD). After selection of
base year and also compilation of base year prices, new series of CPI (Urban) would be
compiled. It is expected that trial indices of CPI(Urban) would be available in 2010.
CPI for rural areas
CPI (Rural) would also be compiled for all states/UTs and all India. Weighting diagrams
of the CPI (Rural) have also been derived from the results of the NSS 61st round of Consumer
Expenditure Survey (2004-05). With a view to have a workload within manageable limits and
considering the fact that the CPI (Rural) would provide the price changes for the entire rural
population of the country, a total of 1183 villages have been selected at all India level. The broad
criterion of selection of villages is to have representation of all the districts with in State/UT and
therefore two villages from each district adjusted on the basis of rural population of the State/UT
have been selected randomly from different tehsils.
 As field investigators of NSSO (FOD) were not available for price collection in the rural
areas, this work has been entrusted to the Department of Posts. After training by NSSO (FOD),
price data collection work has started from October 2009.It is expected that trial indices of
CPI(Rural) would be available in the beginning of 2011.
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation OM No.G-20017/3/2009-B&F dated 8.1.2010
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER  V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
New Delhi;              DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
15 April, 2010                                              Chairman,
25 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Finance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
PRESENT
       Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.   Shri Harischandra Chavan
3.   Shri Khagen Das
4.   Shri Nishikant Dubey
5.   Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
7.   Dr. M. Thambidurai
RAJYA SABHA
8.    Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
9.    Shri Mahendra Mohan
10.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad
11.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
 1.   Shri A.K. Singh    - Joint Secretary
 2.   Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar   - Additional Director
 3.   Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan  - Deputy Secretary
 4.   Smt. B. Visala    - Deputy Secretary
    2.     The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:-
(i) Draft Report on Securities and Exchange Board of India (Amendment) Bill, 2009;
(ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and
Disinvestment);
(iii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue);
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iv) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Planning;
(v) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation;
(vi) Draft Reports on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of  Corporate Affairs;
(vii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and
Disinvestment);
(viii) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue);
(ix) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry
of Planning;
(x) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and
(xi) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs.
3.    The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i), (ii) and (iii) above with few
modifications/amendments as indicated in Annexures I, II and III.  The Committee adopted
the remaining draft reports without any change.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to
present all the reports to Parliament in the current session.
      The Committee adjourned at 1700 hours.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

ANNEXURE
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-2010) OF THE MINISTRY
OF  STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION
              Total  % of Total
(i) Total number of Recommendations   8
(ii) Recommendations/observations which
have been accepted by the Government  5      62.50
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3,
4, 6 and 8  )
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   Nil         0.00
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government¶s replies
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have  3       37.50
not been accepted by the Committee
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 1,5 and 7)
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect  Nil        00.00
of which final reply of the Government is
still awaited
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages