STANDING  COMMITTEE
ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
FIFTIETH  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2012 / Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)
50

FIFTIETH  REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC
SUBSTANCES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 March, 2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21 March, 2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2012 / Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)

COF No. 50
Price : Rs. 64.00
© 2012 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
I . Background ................................................................................... 1
A. Salient features of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances (Amendment) Bill, 2011 ..................................... 2
B. Reasons for delay in bringing out the amendment Bill .... 6
C. Issues pertaining to bringing out comprehensive and
broad based legislation etc. ................................................... 7
II. Clause 2 – Amendment of Clause [vii(a)] & [xxiii(a)]
Section 2 ......................................................................................... 10
III. Clause 5 – Amendment of Section 27 of NDPS Act, 1985 –
Punishment for consumption of any narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance ............................................................... 15
IV . Clause 7 – Amendment of Sub-sections (1) & (2) of Section 31
of the NDPS Act, 1985 – Enhanced punishment for offences
after previous conviction ............................................................ 19
V. Clause 9 – Insertion of new Section 57A – Report of seizure of
property of the person arrested by the notified officer .......... 21
VI. Clause 15 – Amendment of Sub-section (1) of Section 71 –
Power of Government to establish centres for identification,
treatment, etc., of addicts and supply of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances .............................................................. 23
VII. Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 31 A – Death penalty
for certain offence after previous conviction ........................... 26

APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
4 November, 2011, 9 January, 2012 and 19 March, 2012 .. 30
II. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 ........................................................ 38
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2011-2012)
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary
4. Shri Harishchandra Deoram Chavan
5. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
6. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
7. Shri Nishikant Dubey
8. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
9. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
10. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav
11. Shri Prem Das Rai
12. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
13. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
16. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
17. Shri N. Dharam Singh
18. Shri Yashvir Singh
19. Shri Manicka Tagore
20. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
21. Shri M. Thambidurai
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
23. Shri Raashid Alvi
24. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
25. Shri Piyush Goyal
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
28. Shri Mahendra Mohan
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
31. Shri Yogendra P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fiftieth Report on the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Bill, 2011.
2. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment)
Bill, 2011 introduced in Lok Sabha on 8 September, 2011, was referred
to the Committee on 13 September, 2011 for examination and report
thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under rule 331E of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained written information on various
provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue).
4. Written views/memoranda were received from the Lawyers
Collective, New Delhi; Amnesty International, London, U.K.; Indian Harm
Reduction Network, New Delhi; Indian Chemical Council, New Delhi;
Bulk Drug Manufacturers’ Association (India); Organisation of
Pharmaceutical Producers of India, Mumbai Indian Drug Manufacturers’
Association, Mumbai.
5. The Committee, at their sitting held on 04 November, 2011 took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) and on 09 January, 2012, heard the expert views of the
representatives of Lawyers Collective.
6. The Committee, at their sitting held on 09 March, 2012 considered
and adopted the draft report and authorized the Chairman to finalise the
same and present it to the Parliament.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and the representatives
of Lawyers Collective for appearing before the Committee and furnishing
the requisite material and information which were desired in connection
with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the Lawyers
Collective, New Delhi; Amnesty International, London, U.K.; Indian Harm
Reduction Network, New Delhi; Indian Chemical Council, New Delhi;

Bulk Drug Manufacturers’ Association (India); Organisation of
Pharmaceutical Producers of India, Mumbai Indian Drug Manufacturers’
Association, Mumbai for placing before them their considered views on
the Bill in the form of memoranda.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
20 March, 2012 Chairman,
30 Phalguna,1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
(vi)

REPORT
I. Background
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances continue to have
several medical and scientific uses. Their permissible use worldwide is
for medical and scientific purposes only. At the same time, these drugs
and substances have tremendous potential for abuse. In fact, these are
abused and trafficked worldwide. India’s approach towards Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances is enshrined in Article 47 of the
Constitution of India which mandates that the ‘State shall endeavour to
bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of
intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health’.  The
same principle of preventing use of drugs except for medicinal use was
also adopted in the three international conventions on drug related matters,
viz., Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, Convention on
Psychotropic Substances, 1971 and the UN Convention Against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, 1988.  India has
signed and ratified these three conventions. India’s commitment to
prevention of drug abuse and trafficking predates the coming into force
of the three conventions.
2. The statutory control over narcotic drugs is exercised in India
through a number of Central and State enactments. The principal Central
Acts, namely, the Opium Act, 1857. The Opium Act, 1878 and the
Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 were enacted long time ago. With passage
of time and the developments in the field of illicit drug traffic and drug
abuse at the national and international level, many deficiencies in the
laws that have come into force under the aforesaid Acts. As a result to
provide a comprehensive legislation on narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances which, inter alia , should consolidate and amend the then
existing laws relating to narcotic drugs, make provisions for exercising
effective control over psychotropic substances, make provisions for the
implementation of international conventions relating to narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Bill 1985 was enacted on 16th September, 1985, and the
Act is popularly known as (NDPS Act). The NDPS Act prohibits, except
for medical and scientific purposes, the manufacture, production,
possession, sale, purchase, transport, warehouse, use, consumption, import
inter-State, export inter-State, import into India, export from India, or

2
transshipment of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The NDPS
Act, 1985 has been amended twice since then viz. the NDPS (Amendment)
Act, 1989 and the NDPS (Amendment) Act, 2001.
3. The amending Act of 2001 rationalised the sentence structure so
as to ensure that while drug traffickers who traffic in significant quantities
of drugs are punished with deterrent sentences, the addicts and those
who commit less serious offences are sentenced to less severe punishment.
Such provisions have sometimes been misinterpreted to imply that in
determining quantities, only the pure drug content in the quantum of
drug seized should be reckoned. Since the Act duly provides for
punishment for preparations of drugs also, this amendment seeks to clarify
the legislative intent to take the entire quantity of drug seized in a case
for determining the quantum of punishment and not the pure drug
content. Provisions for tracing and seizing of illegally acquired properties
pursuant to drug trafficking activity were introduced in the Principal Act
by way of amendment in 1989 and were further strengthened in the
amending Act of 2001. The need for further expanding the scope of such
provisions and to broad base the definition of illegally acquired property
so that it becomes more difficult for drug traffickers to enjoy the fruits
of drug trafficking activity , has been experienced. It is proposed to do
so by way of certain amendments.
4. During the implementation of the Act, some anomalies have
been noticed in the amendments effected in 2001. Accordingly the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substance (Amendment) Bill, 2011 aims at
rectifying those anomalies and also making certain further changes to
strengthen the provisions of the Act.
A. Salient features of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance
(Amendment) Bill, 2011
5. Salient features of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 are given below:—
i. Defining ‘Central Government Factories’ [new entry in
Section 2]: Even though the term ‘Central Government
Factories’ is mentioned in certain Sections of the Act, till now
it has not been defined in the Act. It is proposed to define
‘Central Government Factories’ on the lines of the definition
of ‘Government Company’ under the Companies Act, so as
to allow the Central Government the flexibility to restructure
the Government Opium and Alkaloid Works without diluting
the control over them.

3
ii. Changing the definition of ‘commercial quantity’ and ‘small
quantity’ [Section 2 (viia) and (xxiiia)]: NDPS Act follows
a graded system of punishment – the quantum of punishment
varies depending on whether the quantity of drug involved
in a case is ‘small’ or ‘commercial’ or more than ‘small’ but
less than ‘commercial’. It has been held by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court that while determining whether the quantum
of drug involved in a particular case is small/commercial,
etc., it is the pure drug content and not the quantity of drug
seized, which has to be taken into account. Since the drug
is almost never seized in the pure form and ‘small’ and
‘commercial’ quantities have been notified for preparations
also, it is proposed to empower the Government to notify
quantities in respect of preparations of drugs and psychotropic
substances also.
iii. Transferring the power of regulating poppy straw from
unlanced crop from State Government to the Central
Government [Sections 9 and 10]:  Apart from the traditional
method of extraction of opium from the poppy plant and
using the same to produce alkaloids which is presently in
vogue in the country, there is an alternative modern method
of production of Concentrate of Poppy Straw (CPS) through
crushing of the poppy capsule and producing alkaloids from
CPS. This is a more efficient method of producing alkaloids
and all other countries of the world, engaged in licit poppy
cultivation, have already switched to this alternative route.
In India too, an expression of interest has been invited for
companies to produce CPS and manufacture alkaloids
therefrom. However, presently the NDPS Act empowers
the State Governments to regulate poppy straw, after opium
has been extracted from the poppy capsule. Since under CPS
method, the poppy capsule will not be lanced at all, if
purchase of poppy straw is regulated by the State
Governments, it will create an anomalous situation in
which the Central Government will have to obtain a
 licence from the State Government for possession, transport,
use etc. of poppy straw from which no juice has been
extracted. Therefore, it is proposed to vest the power to
regulate the poppy straw from which no juice has been
extracted with the Central Government. The proposed
amendment will not affect the powers currently being
exercised by the State Governments in regulating poppy straw
from which opium has been extracted.

4
iv. Rationalising the punishment for consumption of
morphine, cocaine and heroin [Section 27]:  Presently, the
consumption of these drugs involves a maximum punishment
of 1 year while trafficking of small quantities of the same
attracts maximum punishment of 6 months only . This anomaly
is proposed to be rectified, by reducing the maximum
punishment for consumption of drugs to 6 months.
v. P roviding for punishment for laundering proceeds of drug
related offences on the lines of punishment for similar
offences under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
2002 [new entry Section 27B]: The NDPS Act provides
for forfeiture of properties derived from drug trafficking.
Certain activities relating to property derived from drug
offences such as converting or transferring such property,
concealing/disguising the true nature of the property or
knowingly acquiring, possessing and using such property
have been prohibited through section 8A introduced in
the Act through the amendment in 2001. However, no
specific punishment was provided for violation of
Section 8A. This gap is proposed to be bridged by introduction
of a Section 27B with penal provisions on the lines of
the PMLA. This is also one of the commitments given to
Financial Action Task Force (FATF), of which India is a
Member.
vi. Removing the anomaly in punishment for repeat
offences that has been noticed after the amendment to
the NDPS Act, 1985 in 2001 [Section 31]:  Repeat offences
under the NDPS Act invite a punishment of one and one
half times (1.5 times) of the punishment for the first offence.
However, this provision has been erroneously worded as
‘one-half’ of the penalty for the first offence, instead of
‘one and one half times’. This anomaly is proposed to be
rectified.
vii. Providing for pre-trial disposal of precursors and
conveyances [Section 52A]:  While section 52A of the Act
provides for disposal of drugs during trial after due
certification of the inventories of the same by the competent
Magistrate, it does not do so for ‘precursors’ used in the
manufacture of drugs, which are also liable for seizure under
the Act or for conveyances seized. The amendment proposes
to allow for pre-trial disposal of precursors and conveyances
also.

5
viii. Making it mandatory for investigating officers to look
into and report illegally acquired properties of drug
traffickers, their relatives and associates to the Competent
Authority for seizing, freezing and forfeiture [new entry
Section 57A]: Presently , no time limit is prescribed for the
investigating officer to look into the illegally acquired
properties of trafficking and report the same to the Competent
Authority. Consequently financial investigations in drug
cases have been receiving low priority. It is proposed to make
it mandatory for the investigating officer to make a
report of the illegally acquired properties of the person
involved in drug trafficking, to the jurisdictional competent
authority within one hundred and eighty days of the arrest
or seizure.
ix. Enlarging the definition of illegally acquired property
to include the equivalent value of the property and
also include properties of drug traffickers and their
relatives derived out of income and assets whose source
cannot be proved[Section 68B (g) and (h)].  The Hon’ble
Supreme Court has interpreted the present provisions
of Chapter VA (including Section 68B) and held that it is
necessary to establish a direct nexus between the properties
sought to be forfeited and the offence committed. It is nearly
impossible to prove such a nexus as the drug traffickers do
not keep records of the drugs they sell and the manner in
which they invests the sale proceeds. Further, one of the
binding commitments that India has made to the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), membership to which was
contingent upon such commitments, is that NDPS Act will
be amended to include provisions for confiscation  of property
of corresponding value. It is, therefore, proposed to define
properties belonging to traffickers, their relatives and
associates, the source of which cannot be proved and the
property of equivalent value, as illegally acquired properties
by amending section 68B clause (g).
x. Change of nomenclature from ‘Collector’ to ‘Commissioner’
[Section 68D(1)]: ‘Collector’ of Customs and Central Excise
is now known as ‘Commissioner’. Enabling provisions are
being made so that the Central Government may authorize
Commissioner of Customs and Commissioner of Central
Excise, who were hitherto known as ‘Collector of Customs’
and ‘Collector of Central Excise’, to perform the functions of
the Competent Authority .

6
xi. Insertion of Explanation to Section 68H regarding validity
of notice:  Section 68H deals with the issue of a notice for
forfeiture of property. As stated above, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has held that it is necessary to establish a
direct nexus between the properties sought to be forfeited
and the offence committed, which is not practically possible.
In order to address this situation, it is proposed to insert an
‘Explanation’ to section 68H stating that the notice for
forfeiture would not be invalid merely on the ground of failure
to establish a nexus between the property sought to be
forfeited and any activity in contravention of the provisions
of this Act (drug trafficking activity).
xii. Enabling provision to nominate Member, ATFP as
Chairman, ATFP [Section 68O]:  Appeals against the orders
of the Competent Authorities are filed with the Appellate
Tribunal for Forfeiture of Property (ATFP). It is proposed to
add enabling provision to enable the Government to nominate
any member of the ATFP to act as the Chairman if the post
of Chairman is vacant or if the Chairman is unable to
discharge his duties.
xiii. Legal basis for measures to manage injecting drug users
[Section 71]:  Drugs are abused through a variety of ways
including injecting. Injecting drug users often share needles
and syringes, which makes them vulnerable to HIV AIDS.
To minimize risk to HIV , measures such as ‘needle-syringe
exchange’ and ‘oral substitution’ are followed. These measures
aim at management of addicts and cannot be strictly called
‘treatment’. It is proposed to include the word ‘management’
in section 71 so as to provide a firm legal basis to such
measures.
B. Reasons for delay in bringing out the amendment Bill (2011)
6. On being asked the reasons as to why has it taken so long a
period to correct the anomalies noticed in the NDPS Act, 2001, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue), inter alia , furnished their reply as
stated under:—
“Proposal to amend the Act to correct the anomalies commenced
soon after the previous amendments. However, since Act
amendment cannot be carried out frequently, proposals were invited
from all concerned Ministries/Agencies in the country. Then, because
of change of Government at the Centre, fresh inter-ministerial

7
consultations were necessitated. In the meanwhile, certain additional
amendments were felt necessary because of certain judgments of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Law Ministry had to be consulted
each time. All this was time consuming.”
C. Issues pertaining to bringing out comprehensive and broad based
legislation etc.
7. Responding to a query whether this opportunity to amend the
NDPS Act should be capitalized to bring in a comprehensive and broad
based legislation for updated statutory control over narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substance, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
inter alia  furnished their reply as stated under:—
“The present amendments have been proposed based on the
experience of different agencies in the country, since the last
amendments were carried out. It is felt that these amendments
shall make the NDPS Act, 1985 more comprehensive.”
8. However, representations received from stakeholders namely
Organisation of Pharmaceutical Procedures of India (OPPI), Indian Drug
Manufacturers’ Association (IDMA), Indian Chemical Council (ICC) and
Bulk Drug Manufacturers Association India (BDMAI) have in unison
advocated for amendments which were not covered in the provisions of
the Bill. The representations received as such proposed the following:—
(i) Amending of Sections 21, 22, 25-A, 26 of the NDPS Act, 1985
by incorporating provisions to enable compounding of
unintended or inadvertent non-compliances or procedural
lapses.
(ii) Amending of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 42 by
providing suitable provisions to provide protection to legally
authorized manufacturers, dealers, traders etc. of Narcotic
Psychotropic and Controlled substances from undue
harassment during investigations or enforcement of laws/rules
pertaining to the controlled substances.
9. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) on being asked
to give comments on the issue raised by the above stakeholders in the
representations, inter-alia, furnished the following reply as stated under:—
“In summary, it is felt that the issues raised by the industry
associations are administrative in nature which can be addressed
by better enforcement of the Act and not by amending the Act

8
itself…….. Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) does not support the amendments in the NDPS Act, 1985
suggested by the aforesaid industry bodies.”
10. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
prohibits, except for the medical and scientific purposes, the
manufacture, production, possession, sale, purchase, transport,
warehouse, use, consumption, import inter-state, export inter-state,
import into India, export from India, or transshipment of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances. The NDPS Act, 1985 has been amended
twice since then in 1989 and 2001. The NDPS Bill, 2011 mainly aims
at rectifying anomalies noticed during implementation of the
amendments effected in 2001 on the principal Act. The Bill also proposes
further changes to strengthen the provisions of the Act. The Committee
are constrained to note that the Government has taken ten long years
to rectify the anomalies noticed in the amendments effected in 2001.
The Committee are not convinced by the reasons adduced by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for the delay in bringing
out the amendments which include change of Government at the Centre,
fresh inter-ministerial consultations, additional amendments being
necessitated because of certain judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
etc. While expressing agreement about the necessity of the amendments
proposed in the Bill, the Committee, in the course of examination of
the Bill, felt the need for having a more comprehensive and
broad-based legislation on the issues pertaining to the control over the
narcotic and psychotropic substances. The Committee also find it
pertinent to point out that the issues raised by the stakeholders
viz., OPPI, IDMAI, ICC and BDMAI, in their representations pertaining
to amendments to Section 21, 22, 25-A, 26 of the NDPS Act, 1985 to
enable compounding of unintended or inadvertent non-compliances or
procedural lapses, and amending of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section
42 to address undue harassment faced by legally authorized
manufacturers, dealers traders etc. of Narcotic, Psychotropic and
controlled substances during investigations and enforcement of laws/
rules pertaining to the substances are genuine. The Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) assertion that “slight amendments in NDPS
Rules” would suffice to address the issues raised by stakeholders does
not satisfy the Committee. The Committee are of the opinion that the
issues raised as such by the stakeholders merit serious consideration
from the Ministry/Government though they are not covered in the
provisions of the Bill currently under examination. The Committee,
therefore, expect the Government to incorporate these provisions by
way of amendments in the present Bill itself.

9
11. The Committee, having dwelt upon the various provisions
of the Bill, recommend for enactment of the Bill, with modifications
as recommended in the succeeding paragraphs.

10
II. Clause 2 – Amendment of Clause [vii(a)] and [xxiii(a)] Section
2 – Commercial quantity [Section 2 (viia)] and Small quantity
[Section 2 (xxiii a)]
12. Section 2 (viiia) of the NDPS (Amendment) Act, 1985
reads as:—
‘‘commercial quantity”, in relation to narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, means any quantity greater than the
quantity specified by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette.
13. Section 2(xxiiia) of the NDPS (Amendment) Act, 1985
reads as:—
“small quantity”, in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, means any quantity lesser than the quantity specified
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
14. The NDPS Bill, 2011 proposes the following amendments in
Section 2:—
For clause (vii a) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“commercial quantity”, in relation to a narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or any preparation of such drug or such substance, means
any quantity of such drug, substance or preparation of such drug
or substance greater than the quantity specified, in terms of the
pure drug content or otherwise, by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette;’;
For clause (xxiiia), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“small quantity”, in relation to a narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or any preparation of such drug or such substance, means
any quantity of such drug, substance or preparation of such drug
or substance lesser than the quantity specified, in terms of the pure
drug content or otherwise, by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette.’’
15. On being asked why the terms of quantities are not specified
in the Act itself, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
inter alia  furnished their reply as stated under:—
“If small and commercial quantities were to be specified in the
Act itself, it would mean that every time a new substance gets

11
included in the list of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances
and ‘small’ and ‘commercial’ quantities in respect of the same are
to be specified, it would require an amendment in the Act itself.
Since amending the Act is a long process, traffickers of such
newly included narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, would
get relief from the Courts during the period such quantities
remain unspecified. In UK, the Home Secretary can list new drugs
and upgrade, downgrade or delist previously controlled drugs
without the need for passing an Act through both Houses of
Parliament.”
16. Views and suggestions on the issue submitted to the Committee
by an Organization include the following points:—
“The NDPS (Amendment) Bill, 2011 seeks to modify the definitions
of the ‘commercial quantity’ ‘and small quantity’, which will affect
the penalties imposed under the NDPS Act. The Lawyers Collective
is particularly concerned that the proposed amendments may
weaken the rationalized penalty structure introduced by the 2001
Amendment to the NDPS Act, wherein persons involved in minor
drug offences were subject to lesser punishment while traffickers
attracted stringent sentences.
Clause 2:— Sub-clauses 2(b) and 2(c) seek to insert the word
‘‘preparation’’ in the definitions of commercial and small quantity,
as well as add the phrase ‘‘in terms of the pure drug content or
otherwise.”
Proportionate Sentencing based on quantity
The 2001 Amendment was a watershed development in the history
of the NDPS Act that sought to make a distinction between drug
users/persons committing minor offences and drug traffickers, by
rationalizing punishment on the basis of the quantity of drugs
involved. The Act classified narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances into ‘small’ and ‘commercial’ quantities and brought in
notification S.O. 1055(E), dated 19th October 2001 (hereinafter
‘‘2001 notification’’) that specified quantity thresholds for 239 entries
(238 drugs + 1 entry for mixture of one or more drugs). Note 2 of
the 2001 Notification made it clear that the stipulated quantities
applied to the preparations of drugs and substances also. Thus,
quantity of drugs involved in the offence became the basis to
distinguish drug traffickers from less serious offenders.

12
Determination of Drug Quantity by Courts
Prior to 2001, in cases pertaining to drug users, the Supreme Court,
took into account the actual drug content in calculating quantity
and not the entire quantity seized. After the 2001 notification, the
penalties were determined by the quantity of drugs involved, but
the NDPS Act did not provide any guidance of ascertaining the
quantity of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances. Consequently,
some Courts relied on definitions of certain drugs that referred to
a numerical percentage, like
• ‘coca leaf’ includes leaf of the coca plant, mixture of the same
and all preparations containing more than 0.1% cocaine
[Section 2(vi)]
• ‘opium’ consists of coagulated juice of opium poppy; mixture
of opium poppy juice including preparations with 0.2%
morphine [Section 2(xv)]
• ‘opium derivatives’  includes medicinal opium, prepared
opium, heroin, morphine, codeine, thebaine and preparations
containing more than 0.2% morphine or containing any
diacetylmorphine [Section 2(vi)] to calculate the quantity of
drugs involved.
This resulted in several inconsistencies. In many cases, the Courts
relied on the definitions of drugs to calculate the total quantity of
drugs involved
iv, while in other cases including those relating to
preparations of diacetylmorphine, the Courts ignored the definitions
and looked at the percentage of diacetylmorphine, in contrast to
the definition in S.2(vi) that includes preparations containing any
diacetylmorphine
v. The inconsistency became more pronounced
when the drug was a preparation or a mixture inclusive of neutral
materials, wherein some Courts included neutral materials in
calculating the total quantity of drugs involved while others
excluded neutral materials
vi.
E. Michael Raj’s Case
In 2008, the Supreme Court in E. Michael Raj v. Intelligence Officer,
Narcotic Control Bureauvii held that in the mixture of a narcotic drug
or a psychotropic substance with one or more neutral substance/s,
the quantity of the neutral substance/s is not to be taken into
consideration while determining the small quantity or commercial
quantity of a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.  
It is only

13
the actual content by w eight of the narcotic drug which is relev ant
for the purposes of determining whether it w ould constitute small
quantity or commercial quantity .’’
Despite the above decision, the confusion in determination of drug
quantity did not cease. Some Courts sought to limit the application
of Michael Raj decision only to cases of heroin or opium derivatives.
Opium/Cannabis cases were distinguished from the rest and held
to be inclusive of neutral materials
viii.
2009 Notification
In 2009, the Central Government brought in a new notification,
through S.O. 2941 (E), dated 18 November 2009 (‘‘2009 Notification’’
hereinafter), wherein the quantities shown as small and commercial,
apply to the entire mixture or solution of the narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance and not just its pure drug content
ix. It must
be noted that the 2009 notification makes the entire quantity of
narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances liable, irrespective of
pure drug content. It is contended that the relation between the
2009 notification and the proposed amendment, which brings in
the terms ‘pure drug content or otherwise’  to the definitions of
commercial and small quantity, is unclear and will further
compound the confusion and result in arbitrary interpretation of
the Act.
Penal Statutes can’t be vague
It is a cardinal principle of penal law that what constitutes an
offence must be clear and not vague. It is argued that preparations
are already included in the definition of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances under the present Act as well as in the
2001 notification. It is unclear what the addition of the expression
‘‘preparation’’ to the definitions of commercial and small quantities
would achieve. Further, the term ‘otherwise’  in the proposed
amendment is vague and imprecise and can result in arbitrary
interpretation. The fact that the Act also prescribes the death penalty
for repeat offences involving specified quantity of drugs,
underscores the importance of due diligence in ascertaining the
quantity of drug involved in the offence.
It is submitted that apart from capricious sentencing, arbitrariness
in the determination of quantity would have other significant
implications, since quantity is a determinant factor vis-a-vis
i) jurisdiction of courts, that is, if the accused to be tried before

14
the Magistrate or the Special Court, ii) grant of bail and iii) the
duration of pre-trial detention.
17. The Committee are given to understand that the proposed
amendments on Clause (viia) and (xxiiia) of Section 2 are intended
to remove ambiguity in respect of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances to determine the consequential penalty for the illegal
consumption, possession, trafficking etc. of the drugs and substances.
The Committee, however, note that meanings denoted by the terms/
expressions ‘preparation’ and ‘otherwise’ in proposed amendments are
vague and unspecific. Such ambiguity in the clause would lead to
arbitrariness in the interpretation of the law and may weaken the
rationalized penalty structure introduced by the 2001 Amendment to
the NDPS Act. The Committee feel that if the proposed amendments
intend to provide specific provisions for considering the pure drug
content of a recovery to determine the consequential penalty/
punishment for an offender, no word/term/clause with ambiguous
meaning should be used in the provisions. In the opinion of the
Committee, this will enable the Courts/law enforcement agencies to
award punishment commensurate with the seriousness of the crime
committed under the NDPS Act. The Committee desire that the Clauses
(viia) and (xxiiia) of Section 2 may be amended suitably so as to spell
out in clear terms and measure the difference of ‘small quantity’ and
‘commercial quantity’.

15
III. Clause 5 – Amendment of Section 27 of NDPS Act, 1985 –
Punishment for consumption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance
18. Section 27 of NDPS Act, 1985 reads as under:—
“(a) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic substance consumed
is cocaine, morphine, diacetylmorphine or any other narcotic
drug or any psychotropic substance as may be specified in
this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to
twenty thousand rupees; or with both; and
(b) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic substance consumed
is other than those specified in or under clause (a), with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or
with both.”
19. The NDPS (Amendment) Bill, 2011 proposes the following
amendment of Section 27 of the NDPS Act, 1985:—
“Whoever consumes any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance
in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order
made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees or with both.”
20. On being asked during oral evidence, that whether increasing
the penal provision for trafficking drugs in small quantity to one year
imprisonment from the existing 6 months imprisonment instead of
reducing the penal provision for consumption of drugs from one year
imprisonment to 6 months, the Ministry in their post evidence reply
furnished the following written submission as below:—
“The background of this proposal is the amendment carried out
in the Act in 2001. Prior to 2001, there was a uniform punishment
of 10 – 20 years along with financial penalty for all offences under
the Act, irrespective of the quantum of drug involved. The 2001
amendment introduced a system of graded punishment with the
offences involving trafficking of ‘small’ quantities attracting
punishment of only upto 6 months. However, the consumption of
drugs like heroine and cocaine attracts 1 year punishment which
is more than the punishment for traffickers. This is an anomalous
situation which was sought to be corrected by bringing down the

16
punishment for consumption also to the level of traffickers of ‘small’
quantities. The other alternative could have been to increase the
level of punishment in respect of traffickers also to 1 year. However,
this was not proposed on account of the following reasons:—
(a) After having obtained Parliament’s approval for reduction of
punishment in respect of traffickers of small quantity from
10 years to a maximum of 6 months, there appeared to be
no justification for seeking enhancement of the punishment
again,
(b) Punishment for traffickers is contained in several sections of
the NDPS Act, 1985 viz. Sections 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22 and
23 and there appeared to be no justification for enhancing
punishment in respect of offences listed under all these
sections.
However, in view of observations of the Standing Committee on
Finance, the Ministry will have no objection to revising the
proposal.”
21. In a written submission received by the Committee from an
NGO it has been stated that Section 27 of the principal Act may altogether
be deleted and penal action against drug dependency is inappropriate
and unjust for the following reasons:—
• Persons who use drugs need support and assistance.
Punishment is not an appropriate sanction for drug use and
dependence. It has to be understood that once a person
becomes dependent on drugs, she/he cannot give up without
medical help. Punishing a patient is not only inappropriate
but also unhelpful and unjust.
• Punishment is also not an appropriate sanction for
experimental or occasional use of drugs. First time or
occasional users will benefit more from education on the
harms of continued use, rather than prosecution and jail.
Counseling and social support is also more likely to dissuade
future use.
• Imprisoning persons who consume drugs will not address
the problem of consumption or addiction. On the contrary,
incarceration will aid drug users’ exposure to and contact
with other criminal offenders, and likely to entrench them
in a life of more and serious crime.

17
• The NDPS Act itself seeks to provide education, identification,
treatment, rehabilitation and social reintegration for persons
dependent on drugs. Criminal records diminish chances of
reintegration including opportunities for education and
employment. Section 27 thus contradicts the legislative intent,
which is to treat and assimilate persons who use or are
dependent on drugs in society.
• Section 27 is inconsistent with other provisions of the NDPS
Act. The Act itself empowers the State Government to supply
opium to registered addicts for his/her personal consumption
[Section 10(1)(a)(vi)] while Section 71 authorizes the
Government to establish treatment centres for addicts.
Treatment in these de-addiction centres don’t require prior
criminal prosecution, thereby indicating that the Government
itself acknowledges that drug dependence is a medical
condition, requiring treatment and support and not
incarceration.
• Also, the World Health Organisation (WHO) recognizes drug
dependence as a ‘‘multi-factorial health disorder that often
follows the course of a relapsing and remitting chronic
disease.” Imposing criminal penalties for a medical condition
is illogical and unfair.
• The NDPS Act is modeled on International Drug Conventions,
namely, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, as
amended by the Protocol Amending the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, 1972, the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, 1971 and the Convention against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, 1988. None of
these Conventions require State Parties to make consumption
of drugs a punishable offence.
• Evidence from European Union (EU) countries, where
consumption is decriminalized or depenalised, shows that it
has not resulted in higher drug use or dependence. In fact,
removing criminal sanctions for drug consumption has led
to improved access to medical and social services and
reduction in petty crimes. Similarly, there is no proof that
criminalisation of drug use or prohibitionist drug policies
have deterred people from consuming illicit drugs.
• In 2001, Portugal decriminalized consumption, possession and
acquisition of narcotic and psychotropic drugs for personal

18
use. Addicts are supported through medical facilities while
occasional users receive admonition. Ten years later, several
studies show that there has been significant decline in petty
crimes related to drug consumption like theft, because of
availability of methadone treatment, decrease in HIV
incidence amongst injecting drug users, along with reduction
in recidivist crimes.
22. The proposed amendment intends to rationalize the
punishment for consumption of morphine, cocaine and heroine by
reducing it to 6 months from the existing 1 year in the light of the
provision entailing maximum 6 months imprisonment for trafficking
of small quantities. In view of the menace of drug abuse rampant in
the society, the Committee are not inclined to accept the suggestion
forwarded by an NGO that Section 27 of the NDPS Act, prescribing
punishment for abusing drugs, be deleted altogether as drug
dependents/addicts are considered as patients who need help and
treatment rather than imprisonment. However, the Committee feel that
the medical maxim of ‘prevention is better than cure’ is applicable to
the fight against the menace of drug abuse/addiction in the society as
well. The Committee are of the considered view that legislation
prescribing deterrent punishment for consumption of narcotic drugs
or psychotropic substances is needed, as part of multi-pronged approach
to curb the drug menace. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
contrary to the proposal in the Bill, status quo should be maintained
in respect of punishment for consumption of morphine, cocaine and
heroine i.e. 1 year jail term and that the punishment for trafficking
in “small quantity” should rather be enhanced to 1 year jail term from
the existing 6 months jail term in the NDPS Act.

19
IV . Clause 7 – Amendment of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 31
of the NDPS Act, 1985 – Enhanced punishment for offences after
previous conviction
23. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 31 reads as under:—
“If any person who has been convicted of the commission of, or
attempt to commit, or abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to commit,
any of the offences punishable under this Act is subsequently
convicted of the commission of, or attempt to commit, or abetment
of, or criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence punishable under
this Act with the same amount of punishment shall be punished
for the second and every subsequent offence with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-half of the
maximum term of imprisonment and also be liable to fine which
shall extend to one-half of the maximum amount of fine.
(2) Where the person referred to in sub-section (1) is liable to be
punished with a minimum term of imprisonment and to a minimum
amount of fine, the minimum punishment for such person shall
be one-half of the minimum term of imprisonment and one-half
of the minimum amount of fine:—
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a fine exceeding the fine for which a person is
liable.”
24. The NDPS (Amendment) Bill, 2011 proposes to the following
amendments/substitutions in sub-section (1) and (2) of section 2 of the
NDPS Act, 1985 as below:—
“(a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) for the words “one-half of the maximum term”, the
words “one and one half times of the maximum term”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “one-half of the maximum amount”, the
words “one and one-half times of the maximum
amount” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words “one-half of the minimum term”, the
words “one and one-half times of the minimum term”
shall be substituted;

20
(ii) for the words “one-half of the minimum amount”, the
words “one and one-half times of the minimum
amount” shall be substituted’’.
25. Repeated offences under the NDPS Act invite a punishment
of one and one half times the quantum of punishment for the first
offence, which however has been erroneously worded as ‘one-half’ of
the penalty for the first offence instead of ‘one and one half times’.
Such an error must have come in the way of commensurate punishment
for crimes committed under sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 31 of
the NDPS Act. The Committee are constrained to note the lack of
seriousness on the part of the Government in letting the error linger
for one decade and urge the Government to rectify the aforesaid error
as proposed in the Bill without delay.

21
V . Clause 9 – Insertion of new section 57A – Report of seizure of
property of the person arrested by the notified officer –
26. The NDPS (Amendment) Bill proposes to insert new section
57A, after section 57 of the principal Act, which reads as:—
“Whenever any officer notified under section 53 makes an arrest
or seizure under this Act, and the provisions of Chapter VA apply
to any person involved in the case of such arrest or seizure, the
officer shall make a report of the illegally acquired properties of
such person to the jurisdictional competent authority within one
hundred and eighty days of the arrest or seizure.”
27. The Committee feel that the stipulated 180 days for reporting
the illegally acquired property of the person arrested is too long a period.
On being asked whether the number of days for reporting of the seizure
can be reduced to two to three months, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) inter alia furnished the following written reply
as stated below:—
“The initial proposal was for a time of 2 months only for making
a report of illegally acquired property. However, during inter-
ministerial consultations, certain enforcement agencies like the CBEC
requested for enhancement of this limit in this new Section proposed
in the Act to 6 months, as the complaint in the seizure case is
required to be filed within 6 months and because it would be
difficult to complete the investigation relating to illegally acquired
property in 60 days time. For this very reason, CBN argued against
introduction of the provision itself. The Government of Himachal
Pradesh was also against the introduction of this provision as it
will place extra burden on the investigation officers and act as a
disincentive to police officers to investigate such cases. In view of
such comments received from various agencies, it was decided to
provide for 6 months’ for reporting upon illegally acquired
properties in this new Section in the Act.”
28. The Committee are in agreement with the proposal to insert
a new section 57A in respect of report of seizure of property of the
person arrested by the notified officer. However, stipulating 180 days
for reporting the illegally acquired property of the person arrested is
too long a period. The Ministry has stated that 180 days stipulation
has been made in view of comments received from various agencies
expressing that it will not be possible to complete investigations relating
to illegally acquired property in 60 days, and that stipulating shorter
days will act as a disincentive to police officers investigating such

22
cases. The Committee are not convinced by the reasons advanced by
the Ministry for putting such a proposal. The Committee are of the
view that stipulation of such a long period (180 days) would entice and
enable for manipulation/distortion of facts about the seized property
in question. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the limit may
be reduced to 90 days.

23
VI. Clause 15 – Amendment of Sub-section (1) of Section 71 – Power
of Government to establish centres for identification, treatment,
etc., of addicts and supply of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances—
29. Sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 71 of the NDPS Act, 1985
reads as under:—
“(1) The Government may, in its discretion, establish as many
centres as it thinks fit for identification, treatment, education,
after-care, rehabilitation, social re-integration of addicts and
for supply, subject to such conditions and in such manner as
may be prescribed, by the concerned Government of any narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances to the addicts registered with
the Government and to others where such supply is a medical
necessity.
(2) The Government may make rules consistent with this Act
providing for the establishment, appointment, maintenance,
management and superintendence of, and for supply of narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances from, the centres referred to in
sub-section (1) and for the appointment, training, powers, duties
and persons employed in such centres.”
30. The NDPS (Amendment) Bill, 2011 proposes the following
amendment as below:—
“In section 71 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the
words “identification, treatment”, the word “management,” shall
be inserted.”
31. During evidence before the Committee, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) were asked to comment on the view that the
word ‘may’ in Section 71 be substituted with ‘shall’ to make mandatory
for the Government to establish centres for treatment for drug dependent
persons in the country. The Ministry in their post evidence reply have
stated the following:—
“Such a change may not be practical. Further, the section provides
for establishment of treatment centres by the Government ‘in its
discretion’. Thus even if the word ‘may’ used in this section is
replaced with the word ‘shall’ the number of centres to be
established shall remain the discretion of the Government. No
material purpose will thus be served by making this change.
Moreover, the problem of drug abuse doesn’t exist in all parts of
the country. In such a scenario, it should be at the discretion of

24
the Government to decide where such centers should be set up on
the basis of need.”
32. Regarding the rationale and objective for inserting ‘management’
in Section 71(1), the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
submitted the following as stated under:—
“The ‘treatment’ of drug-addicts presently being carried out at the
treatment centres very commonly involve ‘Opioid Substitution
Therapy’ wherein the patient is put on a less harmful dose of opioid,
other than the drug to which he/she is addicted. This is more in
the nature of ‘management’ of the addicts. The insertion of the
word ‘management’ would therefore provide a firm legal basis to
such measures.”
33. On this issue views/comments received from a non-profit
Organization stated the following as below:—
“..the proposed insertion of the term ‘management’ after the
words treatment, identification in Section 71 of the Act, .. is a more
accurate description of clinical care for drug dependence. At the
same time, we would like to suggest the following change to the
said section:—
The words The ‘Government may, in its discretion, establish’ to be
replaced by The Government may establish, recognize or approve
as many centres as it thinks fit, The above changes are being
proposed because existing Government facilities for treatment and
rehabilitation are sparse. Consequently, many private centres have
come up, which are not subject to rules under Section 71(2). In the
absence of State oversight, many such centres are fleecing addicts
and their families, subjecting them to coercion, abuse and torture.
Some drug users have reportedly died because of physical torture
and/or lack of timely medical attention. There is an urgent need
to increase the number of Government institutions providing drug
dependence treatment as well as to regulate private facilities
purporting to provide such services.”
34. The Committee agree, with the proposed amendment for
insertion of the word ‘management’ after the words ‘identification,
treatment’ in sub-section (1) of Section 71 so as to give a firm legal
basis for treatment of drug addicts carried out at treatment centres
where patient/addicts are put on a less harmful dose of opioid under
the ‘Opioid substitution therapy’. The Committee desire the

25
Government to incorporate further changes in the Section so as to
enable the Government to be more proactive in establishing, recognizing
and approving more rehabilitation/management centres for persons with
drug addiction.

26
VII. Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 31 A – Death penalty for
certain offence after previous conviction—
35. That reads as below:—
“Notwithstanding anything contained in section 31, if any person
who has been convicted of the commission of, or attempt to commit,
or abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to commit, any of the offences
punishable under 3 sections[section 19, section 24, section 27A and
for offences involving commercial quantity of any narcotic drug,
or psychotropic substance] is subsequently convicted of the
commission of, or attempt to commit, or abetment of, criminal
conspiracy to commit, an offence relating to—
(a) …………………
(b) financing, directly or indirectly, any of the activities specified
in clause (a), shall be punishable with death.”
36. Responding to a specific query on the death penalty under
Section 31A of the NDPS Act with reference to Michael Raj case, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) inter alia  furnished the
following written submission as stated below:—
‘‘The judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of E. Micheal Raj,
does not recommend review of mandatory death penalty.
However, Section 31A of the NDPS Act, which provides for
mandatory death penalty in certain cases, was challenged in CWP
No. 1784/2010 in the High Court of Judicature at Bombay – Indian
Harm Reduction Network Vs. Union of India and Others. In the
judgment dated June 2011, the Hon’ble High Court observed as
under in this case:
‘To conclude, we hold that Section 31-A of the NDPS Act is violative
of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, as it provides for
mandatory death penalty. We, however, reject the challenge to the
said provision on the stated grounds, being violative of Article 14
of the Constitution of India. Further, instead of declaring Section
31-A as unconstitutional, and void ab initio, we accede to
the alternative argument of the respondents that the said provision be
construed as directory by reading down the expression ‘shall be
punishable with death’ as ‘may be punishable with death’ in
relation to the offences covered under Section 31-A of the Act.
Thus, the Court will have discretion to impose punishment specified
in Section 31 of the Act for offences covered by Section 31-A of
the Act. But, in appropriate cases, the Court can award death penalty

27
for the offences covered by Section 31-A, upon recording reasons
therefor.’
It would be apparent from the above that the Hon’ble Court did
not declare the Section 31-A of the NDPS Act as unconstitutional.
However, the said judgment has been examined in the Ministry
and the approval of the Finance Minister has been obtained to
amend Section 31-A to remove the mandatory nature of the death
penalty provided therein. However, by that time the proposal to
carry out the other amendments to the NDPS Act, which are
presently under consideration of the Standing Committee on
Finance, had already been sent to the Union Cabinet after a detailed
process involving inter-ministerial consultation and vetting by Law
Ministry. In view of observations of the Standing Committee on
Finance in respect of Section 31-A, the amendment to the same
may be included in the present set of amendments being carried
out, if the Standing Committee so recommends.”
37. Comments/views received from a non-profit Organization
further stated that:—
“Section 31A of the NDPS Act imposes mandatory death penalty
for certain repeat crimes involving a large quantity of drugs. The
death sentence is mandatory in that there is no punishment laid
down in Section 31A other than death. Under Section 31A, the first
conviction must be for offences under Sections 19/24/27A and for
offences involving commercial quantity. And the second conviction
has to be for offences relating to production, manufacture, possession,
transportation, export from India or trans-shipment, of the narcotic
drugs or psychotropic substances specified in the table in Section
31A(1)(a), e.g., Opium (10kgs), Heroin (1kg), Cannabis (20kgs), etc.
Section 31A applies to repeat offenders who are subsequently
convicted with specific quantities, which being greater than
commercial quantities, are still commercial quantity within the
meaning of Section 2(viia) of the Act, while Section 31 of the Act
provides for enhanced punishment for offences after previous
conviction. In order to attract Section 31, the subsequent offence
must be an offence punishable under the NDPS Act with the same
amount of punishment as the first offence. It is submitted that the
classification between repeat offenders under Section 31 and under
Section 31A is unreasonable and arbitrary. No substantial difference
exists between the two, except the quantity of drugs, which too is
notional, since Section 31A quantities themselves fall in the category
of commercial quantities.

28
Further, following the 2009 notification, quantity of drug is to be
determined on the basis of the entire amount of the mixture or
solution and not the pure drug content. As noted above, making
pure drug content irrelevant and taking neutral materials in account
will result in patently unjust consequences, especially in the context
of S.31A. For example ‘‘if X was convicted for 1 kg substance (including
500 grams heroin and 500 grams powdered sugar) while Y was
convicted for 900 grams substance (constituting 800 grams heroin
and 100 grams powdered sugar), still, X would get death for 1 kg
heroin under s.31A while Y would be imprisoned under s.31 for
900 grams, even though the actual amount of heroin is higher in
Y’s case. The legislature must avoid such unjust consequences,
especially in matters of life and death.
The NDPS Act has been enacted pursuant to the International Drug
Conventions, which do not mandate imposition of death penalty ,
much less mandatory death penalty for drug offences. On the
contrary, penal measures referred to in the Conventions are in the
nature of ‘imprisonment or other forms of deprivation of liberty’,
and not deprivation of life.
More importantly, Section 31A contravenes settled principles of
international human rights law and constitutional jurisprudence
on death penalty. Article 6(2) of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR) restricts imposition of death penalty
to ‘most serious crimes’, which has been interpreted to mean crimes
that involve intentional taking of life, and drug offences do not fall
in the category of ‘most serious crimes’. It is pertinent to point out
that United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the UN
agency responsible for drug control, itself is of the opinion that
drug offences do not meet the threshold of ‘most serious crimes’
and advocates ‘the abolition of the death penalty for drug offences’.
The Standing Committee may also note that the UN Human Rights
Committee has asked India to limit the number of offences carrying
the death penalty to the most serious crimes.
In India, death penalty is reserved for the ‘rarest of rare’cases,
which has also been held to be ‘the internationally accepted standard
in cases of death penalty’. The Supreme Court has never imposed
or upheld death penalty in any case that did not involve taking
of life. It is submitted that imposing capital sentence for drug crimes
that do not involve homicide is not consistent with the constitutional
principles of India.
In addition, in Mithu vs. State of Punjab, the Supreme Court had
declared mandatory capital punishment as unconstitutional. In a

29
recent decision, the Bombay High Court applied the same principle
and held Section 31A of the NDPS Act to be violative of Article
21 of the Constitution. The High Court observed that ‘the use of
wise and beneficent discretion by the Court in a matter of life and
death after reckoning the circumstances in which the offence was
committed and that of the offender is indispensable; and divesting
the Court of the use of such discretion and scrutiny before
pronouncing the preordained death sentence cannot but be regarded
as harsh, unjust and unfair’. The said decision has not been appealed
against by the Government till date.’’
38. From the reply furnished to Committee in response to specific
query on death penalty under Section 31A of the NDPS Act, 1985, the
Committee are given to understand that the Government is agreeable
to amend the said section to remove the mandatory nature of the death
penalty provided therein. The Committee also understand that in India
death penalty is reserved for the ‘rarest of rare cases’. The Committee
find that the NDPS Act had been enacted pursuant to the International
Drug Conventions, which do not mandate imposition of death penalty.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of Section 31A may be amended appropriately to read as ‘may be
punishable with death’ in place of ’shall be punishable with death’.
N
EW DELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
20 March, 2012 Chairman,
30 Phalguna,1933 (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

30
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 4th November, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
3. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
4. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
7. Shri Sarvey Sathynarayana
8. Shri G.M. Siddeswara
9. Shri N. Dharam Singh
10. Shri Manicka Tagore
11. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
12. Shri M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
14. Shri Raashid Alvi
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
16. Shri Mahendra Mohan
17. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao

31
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri R.S. Gujral, Finance Secretary and Revenue Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Goel, Chairman, Central Board of Excise and
Customs (CBEC)
3. Shri Anoop Kumar Srivastava, Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Jagjit Pavadia, Narcotics Commissioner
5. Shri Rajesh Nandan Srivastava, Director (Narcotics Control)
Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.R. Jha, Joint Secretary (FFR), Ministry of Home Affairs
2. Shri O.P .S. Malik, Director General, Narcotics Control Bureau
(NCB)
3. Shri A.K. Jaiswal, Deputy Director General (HQ), Narcotics
Control Bureau (NCB)
4. Shri B.B. Mishra, Deputy Director General (Ops.), Narcotics
Control Bureau (NCB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the
representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), Ministry
of Home Affairs and Narcotics Control Bureau to the sitting. The
representatives of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) made a
power-point presentation on the proposed amendments to the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Bill, 2011. Major issues
discussed included the definitions of small, commercial and pure quantity
of narcotic drugs, reducing of the punishment for consumption of certain
narcotic drugs, punishment for money laundering offences, expanding
the definition of illegally acquired property for forfeiture, issuance of
licences for poppy cultivation, and illegal cultivation of poppy. The
Chairman then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) that instead of bringing amendments to the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 in peacemeal, the
Ministry should comprehensively review the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 in context with the International laws
and conventions and also anomalies noticed in the Narcotic Drugs and

32
Psychotropic Substances Act and accordingly bring amendments to the
NDPS Act, 1985. The Chairman also directed them to furnish a detailed
background note to the Committee at the earliest in this regard.
3. The Committee decided to hear the views of individuals/experts/
organisations on the proposed amendments to the NDPS Act, 1985.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

33
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 9th January, 2012 from
1130 hrs. to 1430 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
4. Shri Chandrakant Khaire
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Prem Das Rai
7. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Yashvir Singh
11. Shri Manicka Tagore
12. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
13. Shri M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
15. Shri Raashid Alvi

34
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
17. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
18. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Meenakshi Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora — Under Secretary
PART I
(1130 hrs. to 1250 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Lawyers Collective
1. Shri Anand Grover, Senior Advocate and Director
2. Shri Tripti Tandon, Advocate
3. Ms. Amritananda Chakravorty, Advocate
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of
Lawyers Collective on the provisions of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Bill, 2011. The major issues discussed during
the sitting broadly related to quantities and purity of drug content,
treatment facilities for addicts, availability of opiates for medical use,
immunity provision on death penalty under Section 31(a) of NDPS Act,
deterrent provisions for drug abuse among the youths, cultivations of
poppy etc. The Chairman directed the representation of Lawyers Collective
to furnish replies to the points raised by the Members during the
discussion within a fortnight.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

35
Part II
(1250 hrs. to 1425 hrs.)
WITNESSES
3. *** *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned

36
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2011-12)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th March, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Anjan Kumar Yadav M.
6. Shri Prem Das Rai
7. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Rayapati S. Rao
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
11. Shri M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
13. Shri Mahendra Mohan
14. Shri Y.P . Trivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary

37
2. The Committee took up the draft Report on Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Bill, 2011 for consideration and
adoption.
3. The Committee adopted the above draft report with some minor
modifications/changes as suggested by Members. The Committee
authorised the Chairman to finalise the report in the light of the
modification suggested and present the Report to Speaker/Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

38
AS INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 78 of 2011
THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2011
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the
Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2011.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) after clause ( iv), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘( iva ) “Central Government
factories” means factories owned by
the Central Government or factories
owned by any company in which the
Central Government holds at least fifty-
one per cent. of the paid-up share
capital;’;
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Amendment
of section 2. 61 of 1985.

39
(b) for clause ( viia), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(viia ) “commercial quantity”, in
relation to a narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or any preparation of such
drug or such substance, means any
quantity of such drug, substance or
preparation of such drug or substance
greater than the quantity specified, in
terms of the pure drug content or
otherwise, by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette;’;
(c) for clause (xxiiia), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(xxiiia) “small quantity”, in relation
to a narcotic drug, psychotropic
substance or any preparation of such
drug or such substance, means any
quantity of such drug, substance or
preparation of such drug or substance
lesser than the quantity specified, in
terms of the pure drug content or
otherwise, by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette;’.
3. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-
section ( 1), in clause ( a), after sub-clause ( iii),
the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(iiia) the possession, transport, import
inter-State, export inter-State, warehousing,
sale, purchase, consumption and use of
poppy straw produced from plants from
which no juice has been extracted through
lancing;”.
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-
section ( 1), in clause ( a), in sub-clause ( i), after
the words “poppy straw”, the words “except
poppy straw produced from plants from which
no juice has been extracted through lancing” shall
be inserted.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.

40
5. For section 27 of the principal Act, the
following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“27. Whoever consumes any narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance in
contravention of any provision of this Act or
any rule or order made thereunder shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months or with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or
with both.”.
6. After section 27A of the principal Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“27B. Whoever contravenes the provision
of section 8A shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable
to fine.”.
7. In section 31 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for the words “one-half of the
maximum term”, the words “one and
one-half times of the maximum term”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “one-half of the
maximum amount”, the words “one and
one-half times of the maximum amount”
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the words “one-half of the
minimum term”, the words “one and
one-half times of the minimum term”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “one-half of the
minimum amount”, the words “one and
one-half times of the minimum amount”
shall be substituted.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 27.
Punishment
for
consump-
tion of any
narcotic
drug or
psychotro-
pic
substance.
Insertion of
new section
27B.
Punishment
for
contraven-
tion of
section 8A.
Amendment
of section 31.

41
8. In section 52A of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) The Central Government may,
having regard to the hazardous nature,
vulnerability to theft, substitution,
constraint of proper storage space or  any
other relevant consideration, in respect
of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic
substances, controlled substances or
conveyances, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify such narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances,
controlled substances or conveyance or
class of narcotic drugs, class of
psychotropic substances, class of
controlled substances or conveyances,
which shall, as soon as may be after their
seizure, be disposed of by such  officer
and in such manner as that Government
may, from time to time, determine after
following the procedure hereinafter
specified.”;
(b) in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the words “narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance” and “narcotic
drugs or psychotropic substances”,
wherever they occur, the words “narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances,
controlled substances or conveyances”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “such
drugs or substances”, the words
“such drugs, substances or conveyances”
shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section ( 4), for the words
“narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances”,
the words “narcotic drugs, psychotropic
substances, controlled substances or
conveyances” shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
52A.

42
9. After section 57 of the principal Act,
the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“57A. Whenever any officer notified
under section 53 makes an arrest or seizure
under this Act, and the provisions of
Chapter VA apply to any person involved
in the case of such arrest or seizure, the
officer shall make a report of the illegally
acquired properties of such person to the
jurisdictional competent authority within one
hundred and eighty days of the arrest or
seizure.”.
10. In Chapter VA of the principal Act, for
the heading “F
ORFEITURE OF PROPERTY DERIVED FROM,
OR USED IN ILLICIT TRAFFIC”, the heading “FORFEITURE
OF   ILLEGALLY  ACQUIRED  PROPERTY ” shall be
substituted.
11. In section 68B of the principal Act,—
(a) in clause ( g),—
(i) in sub-clause (i), for the words “of
this Act; or”, the words “of this Act or
the equivalent value of such property; or”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-clause ( ii), for the words
“such property,”, the words “such
property or the equivalent value of such
property; or” shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-clause (ii), the following
sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(iii) any property acquired by such
person, whether before or after the
commencement of the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2011, wholly or partly
out of or by means of any income,
earnings or assets the source of which
cannot be proved, or the equivalent value
of such property”;
Insertion of
new section
57A.
Report of
seizure of
property of
the person
arrested by
the notified
officer.
Substitution
of new
heading for
heading of
Chapter
VA.
Amendment
of section
68B.

43
(b) for clause ( h), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(h) “property” means any property
or assets of every description, whether
corporeal or incorporeal, movable or
immovable, tangible or intangible,
wherever located and includes deeds and
instruments evidencing title to, or interest
in, such property or assets;’.
12. In section 68D of the principal Act, in
sub-section ( 1), for the words “any Collector of
Customs or Collector of Central Excise”, the
words “any Commissioner of Customs or
Commissioner of Central Excise” shall be
substituted.
13. In section 68H of the principal Act, the
following Explanation shall be inserted at the end,
namely:—
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts,
it is hereby declared that in a case where the
provisions of section 68J are applicable, no
notice under this section shall be invalid
merely on the ground that it fails to mention
the evidence relied upon or it fails to establish
a direct nexus between the property sought
to be forfeited and any activity in
contravention of the provisions of this Act.”.
14. In section 68-O of the principal Act, in
sub-section (4),  after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that if the office of the
Chairman is vacant by reason of his death,
resignation or otherwise, or if the Chairman
is unable to discharge his duties owing to
absence, illness or any other cause, the
Central Government may, by order, nominate
any member to act as the Chairman until a
new Chairman is appointed and assumes
Amendment
of section
68D.
Amendment
of section
68H.
Amendment
of section
68-O.

44
charge or, as the case may be, resumes his
duties.
15. In section 71 of the principal Act, in sub-
section ( 1), after the words “identification,
treatment”, the word “management,” shall be
inserted.
Amendment
of section
71.

45
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 was
enacted consolidating and amending the provisions for the control and
regulation of operations relating to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances under the Opium Act, 1857, Opium Act, 1878 and the
Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930. This Act was amended once in 1989 and
subsequently in 2001. During the implementation of the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 2001 certain anomalies
have been noticed. It is proposed to rectify those anomalies and make
certain further changes to strengthen the provisions of the Act.
2. The amending Act of 2001 rationalised the sentence structure so
as to ensure that while drug traffickers who traffic in significant quantities
of drugs are punished with deterrent sentences, the addicts and those
who commit less serious offences are sentenced to less severe punishment.
Such provisions have sometimes been misinterpreted to imply that in
determining quantities, only the pure drug content in the quantum of
drug seized should be reckoned. Since the Act duly provides for
punishment for preparations of drugs also, this amendment seeks to clarify
the legislative intent to take the entire quantity of drug seized in a case
for determining the quantum of punishment and not the pure drug
content.
3. Provisions for tracing and seizing of illegally acquired properties
pursuant to drug trafficking activity were introduced in the Principal Act
by way of amendment in 1989 and were further strengthened in the
amending Act of 2001. The need for further expanding the scope of such
provisions and to broad base the definition of illegally acquired property
so that it becomes more difficult for drug traffickers to enjoy the fruits
of drug trafficking activity , has been experienced. It is proposed to do
so by way of certain amendments.
4. The amendments also seek to put in place the enabling provisions
for the introduction of an alternate method of obtaining alkaloids of
opium through production of Concentrate of Poppy Straw instead of
production and processing of opium, in the country. Besides, some other
amendments seeking to address the anomalies arising out of the

46
amendments made in 2001 are sought to be introduced alongwith
measures to further strengthen the provisions of the Act.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW D ELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE.
The 6th September, 2011.

47
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 of the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. By way of this amendment, it is
proposed to confer on the Central Government the power to permit and
regulate, by making rules, the possession, transport, import inter-State,
export inter-State, warehousing, sale, purchase, consumption and use of
poppy straw produced from plants from which no juice has been extracted
through lancing.
2. The rules as may be made by the Central Government are
required to be laid before the Parliament. The matters in respect of which
rules may be made by the Central Government in accordance with the
provisions of the said Act are matters of procedure and administrative
details and it is not practical to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

48
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE N ARCOTIC D RUGS AND
PSYCHOTROPIC S UBSTANCES A CT, 1985
(61 OF 1985)
* *** *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
* *** *
(viia) “commercial quantity”, in relation
to narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, means any quantity greater than
the quantity specified by the Central
Government by notification in the Official
Gazette;
* *** *
(xxiiia) “small quantity”, in relation to
narcotic drugs and  psychotropic substances,
means any quantity lesser than the quantity
specified by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette;
* *** *
9. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 8,
the Central Government may, by rules— ( a)
permit and regulate—
* *** *
10. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 8,
the State Government may , by rules—
(a) permit and regulate—
Definitions.
Power of
Central
Government
to permit,
control and
regulate.
Power of
State
Government
to permit,
control and
regulate.

49
(i) the possession, transport, import
inter-State, export inter-State,
warehousing, sale, purchase,
consumption and use of poppy straw;
* *** *
27. Whoever consumes any narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance shall be punishable,—
(a) where the narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance consumed is cocaine,
morphine, diacetyl-morphine or any other
narcotic drug or any psychotropic substance
as may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette, with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to twenty
thousand rupees, or with both; and
(b) where the narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance consumed is other
than those specified in or under clause ( a),
with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.
* *** *
31. (1) If any person who has been convicted
of the commission of, or attempt to commit, or
abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to commit,
any of the offences punishable under this Act is
subsequently convicted of the commission of, or
attempt to commit, or abetment of, or criminal
conspiracy to commit, an offence punishable
under this Act with the same amount of
punishment shall be punished for the second and
every subsequent offence with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one-half of the maximum term of imprisonment,
and also be liable to fine which shall extend to
one-half of the maximum amount of fine.
Punishment
for
consump-
tion of any
narcotic
drug or
psychotro-
pic
substance.
Enhanced
punishment
for offences
after
previous
conviction.

50
(2) Where the person referred to in sub-
section ( 1) is liable to be punished with a
minimum term of imprisonment and to a
minimum amount of fine, the minimum
punishment for such person shall be one-half of
the minimum term of imprisonment and one-
half of the minimum amount of fine:
Provided that the court may, for reasons
to be recorded in the judgment, impose a
fine exceeding the fine for which a person is
liable.
* *** *
52A. (1) The Central Government may, having
regard to the hazardous nature of any narcotic
drugs or psychotropic substances, their
vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraints of
proper storage space or any other relevant
considerations, by notification published in the
Official Gazette, specify such narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances or class of narcotic drugs
or class of psychotropic substances which shall,
as soon as may be after their seizure, be disposed
of by such officer and in such manner as that
Government may from time to time, determine
after following the procedure hereinafter
specified.
(2) Where any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance has been seized and forwarded to the
officer-in-charge of the nearest police station or
to the officer empowered under section 53, the
officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall prepare
an inventory of such narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances containing such details
relating to their description, quality, quantity,
mode of packing, marks, numbers or such other
identifying particulars of the narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances or the packing in which
they are packed, country of origin and other parti-
culars as the officer referred to in sub-section ( 1)
Disposal of
seized
narcotic
drugs and
psychotro-
pic
substances.

51
may consider relevant to the identity of the
narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances in any
proceedings under this Act and make an
application, to any Magistrate for the purpose
of—
* *** *
(b) taking, in the presence of such
Magistrate, photographs of such drugs or
substances and certifying such photographs
as true; or
* *** *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, every court trying
an offence under this Act, shall treat the
inventory, the photographs of narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances and any list of samples
drawn under sub-section ( 2) and certified by
the Magistrate, as primary evidence in respect of
such offence.
* *** *
CHAPTER VA
F
ORFEITURE OF PROPERTY DERIVED FROM, OR USED IN
ILLICIT TRAFFIC
* *** *
68B. In this Chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
* *** *
(g) “illegally acquired property”, in
relation to any person to whom this Chapter
Definitions.
1 of 1872.
2 of 1974.

52
applies, means,—
(i) any property acquired by such
person, whether before or after the
commencement of this Chapter, wholly
or partly out of or by means of any
income, earnings or assets derived or
obtained from or attributable to the
contravention of any provisions of this
Act; or
(ii) any property acquired by such
person, whether before or after the
commencement of this Chapter, for a
consideration, or by any means wholly
or partly traceable to any property
referred to in sub-clause (i) or the income
or earning from such property, and
includes—
(A) any property held by such
person which would have been, in
relation to any previous holder
thereof, illegally acquired property
under this clause if such previous
holder had not ceased to hold it,
unless such person or any other
person who held the property at any
time after such previous holder or,
where there are two or more such
previous holders, the last of such
previous holders is or was a
transferee in good faith for adequate
consideration;
(B) any property acquired by
such person, whether before or after
the commencement of this Chapter,
for a consideration, or by any means,
wholly or partly traceable to any
property falling under item (A), or
the income or earnings therefrom;
(h) “property” means property and
assets of every description, whether

53
corporeal or incorporeal, movable or
immovable, tangible or intangible and
deeds and instruments evidencing title
to, or interest in, such property or
assets, derived from, or used in, the illicit
traffic;
* *** *
68D. (1)  The Central Government may, by
order published in the Official Gazette, authorise
any Collector of Customs or Collector of Central
Excise or Commissioner of Income- tax or any
other officer of the Central Government of
equivalent rank to perform the functions of the
competent authority under this Chapter.
* *** *
68-O. ( 1) * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (3), where the Chairman considers it
necessary so to do for the expeditious disposal
of appeals under this section, he may constitute
a Bench of two members and a Bench so
constituted may exercise and discharge the
powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal:
Provided that if the members of a Bench so
constituted differ on any point or points, they
shall state the point or points on which they differ
and refer the same to a third member (to be
specified by the Chairman) for hearing of such
point or points and such point or points shall be
decided according to the opinion of that member.
* *** *
71. (1) The Government may, in its discretion,
establish as many centres as it thinks fit for
identification, treatment, education, after-care,
rehabilitation, social re-integration of addicts and
Competent
authority .
Appeals.
Power of
Government
to establish
centres for
identifica-
tion,

54
for supply, subject to such conditions and in such
manner as may be prescribed, by the concerned
Government of any narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances to the addicts registered
with the Government and to others where such
supply is a medical necessity.
* *** *
treatment,
etc., of
addicts and
for supply
of narcotic
drugs and
psychotro-
pic
substances.

55
LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
further to amend the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985.
_______
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of  Finance )

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”