STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
FINANCEFINANCEFINANCEFINANCEFINANCE
(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
2323232323
MINISTRY OF CORPO RATE AFFAIRS
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
TWENTY-THIRD REPORTTWENTY-THIRD REPORTTWENTY-THIRD REPORTTWENTY-THIRD REPORTTWENTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
August, 2010/Bhadra, 1932 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 August, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 August, 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Bhadra, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.O.F. No. 23
Price : Rs. 32.00
© 2010 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................
REPORT
I. Introductory......................................................................................
II. Amendments to the Company Secretaries Act, 1980.............
(A) Clause 2: (Amendment of Section 2 of the Act relating
to Definitions and Interpretation).......................................
(B) Clause 3: (Amendment of Section 26 of the Act
relating to Companies not to engage in Company
Secretaryship)...........................................................................
III. Other Issues.......................................................................................
(A) Name of the Institute...........................................................
(B) Modification of Section 16 (1) (a) of the Act...............
IV. Recommendations...........................................................................
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 7 July,
2010, 4 August, 2010 and 26 August, 2010.............................
II. The Companies Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010..............
PAGE
(iii)
(v)
1
3
3
4
5
5
6
8
9
17

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
(2009-2010)
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj)
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri C.M. Chang
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
8. Shri Khagen Das
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey
10. Smt. Jayaprada
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
14. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai
20. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
21. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara*
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP.
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Raashid Alvi
23. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao
24. Vacant**
25. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
26. Shri Moinul Hassan
27. Shri Mahendra Mohan
28. Vacant***
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
30. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
31. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri T. Mathivanan — Senior Executive Assistant
(iv)
**Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda, MP retired on 4 July, 2010.
***Shri S. Anbalagan, MP retired on 29 June, 2010.

 N EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August , 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Third Report
on “The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010”.
2. The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010 introduced
in Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010, was referred to the Committee on
4 May, 2010 for examination and report thereon, by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha in consultation with the Chairman, Rajya Sabha under Rule
331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee obtained background note and written
information on various provisions contained in the aforesaid Bill from
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
4. Written views/memorandum was received from the Institute
of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI).
5. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
ICSI on 7 July, 2010. The Committee also took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 4 August, 2010.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
sitting held on 26 August, 2010.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for appearing
before the Committee and furnishing the material and information
which were desired in connection with the examination of the Bill.
8. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) for furnishing written
views/memorandum and appearing before the Committee for placing
their views.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the
Report.
(v)

REPORT
I. Introductory
The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) is the
organisation for the regulation and continuing professional develop-
ment of company secretaries in India. The Institute of Company
Secretaries of India is constituted under a 1980 Act of Parliament, the
Company Secretaries Act.
(i) The Company Secretaries Act, 1980
2. The Company Secretaries Act, 1980 is an enactment which
regulates the profession of the Company Secretaries. The said Act
was amended in 2006 by the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Act, 2006, inter alia , to enable the members of the Institute of
Company Secretaries of India to form multi-disciplinary firms and
offer multi-professional services in a competitive and commercial
manner.
(ii) The Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act, 2008
3. A new law, the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act was
enacted in the year 2008 to make provisions for the formation and
regulation of limited liability partnerships and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto. The limited liability partnership is an
organized form of business which operates on the basis of an agreement
and gives the benefits of limited liability of a company and the
flexibility of a partnership. The LLP is a separate legal entity,
liable to the full extent of its assets, with the liability of the partners
being limited to their agreed contribution in the limited liability
partnership which may be of tangible or intangible nature or both
tangible and intangible in nature. Any two or more persons associating
for carrying on a lawful business with a view to profit may set up
a LLP.

(iii) Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010
4. The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010, was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010 and referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4 May,
2010 for examination and report thereon. The Bill proposes to amend
the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 to apply certain provisions of the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 to the Company Secretaries Act,
1980 in order to allow the members of the professional institute
governed by the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 to form the limited
liability partnership and insert new definitions of “firm”, “partner”,
“partnership” and “sole proprietorship” for the said purpose..
5. Apart from taking evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Corporate Affairs in connection with the examination of
the Bill, the Committee also heard the views of the representatives of
the Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) on the provisions
of the Bill. The Institute also furnished their written views/suggestions
thereon for consideration of the Committee.
6. The background note on the amendment proposals of the Bill
furnished to the Committee by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs states
interalia:—
“India has witnessed considerable growth in services sector and
the quality of our professionals is acknowledged internationally.
It is likely that in the years to come Indian professionals would
be providing accountancy, legal and various other professional/
technical services to a large number of entities across the globe.
Such services would require multidisciplinary combinations that
would offer a menu of solutions to international clients.
Consultations with the Company Secretaries institute have been
held which have revealed that if definition of the firm is added
to the CS Act it will enable the members of the CS institutes to
form LLPs and take benefits of the provisions of the LLP Act.
This will enlarge the spectrum of the services provided by the
Members of the CS Institute. It will also ensure the competitive-
ness of the members of the professions. Apart from the inclusion
2

of the definition of the firm, some allied definitions like partner,
partnership and sole proprietorship would also be required in the
Act and as such have been included in the proposed Bill.”
 7. Questioned whether any shortcomings had come to notice in
the LLP Act, 2008 that need to be addressed for enabling enterprises
in various fields including Chartered Accountants, Company
Secretaries and Cost and Works Accountants to adopt this form of
organization, the Ministry, in reply informed:—
“The Ministry has not come across any shortcoming in the LLP
Act, 2008. Certain professionals have taken the benefit of the LLP
Act. However, the professionals of ICAI, ICWAI and ICSI could
not take the benefit of the Act as there was no enabling provision
in the Acts of these three Professional Institutes.”
II. Amendments to the Company Secretaries Act, 1980
(A) Clause 2: (Amendment of Section 2 of the Act relating to
Definitions and Interpretation)
 8. Section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 as it presently
stands, interalia provides that a member of the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India shall be deemed to be in practice when individually
or in partnership with one or more members of the Institute in practice
or in partnership with members of such other recognized professions
as may be prescribed.
 9. Section 2(1) defines various terms in the Act.
10. Clause 2 of the Bill which seeks to insert new definitions of
‘firm’, ‘partner’, ‘partnership’ and ‘sole proprietorship‘ in Section 2(1)
of the said Act reads as under:—
“In the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), in section 2, in sub-section ( 1)—
(i) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(fa) “firm” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section
4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, and includes,—
3

(i) the limited liability partnership as defined in
clause ( n) of subsection ( 1) of section 2 of the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008; or
(ii) the sole proprietorship, registered with the
Institute;’;
(ii) after clause ( ga), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(gb) “partner” shall have the meaning assigned to it in
section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or in clause
(q) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008, as the case may be;
(gc) “partnership” means—
(A) a partnership as defined in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932; or
(B) a limited liability partnership which has no
company as its partner;’;
(iii) after clause ( j), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(jj) “sole proprietorship” means an individual who engages
himself in the practice of the profession of the
Company secretaries or offers to perform services
referred to in clauses ( b) to ( f) of sub-section ( 2);’;
(B) Clause 3: (Amendment of Section 26 of the Act
relating to Companies not to engage in Company
Secretaryship)
11. Section 26 (1) of the Act reads as below:
“No company, whether incorporated in India or elsewhere, shall
practise as Company Secretaries.”
4

12. Clause 3 of the Bill which seeks to insert an ‘explanation‘
under Section 26 (1) of the Act reads as under:—
“In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the following
Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the “company” shall include any limited liability partnership
which has company as its partner for the purposes of this
section’.”
13. While expressing their agreement with the proposed
amendments in the Bill, the Institute of Company Secretaries of
India (ICSI), in their written memorandum and also in the course of
personal hearing before the Committee, inter-alia submitted: “the
amendments proposed are in sync with the global trends and practices
and the Limited Liability Partnership organization is an ideal form of
organization for mega firms wherein while every partner shall continue
to be personally liable for his professional or other misconduct, he will
be shielded from joint liability attached in a traditional partnership.”
III. Other Issues
14. The Institute of Company Secretaries of India have also
placed before the Committee other issues on the Company Secretaries
Act, 1980.
(A) Name of the Institute
15. Making a proposal for changing the name of the Institute
and the designation of members of the Institute, the ICSI, in their
memorandum submitted as follows:—
“The name of the Institute i.e. ‘the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India’ may be changed as ‘The Institute of Chartered
Secretaries of India’ and the designation ‘Company Secretary’ may
be changed as ‘Chartered Secretary’.”
5

16. By way of providing the justification for the said proposal,
ICSI further submitted as under:—
“Globally, Institutes similar to ‘The Institute of Company
Secretaries of India’ are known as “Institutes of Chartered
Secretaries”. Further, their members are known by the designation
‘Chartered Secretaries’. The Institute has been receiving
suggestions from its members for a long time for change in the
name of the Institute as well as the designation of members.
Keeping in view the globally recognized and known nomenclature,
of ‘Chartered Secretary’, it is suggested that the name of the
Institute may be changed as “The Institute of Chartered
Secretaries of India” and the designation ‘Company Secretary’ be
changed as ‘Chartered Secretary’. The designation ‘Chartered
Secretary’ will also distinguish a member in practice from a person
who is in employment as company secretary.”
17. Asked to furnish their views on the above-mentioned
suggestion made by ICSI, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, in a written
reply, stated as under:—
“A proposal for change of name of the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India to the Chartered Secretaries of India was
received in the Ministry in the year 2008. Since Government of
India does not issue ‘charters‘ after it became republic in the year
1950, it was considered not to allow the change of name. CA Act
is of 1949 and follows the British Practice then in existence. The
proposal of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India was
considered by the Government and then was rejected. Hence, the
same does not have merit and deserves to be rejected.”
(B) Modification of Section 16(1)(a) of the Act
18. Section 16 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 relates to
Officers and employees of the Institute, salary, allowances etc. Section
16(1)(a) of the Act as it presently stands reads as under:—
“For the efficient performance of its duties, the Council shall
appoint a Secretary of the Council to perform such duties as may
be prescribed;”
6

19. In this regard, the ICSI in their written memorandum
inter-alia stated as under:—
“Sub-section (1) of section 16 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980
originally provided that ‘the Council shall appoint a Secretary
who shall be a member of the Institute….’. However, while the
said section 16 was being recast by an amendment in 2006, the
words ‘who shall be a member of the Institute’ got omitted.
Consequently, even a non-member of the Institute can be
appointed as Secretary of the Council. The duties of the Secretary
prescribed under Regulation 157 of the Company Secretaries
Regulations can be better performed by a person who is a member
of the Institute. Secretary of the Council plays a very vital role
and provides important inputs to the Council in taking policy
decisions and finalizing the research publications including
Guidance notes and Secretarial Standards etc. Further, it would
be in the fitness of things that the secretary of the Council of
the ICSI should be a qualified member of the Institute. Therefore,
it is suggested that the words who shall be a member of the
Institute may be restored.”
20. Questioned on the necessity expressed by ICSI, on reinstating
the words, ‘the council shall appoint a Secretary who shall be a number
of the Institute’ in Section 16(1)(a), the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
in a written reply informed as under:—
“Similar provisions were made in all the three Acts by the
amendment Acts in 2006 by replacing Section 16 completely.
Before these amendments, the CA and CWA Act had same
provision and the CS Act was amended to align with the two
Acts. The ICAI and ICWAI have never objected to the existing
provisions ever since. This is for the council to appoint Secretary.
The Government do not interfere in their decision. By deletion
of the words ‘who shall be a member of the Institute’ has widened
the choice available with the Council. The Council may appoint
a person as Secretary who may be more competent than a member
of the same Institute. There is no instance when a non-member
has served as Secretary of ICSI. The Ministry do not accept the
7

proposal to restore the words omitted as the existing provisions
are same for all the Acts governing the three professional
Institutes.”
IV. Recommendations
21. The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks
to amend the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 for enabling the
members of the Institute of Company Secretaries (ICSI) to form
limited liability partnerships as defined by the Limited Liability
Partnership (LLP) Act, 2008. The Committee express agreement with
the amendment proposals of the Bill to this end which 
inter-alia
seek to add in the Act, the definitions of ‘firm’, ‘partner’,
‘partnership’ and ‘sole proprietorship’ in line with the LLP Act, and
recommend the same for consideration.
22. A proposal has been placed before the Committee by the
ICSI for renaming the institute as ‘Institute of Chartered
Secretaries’ and rephrasing the designation of the profession of
‘company secretary’ as ‘chartered secretary’ as being in line with
international practice, which has not found favour by the Ministry.
The matter, having wider ramifications and requiring detailed
examination, the Committee do not find it appropriate to pursue
it further at this stage.
23. The stance of the Ministry in not agreeing to the proposal
of the ICSI for restricting the appointment of the Secretary to the
Council from the members of the institute is not convincing to the
Committee. As pointed out by the ICSI, it would be in the fitness
of things that the Secretary of the Council of the Institute is a
qualified member of the institute. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the stipulations of section 16(1)(a) relating to the
appointment of the Secretary of the Council are reviewed for
reinstating the position prevailing earlier whereby the Secretary had
to necessarily be a member of the institute.
8
 N
EW D ELHI; YASHWANT SINHA,
26 August , 2010 Chairman,
4 Bhadra , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Finance.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th July, 2010 from
1100 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
3. Shri C.M. Chang
4. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Nishikant Dubey
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal
9. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
10. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri N. Dharam Singh
12. Shri Manicka Tagore
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Raashid Alvi
15. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
16. Shri Moinul Hassan
17. Shri Mahendra Mohan
18. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
9

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
Part I
(1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs.)
** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** **
Part II
(1415 to 1430 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI)
1. Shri Vinayak S. Khanvalkar, President, ICSI
2. Shri N.K. Jain, Secretary and CEO, ICSI
The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) in connection with
examination of the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The
major issues discussed with the representatives included, change of
name of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India to Institute of
Chartered Secretaries of India, and subsequent change of designation
for the members of the Institute as “Chartered Secretaries”, substitution
of the words “professional business” which is in the existing Act with
the words “professional services”, incorporation of provisions to make
only members of the Institute eligible for appointment to the post of
Secretary of the Council etc. The Chairman directed the representatives
to furnish written replies to the queries raised by Members at an early
date.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
10

Part III
(1430 to 1500 hrs.)
** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** **
Part IV
(1500 to 1530 hrs.)
** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
11

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4th August, 2010 from
1600 hrs. to 1900 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri N. Dharam Singh
10. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
11. Dr. M. Thambidurai
12. Shri Anjankumar M. Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
15. Shri Moinul Hassan
16. Shri Mahendra Mohan
17. Dr. Mahendra Prasad
12

18. Shri Y.P. Trivedi
19. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
Part I
(1600 to 1640 hrs.)
WITNESSES
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
1. Shri R. Bandyopadhyay — Secretary
2. Shri P. D. Sudhakar — Special Secretary
3. Smt. Renuka Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the Chartered Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2010, the Company Secretaries (Amendment)
Bill, 2010 and the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010.
3. The major issues discussed with the representatives
included, necessity of the proposed amendment Bills, change proposed
in the name of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India
to the Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of India, and
consequent change of name of members of the Institute to ‘Cost and
Management Accountants‘, distinction in the roles of a Cost and Works
Accountant and a Cost and Management Accountant, nomenclature of
‘Cost and Works Accountants‘ in other Countries etc. The Chairman
13

directed the representatives to furnish written replies to the queries
raised by Members within a week.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
Part II
(1645 to 1900 hrs.)
** ** ** ** ** **
** ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
14

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th August, 2010 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
PRESENT
Shri Yashwant Sinha —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri C.M. Chang
3. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
7. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy
10. Shri N. Dharam Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Moinul Hassan
12. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar — Additional Director
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. B. Visala — Deputy Secretary
15

2. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on the Companies Bill, 2009;
(ii) Draft Report on the Coinage Bill, 2009;
(iii) Draft Report on the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill,
2010;
(iv) Draft Report on the Chartered Accountants (Amendment)
Bill, 2010; and
(v) Draft Report on the Cost and Works Accountants
(Amendment) Bill, 2010.
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports at (i) with the
modifications/amendments as shown in Annexure* and (ii) and (iv)
above with minor modifications. The Committee adopted the
remaining draft Reports without any change.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Reports in the light of the modifications suggested and present all the
reports to Parliament in the current session.
The Committee adjourned at 1600 hours.
16
*Does not pertain to this Report.

17
Bill No. XXVII of 2010
THE COMPANY SECRETARIES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Company Secretaries Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first
Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  ( 1) The Act may be called the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Act, 2010.
   (2) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Company Secretaries Act, 1980
(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), in
section 2, in sub-section ( 1)—
(i) after clause ( f), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(fa) “firm” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 4 of the
56 of 1980.
Short title and
commencement
Amendment
of section 2.
APPENDIX II
AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA

18
Indian Partnership Act, 1932, and
includes,—
(i) the limited liability partnership
as defined in clause ( n) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the
Limited Liability Partnership Act,
2008; or
(ii) the sole proprietorship, registered
with the Institute;’;
(ii) after clause ( ga), the following clauses
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(gb) “partner” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 4 of the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or in
clause ( q) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 2 of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008, as the case
may be;
(gc) “partnership” means—
(A) a partnership as defined
in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932; or
(B) a limited liability partner-
ship which has no company
as its partner;’;
(iii) after clause ( j), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(jj) “sole proprietorship” means an
individual who engages himself
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
6 of 2009.
9 of 1932.
9 of 1932.

19
in the practice of the profession of
the Company Secretaries or offers
to perform services referred to in
clauses ( b) to ( f) of sub-section
(2);’;
3. “In section 26 of the principal Act, in
sub-section ( 1), the following Explanation shall
be inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts,
it is hereby declared that the “company”
shall include any limited liability partner-
ship which has company as its partner for
the purposes of this section’.
Amendment
of section 26.

20
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Company Secretaries Act, 1980 has been enacted to make
provision for the regulation of the profession of the Company
Secretaries. The said Act was amended in 2006 by the Company
Secretaries (Amendment) Act, 2006, inter alia , to enable the members
of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India to form multi-
disciplinary firms and offer multi-professional services in a competitive
and commercial manner.
2. Subsequently, the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 has
been enacted to make provisions for the formation and regulation of
limited liability partnerships and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. The limited liability partnership will be a separate
legal entity, liable to the full extent of its assets, with the liability of
the partners being limited to their agreed contribution in the limited
liability partnership which may be of tangible or intangible nature or
both tangible and intangible in nature.
3. It is proposed to extend the benefits of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of company secretaries under the
Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and to amend the provisions of the said
Act.
4. Section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 inter alia ,
provides that a member of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India
shall be deemed to be in practice when individually or in partnership
with one or more members of the Institute in practice or in partnership
with members of such other recognized professions as may be
prescribed.
5. The Company Secretaries (Amendment) Bill, 2010, proposes
to amend the Company Secretaries act, 1980 to apply certain provisions
of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 to the Company

21
Secretaries Act, 1980 in order to allow the members of the professional
institute governed by the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 to form
the limited liability partnership and insert new definitions of
“firm”, “partner”, “partnership” and “sole proprietorship” for the said
purpose.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
 N
EW D ELHI; SALMAN KHURSHID.
The 15th April, 2010.

22
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 and clause 3 of the Bill seeks to extend the benefits of
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 to the firms of company
secretaries under the Company Secretaries Act, 1980. The provisions
of the Bill will not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-
recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.

23
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANY SECRETARIES ACT, 1980
(57 of 1980)
*****
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
*****
26. (1) No company, whether incorporated in India
or elsewhere, shall practise as Company Secretaries.
Definitions
and interpre-
tation.
Companies
not to engage
in Company
Secretaryship.

RAJYA SABHA
________
A
BILL
further to amend the Company Secretaries Act, 1980
________
(Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of Corporate Affairs)
24

All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.