 
 
 
9 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
               
(2009-10) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 78th 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector’] 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2010/ Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)


 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 78th 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector’] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12  March, 2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on12 March, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2010/ Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ...................................……….…………(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................……………………...... (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................………….....  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………….  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………......  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……….  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 
10 March, 2010 ......................................................…………….......  
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in 78th Report (14th Lok Sabha)  
on „Flow of Credit to Agriculture Sector‟...................………………….......  
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2009-2010    
 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
   MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram (Lalganj) 
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
4. Shri C.M. Chang 
5. Shri Harishchandra Chavan 
6. Shri Bhakta Charan Das 
7. Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
8. Shri Khagen Das 
9. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
10. Smt. Jayaprada 
11. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
13. Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy 
15. Shri Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy 
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
17. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana 
18. Shri Manicka Tagore 
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20. Shri   Anjankumar M. Yadav 
21.   Shri  G.M. Siddeshwara* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.   Shri Raashid Alvi 
23.   Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
24.   Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
25.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
26.   Shri Moinul Hassan 
27.   Shri Mahendra Mohan 
28.   Shri S. Anbalagan 
29.   Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30.   Shri Y.P. Trivedi 
31.   Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A.K. Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar -  Additional Director 
 
 
* Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 09.03.2010 vice Shri Gopinath Munde, MP 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, ha ving been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Ninth Report on action taken by 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventy -eighth Report of 
the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Flow of Credit to 
Agriculture Sector”. 
 2. The Seventy-eighth Report ( 14 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok 
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2008.  Replies indicating action 
taken on all the recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the 
Government on 17 July, 2009.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting 
held on 10 March, 2010. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventy -eighth Report of the Committee is 
given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi        DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI, 
10  March, 2010                                         Chairman, 
19 Phalguna 1931 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Finance. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in their Seventy-Eight Report on the subject „Flow of Credit to Agriculture 
Sector‟ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2008. 
 
2.  The Report contained 13 recommendations.  Action taken notes ha ve 
been received from the Government in respect of all the recommendations 
contained in the report. These have been categorised as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10 
(Total 7) 
(Chapter II) 
 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
(Total Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 9,11,12 and 13 
 
(Total 6) 
(Chapter IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited: 
  
(Total Nil) 
(Chapter V) 
 
 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the rep lies to the comments contained 
in Chapter I be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations. 

 
 
 
  
Recommendation No. 1  
Credit accessibility of farmers 
 
 
5.  The Commi ttee were dismayed to note that though numerous measures 
have been taken by the Government from time to time to address the problems of 
credit availability, on the basis of the recommendations of various Expert groups and 
Committees, even now vast majority  of farmer households did not have access to 
institutional credit. Since vast majority of farmers take loans from non -institutional 
sources, like money lenders at high rates of interest due to non -availability of 
institutional credit, the Committee urged t hat as recommended by the Committee on 
Financial Inclusion, headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, at least 50% (55.77 million) of the 
excluded cultivator and non-cultivator households should be provided access to credit 
through commercial banks and RRBs by the year  2012 and the remaining households 
by the year 2015. The Committee desired to be informed of the specific steps taken by 
the Government to implement these recommendations and details of annual targets, 
fixed in this regard. 
 
6.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“On 18 th June, 2004, the Government announced a package for 
doubling the flow of credit to agriculture and allied activities in a 
period of three years commencing from 2004 -05 over the amount 
disbursed during the yea r 2003 -04. This goal was achieved in just 
two years.  
 
The Government has been committed, during the last five years, 
towards availability of timely and affordable credit for rural/farm 
sector.  Agriculture credit disbursement increased nearly three and a 
half times from Rs. 86,981 crore in 2003 -04 to Rs. 2,87,149.19 crore 
in 2008-09 (provisional figures), which is also, in fact, 102.55% of the  
target of Rs. 2,80,000 crore set for the year.  During the years 2007 -
08 and 2008 -09, the agricultural loans were disbursed to a total of 
4.39 crore and 4.56 crore farmer accounts respectively, which shows 
the commitment of banks in disbursing to this sector.  A comparison 
of agency-wise achievements vis -a-vis the annual targets during the 
current year viz-a-viz that of 2007-08, is given below: 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Agency 2007-08 
Amount (in Rs. Crore) 
2008-09 
Amount (in Rs. Crore) 
  Target Achievement Target Achievement 
1. Comm. Banks     
i. Public Sector Comm. 
Bank 1,50,000 
1,33,225.61 
1,95,000 
1,64,350.10 
ii. Private Sect or Comm. 
Bank 
47,862.00 59,312.92 
 Sub-total for Comm. Bank  1,81,087.61  2,23,663.02 
2. Coop. Banks 52,000 48,258.19 55,000 36,761.99 
3. RRBs 23,000 25,311.65 30,000 26,724.18 
 Grand Total  2,25,000 2,54,657.45 2,80,000 2,87,149.19 
 
The Government of India (GoI) has taken the following steps to ensure 
availability of timely and affordable credit for rural/farm sector: 
 The GoI has implemented the Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief 
Scheme for farmers covering nearly 3.68 crore farmers(provisiona l figures), 
thus declogging the line of credit and making these farmers eligible for fresh 
credit from the lending institutions.  
 The GoI is providing interest subvention to banks since Kharif 2006 -07 to 
ensure Short Term crop loans upto Rs.3 lakh to famer s at interest rate of @ 
7% per annum at the ground level.   
 Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative Banks have been 
successful in financing more than 80 lakhs new farmers during each of the 
last three year. 
 Banks have simplified the procedur e for documentation for agricultural loans.  
Loans upto Rs.50,000/ - have been made collateral and margin free and the 
requirement of „No Dues Certificate‟ has been dispensed with. 
 Banks have been advised to provide all eligible farmers with Kisan Credit 
Cards. 
 Norms for opening „no frills‟ account, has been simplified. 
 Banks have been advised to make available a basic banking „no frills‟ account 
either with „nil‟ or very low minimum balances. 
 Regional Rural Banks have been advised to allow limited overdraft  facilities in 
„no frills‟ accounts, without any collateral. 
 Small borrowers with loans settled under the one time settlement scheme 
have been made eligible to access fresh credit. 
 Banks have been advised to issue General Credit Cards to eligible 
beneficiaries without insistence on security, purpose or end use of credit. 
 Banks have been permitted to utilise the services of Non -Governmental 
Organisations, Self Help Groups, Micro Finance Institutions and other Civil 
Society Organisation as intermediaries in p roviding financial and banking 
services. 
 All State Level Bankers‟ Committee convener banks have been advised to 
initiate action for identifying at least one district in their States/Union 
Territories for 100% financial inclusion.  In many states, SLBCs hav e 
identified and taken steps to cover a larger number of districts for 100% 
financial inclusion.  Banks have been urged to scale up IT initiatives for 
financial inclusion.”  

 
 
 
 
7.   It was upon noting with serious concern that a vast majority of 
farmer house holds continue to remain outside the ambit of institutional 
financial system despite the numerous measures taken by the Government 
that the Committee had desired to know the details of the specific steps 
initiated for implementing the recommendations of th e Dr. C. Rangarajan 
Committee on Financial Inclusion on providing access to institutional credit to 
atleast 50% (55.77 million) of the excluded cultivator and non -cultivator 
households by the year 2012 and the remaining households by the year 2015.   
Instead of spelling out the policy stance and measures initiated or 
contemplated in implementing the recommendations of the Dr. C. Rangarajan 
Committee, the Government have chosen to furnish details of the agency -wise 
distribution of agricultural credit in the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09.  The 
Committee can not help deploring the casual and indifferent approach 
adopted by the Government in furnishing the action taken note on this issue 
of serious concern.  The Committee, therefore expect to be apprised of the 
specific details of the action plan formulated or contemplated in implementing 
the Dr. C. Rangrarjan Committee’s recommendations on bringing the vast 
multitude of excluded cultivator households within the ambit of institutional 
finance along-with the annual ta rgets fixed for this purpose within one month 
of the presentation of this report to Parliament.   
8.  From the data on agriculture credit flow furnished in the action taken 
note, the Committee also note that Co -operative Banks and Regional Rural 
Banks (RRB s), which are mandated to become the prime sources of 
institutional financing for rural credit have failed in achieving the annual credit 

 
 
 
disbursement targets.   This being a matter of serious concern, the Committee 
desire that the reasons for the dwindlin g share of Cooperative and Regional 
Rural Banks in agriculture credit disbursement are analyzed in detail for 
formulating appropriate remedial measures.  The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard along -with the details of the a ction 
plan initiated or contemplated by the Government for brining the excluded 
farmer households within the ambit of institutional credit disbursement. 
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Shortfall in agricultural lending by banks 
9.  The Committee were concerned to note that commercial banks, despite 
having a vast chain of branches in rural areas had continued to fail to reach the 
mandated level of disbursing 18% credit to agriculture. The lower disbursements to 
agriculture were attributed to non -completion of formalities by borrowers, lack of co -
ordination between 39 banks and sponsoring agencies, bunching of applications, 
etc. The Committee felt that these were the matters which could be managed by a 
proper co -ordination mechanism and awareness campaigns by banks. T he 
Committee urged that suitable measures be taken to address these problems and to 
ensure that the targeted level of credit reaches farmers. 
 
10.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated inter-alia as follows: 
 
“Agriculture credit disburseme nt increased nearly three and a half times 
from Rs. 86,981 crore in 2003 -04 to Rs. 2,87,149.19 crore in 2008 -09 
(provisional figures) while the outstanding credit to agriculture by public 
sector banks has gone up from Rs.70,501 crore in March 2004 to 
Rs.2,43,570 crore in March 2007 (figures provisional), showing a robust 
compounded annual rate of growth of over 30 per cent.  Lending to 
agriculture as a percentage of net bank credit has also improved from 14.5 
per cent to 15.4 per cent during the same period .  However, it has been 
lower than the target of 18% of net bank credit prescribed by Reserve 
Bank.  This is partly due to a comparatively lower growth rate of agriculture 
sector compared to industry and services sectors…    
…Besides above, from April 30, 2007, the base on which the priority sector 
target is calculated has been modified.  Accordingly, banks are now 
required to lend to priority sector at 40% of adjusted net bank credit 
(ANBC) (ANBC represents net bank credit plus investments made by 
banks in non-Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) bonds under Held to Maturity 
category or credit equivalent amount of Off -Balance Sheet Exposures 
(OBE), whichever is higher, as on March 31 of the preceding accounting 
year.  This change may increase the priority sector  lending obligations of 
banks in absolute terms. 
Considering the amount of shortfall in lending to priority sector (including 
agriculture), four additional funds were created after announcement in the 
Budget Speech 2008 -09.  These funds, which are to be go verned by the 
general guidelines that are now applicable to RIDF with some 
modifications, are as under: 
i) A Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit (SRCRC) Fund of Rs.5,000 
crore with National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 

 
 
 
(NABARD) to enhance its re finance operations to Short Term 
Cooperative Credit Institutions. 
ii) Two funds of Rs.4,600 crore have been created in Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) – one for risk capital financing 
(Rs. 1,000 crore) and other for enhancing refinance capab ility (Rs. 
3,600 crore) to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
sector. 
iii) A Rural Housing Fund of Rs.2,000 crore with National Housing Bank 
(NHB) to enhance its refinance operations in the rural housing 
sector. 
 
Besides above, for the year 2009 -10, it has been proposed to allocate Rs. 
14,000 crore for RIDF, Rs. 4,500 crore for separate window under RIDF for 
rural roads component of Bharat Nirman, Rs. 4,000 crore for SIDBI to lend 
to MSME sector by refinancing and Rs. 2,000 crore for Rural Housing Fund 
in NHB.  With the constitution of these Funds, the banks with shortfall in 
lending to priority sector, including agriculture and weaker section, would 
have to contribute higher amounts. In fact for the years 2008 -09 and 2009-
10, almost the total amount (near 100%) of shortfall has been utilized, thus 
causing a huge penalty to such banks.”   
 

 
 
 
11.   The Committee feel constrained to note that the Government have chosen 
not to touch upon the remedial action/measures initiated or being taken for 
overcoming the problems such as inadequacies in the co -ordination mechanism 
among banks and sponsoring agencies, non completion of formalities by borrowers, 
bunching of applications etc. which, as highlighted in the report, and as also 
admitted by the Government, are  factors attributable to the low disbursement of 
bank credit to the agriculture sector.  Instead of detailing the policy measures for 
addressing these impediments, the Government have chosen to list out the 
measures already in place, or initiated, for dete rring, or penalising Banks for 
incurring shortfall in meeting the 18% target of agricultural lending i.e. the Rural 
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) put in place many years ago and the four 
additional funds created for enabling utilization of the amount of shortfall of banks in 
agricultural lending (Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit -SRCRC with NABARD, 
two funds with SIDBI and a Rural Housing Fund with National Housing Bank).     The 
failure of RIDF in serving as an effective deterrent against the l ethargy or 
indifference of scheduled commercial banks in meeting the mandated level of 
agricultural lending being more than obvious, the effectiveness of the additional 
funds to serve as a persuasive measure on banks to increase agriculture lending 
would r emain doubtful.  Formulating concrete remedial measures to resolve the 
problems impeding agricultural credit flow from banks, and improving the 
mechanism of co -ordination among banks and sponsoring agencies being an 
imminent necessity, the Committee reiter ate the necessity on the part of the 
Government/Reserve Bank of India in taking suitable measures to address these 

 
 
 
problems.  The Committee expect to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this 
direction within one month of presentation of this report to Parliament. 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation Nos. 9, 11 & 12 
Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Scheme 
 
12.  The Committee regretted to note that though the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
scheme had been extended to cover all categories of loans viz. short and long term 
loans and produc tive and non -productive loans, the loans sanctioned under the 
scheme had declined from Rs. 47,601 crore in 2005 -06 to 40,300 crore in 2006 -07. 
Ineligibility to avail fresh loans by defaulters was stated to be the main reason in this 
regard. Consequently, a s many as 40% of KCC  holders were ineligible for getting 
credit from the institutional sources and were driven to money lenders. It appeared 
that the scheme had led to unintended consequences. The Committee felt that the 
scheme should be critically reviewed with a view to plugging the short comings and to 
ensure that non-wilful defaulters were not put to any difficulty in accessing institutional 
credit. 
13.   The Committee found it surprising to note that the data reporting system of 
the nodal agency (NABA RD) for implementation of the KCC Scheme did not include 
information on total amount of credit availed by KCC holders and recovery 
performance under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, desired that the data 
reporting system of NABARD should be geared up to include this information of vital 
importance to enable assessment of the successfulness of the KCC Scheme. 
14.  The Committee found that a number of shortcomings and weaknesses 
have been identified in the KCC scheme by the study undertaken by National C ouncil 
of Applied Economic Research (NCAER). The Committee hoped that the Government 
would take necessary action to implement the recommendations of the Expert Group 
on Agricultural Indebtedness particularly the one relating to making the KCC all 
inclusive by incorporating therein information on the credit history of the card holder. 
 
15.  The Ministry, in their action taken reply on recommendation no. 9 on the 
problems of Kisan Credit Card (KCC) holders, have submitted as under: 
 
“During 2006 -07, in fact, Rs.46,729 crore has been sanctioned 
under KCC scheme by all banks as against the loan amount of Rs.47,601 
crore sanctioned under KCC during 2005-06 by all banks.  
 

 
 
 
The banks have been advised that all in -operative accounts may 
be reviewed periodically by t hem to ascertain the reasons for accounts 
being inoperative and wherever possible the willing farmers may be 
allowed to operate the account subject to banking norms. Further, the 
banks have been also advised to ensure that KCCs are renewed in a 
hassle free  manner and direct their efforts towards ensuring 'quality in 
operations' on the KCCs.  Cooperative Banks and RRBs have also been 
advised to cover all eligible borrowers and have at least 150 new KCCs in 
each year in each branch.   
Regarding revisiting the  scheme, NABARD has conducted study on 
implementation of KCC focusing on operation of account, rate of interest 
charged, the process of revisiting the credit limits, coverage of KCC 
borrowers under Personal Accident Insurance Scheme (PAIS) and 
difficulties in settlement of insurance claims.  The study findings are being 
compiled.” 
 
16.  In the action taken note on recommendation no. 11 on „Collection of data 
in respect of Kisan Credit Card Scheme‟, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Presently, all banks  are providing short term finance to farmers 
through KCC only.  KCC is a scheme in which credit limit is sanctioned to 
farmers for a period of 3 years.  During the period of operations, farmers 
are free to make drawals and repayments any number of times.  While 
assessing the finance made under KCC, maximum outstanding is 
reckoned for the purpose of loans and advances made during the year.   
The Credit flow to agriculture sector is compiled by NABARD on a 
monthly basis.  Data in respect of Commercial Banks a re provided by 
Indian Banks‟ Association (IBA) and data in respect of Cooperative Banks 
and RRBs are collected through Regional Offices of NABARD.  Presently 
MIS does not capture the data on recoveries.  However, the details of 
Limits sanctioned, outstandi ng and recovery there against are available 
with NABARD Regional Offices in respect of Cooperatives and RRBs.  As 
such NABARD is in a position to furnish such information in respect of 
Cooperative Banks and RRBs.” 
 
17.   The action taken note on recommenda tion no. 12 pertaining to the 
„Lacunae in Kisan Credit Card Scheme‟ reads as follows: 
 
“The major findings of the National Council of Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) study have already been circulated by NABARD vide 
its Circular dated 06 November 2004 to  all Banks advising them to take 
appropriate remedial action on the findings of the study and remove the 
bottle-necks in the implementation of the Scheme. This is expected to 
facilitate farmers in providing adequate, timely and hassle free credit as 
envisaged under the scheme. 
 

 
 
 
Conversion / reschedulement of loan is also permissible under the 
KCC scheme, in case of damage to cultivated crops on account of natural 
calamities.  Crop loans disbursed under the scheme for notified crops are 
covered under Rashtri ya Krishi Bima Yojna (National Crop Insurance 
Scheme) to ensure hassle free credit for borrowers while a better 
recovery mechanism for banks as well. 
 
Few pilots have been started with grant support from Financial Inclusion 
Technology Fund (FITF), in Andhr a Pradesh, Tripura etc.  Based on the 
results the banks would be advised to upscale process.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
18.  It was upon noting with serious concern the unintended 
consequences the implementation of the KCC scheme had led to whereby 40% 
of the KCC holders  had become ineligible for getting institutional credit with the 
loans sanctioned under the scheme also witnessing a trend of decline that the 
Committee had recommended a critical review of the Scheme.   The progress in 
regard to compilation of the finding s of the study conducted by NABARD on the 
implementation of the KCC Scheme for formulating remedial measures with a 
view to overcoming the shortcomings in the scheme remain to be communicated 
to the Committee.    Also, while Co -operative Banks and Regional  Rural Banks 
have reportedly been instructed to issue atleast 150 new KCCs per branch in a 
year, the action taken note is silent on the progress made in this direction, and in 
bringing non-wilful defaulters back in the fold of institutional credit.  Persis tence 
of serious lacunae in implementing the KCC Scheme being clearly evident, the 
Committee once again emphasise on ensuring that the Government is not found 
lacking in overcoming the shortcomings.  The Committee, therefore, expect that 
concrete measures are formulated for overcoming the shortcomings on the 
basis of the study conducted by NABARD, and in enabling non -wilful defaulters 
in accessing institutional credit.  The Committee expect to be apprised of the 
specific measures initiated by the Government  in this regard and their 
effectiveness within one month of the presentation of this report to Parliament. 
19.  The Committee also note from the action taken note that no specific 
measures appear to have been initiated for overcoming the shortcomings in th e 
data reporting system of NABARD to include information on the total amount of 
credit availed by the KCC holders.  Maintaining a centralized data base on the 

 
 
 
total amount of credit availed by KCC holders and recovery performance under 
the scheme being a n ecessity in assessing the performance of the scheme, the 
Committee reiterate the need for ensuring that the Management Information 
System of NABARD is geared up and enabled for maintaining this information. 
20.   With reference to the KCC Scheme, the Commi ttee also note that 
while the Expert Group on Agricultural Indebtedness had inter -alia 
recommended making the KCC all inclusive by incorporating therein information 
on the credit profile of the Card holder, no information has been furnished on the 
action taken in this regard.  This only betrays the indifference of the Government 
to the Committee’s recommendation as well as the report of the Expert 
Committee.  The Committee expect to be apprised of the policy stance of the 
Government on the recommendations o f the Expert Group on Agricultural 
Indebtedness as well as the details of the upscaling process in regard to KCC 
Scheme which is reportedly being implemented by banks on the basis of pilot 
projects undertaken in some States with support from the Financial Inclusion 
Technology Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Creation of Money Lenders Debt Redemption Fund 
Recommendation  No. 13 
 
21.   The Committee noted that the Expert Group on Agricultural Indebtedness 
had also recommended the creation of a Money Lenders Debt Redemption Fund w ith 
a corpus of Rs. 100 crore contributed by Central and State Governments. In view of 
the continued and increasing dependence of the rural households on money lenders 
for meeting credit requirements, as evident from the NSSO‟s survey data on rural 
indebtedness, the Committee expected the Government to implement the 
recommendation of the Expert Group without delay and create the proposed fund, 
which would facilitate in the swapping of debt. 
 
22.   The Government in their action taken reply stated as under: 
 
    “In the Budget Speech 2009-10, it has been announced to set up a 
Taskforce to examine the matter relating to loans availed from private 
money lenders in greater detail and suggest the future course of 
action.” 

 
 
 
23.   While the emphasis made in the Com mittee’s recommendation has been 
on setting up a Money Lenders Debt Redemption Fund as recommended by the 
Expert Group on Agricultural Indebtedness, the Government have merely chosen to 
inform about the proposed constitution of a Taskforce to examine the m atter 
relating to loans availed from private money lenders.  It is obvious from the action 
taken note that the Government have chosen to be evasive in regard to the 
emphasis made by the Committee on taking measures, as suggested by the Expert 
Committee for  addressing the problem of the continued dependence of the rural 
households on money lenders for meeting credit requirements.  Perpetuation of 
private money lending being a big hurdle in brining all the farmers under the ambit 
of institutional financing, t he Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation on 
the need for pursuing for implementation, the recommendation of the Expert Group 
on creating a Money Lenders Debt Redemption Fund with a corpus of Rs. 100 crore.  
The Committee desire to be apprised of the specific action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Expert Group (headed by Prof. R. Radha Krishna) which submitted its 
report on 3 July, 200 7 had highlighted that farmers in States which recorded the 
highest rates of suicide borrowed money for productive purposes i.e. to buy 
seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, etc. As brought out in a succeeding paragraph, 
farmers were debarred from availing institutional credit if they defaulted under the 
Kisan Credit Card Scheme. The Ministry of Finance had stated that the debt 
waiver and debt relief scheme announced in the budget, 2008 was expected to 
de-clog the line of credit to farmers by bringing a sizable n umber of indebted 
farmers to access fresh institutional loans, and strengthen the rural financial 
institutions. The Committee felt that concerted efforts and result oriented 
strategies were needed to address the root cause of the malady of deep rooted 
indebtedness in the agrarian society. The Committee wished to be apprised of 
the specific measures evolved in this regard and also details of the extent to 
which implementation of the debt waiver and debt relief scheme had contributed 
in helping the debarred f armers in accessing institutional credit and in 
strengthening the rural credit delivery system. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A total of 3.68 crore farm loan accounts (provisional figures) have been 
benefited and total eligible waiver/relief amounted to the tu ne of Rs. 65,318.33 
crore under Agriculture Debt Waiver and Debt Relief (ADWDR) Scheme, 2008. 
The lending institutions were specifically instructed by RBI/NABARD to provide 
fresh finance both production and investment credit to the beneficiaries covered 
by ADWDR Scheme.  As per the reports submitted by banks, 4.56 crore farmer 
accounts were disbursed agriculture credit during the year 2008 -09 amounting to 

 
 
 
Rs. 2,87,149 crore.  In respect of Cooperative Banks and RRBs, a fresh finance 
to the tune of Rs. 5,426 crore have been extended by Cooperatives and RRBs in 
respect of 26.08 lakh farmers as at the end of 31 March 2009. 
  
Further, the banks have been advised to identify and bring into the fold of Kisan 
Credit Card (KCC), such farmers including defaulters, or al lessees, tenant 
farmers & share -croppers who may have been left outside the fold of the 
scheme, for some reasons or others as also new farmers. The banks were also 
advised that all in -operative accounts may be reviewed periodically by them to 
ascertain the reasons for accounts being inoperative and wherever possible the 
willing farmers may be allowed to operate the account subject to banking norms. 
Further, the banks were also advised to ensure that KCCs are renewed in a 
hassle free manner and direct their efforts towards ensuring 'quality in operations' 
on the KCCs.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee found that the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) set 
up in 1995 -96, for banks to deposit to the Fund in compensation for shortfall in 
lending to priority sector had failed to serve as an effective disincentive. From the 
data made available, the Committee were surprised to note that while the corpus 
under RIDF tranches X to XIII (2004 -05 to 2007 -08) totaled to Rs. 46,000 crore, 
the amounts deposited by banks upto 31.01.2008 added upto only Rs. 13,896.69 
crore, with the gap in utilization being to the extent of as much as Rs. 32,103.31 
crore. The Committee had been informed that four more funds were being 
created requiring banks to deposit the whole amount of shortfall in priority sector 
lending, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Expert Group on 
Agricultural Indebtedness. The Committee found that the corpus of all the new 
four funds added up to just Rs. 10,200 crore whereas the tota l shortfall of the 
banks under the priority sector lending during the year 2007 - 08 alone was of the 
order of Rs. 22,000 crore. In order to address this situation, the Committee felt 
that an effective mechanism should  be evolved to ensure that banks reached out 

 
 
 
to the farmers and met the agricultural lending targets. The Committee 
suggested that it might be considered whether it would be desirable to introduce 
any punitive measures in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A Reply has already been given at recommendation –2 above. 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
Government provideed interest subvention of 2% to public sector banks, 
Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative Banks to enable them to extend short -
term production credit to farmers at 7% interest. The Committee agreed with the 
National Commission on Farmers that inefficiencies of the delivery system should 
not be loaded on the interest charged. The Committee recommended that in 
order to make credit affordable and as proposed by the National Commissi on on 
Farmers and as stressed by the Committee in their 51st report (14th Lok Sabha), 
interest rates on agricultural credit should be brought down to 4% if necessary by 
extending the scheme of interest subvention. This would improve further credit 
absorption by farmers. The Committee also desired to know the cost cutting 
measures introduced by banks, the extent of their implementation, adoption of 
new modes of delivery viz. banking facilitators/banking correspondents, etc. and 
impact of these measures on in terest rates and further deepening the credit 
absorption by farmers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Since Kharif 2006 -07, the farmers are being provided with short 
term/crop loans upto a principal amount of Rs. 3 lakh @ 7% per annum rate of 
interest.  For this , the Government is providing interest subvention @ 2% per 
annum (3% per annum during 2008 -09) to the Public Sector Banks, Regional 
Rural Banks (RRBs) and Cooperative Credit Institutions (CCIs) on their own 
involvement of funds and concessional refinance i s being extended by National 

 
 
 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) to RRBs and CCIs for 
this purpose.  It has been announced in the Union Budget Speech 2009 -10 to 
continue this Scheme for the year 2009 -10 as well with an additional interest 
subvention @ 1% to prompt paying farmers.  Thus, the prompt paying farmers 
would avail short term crop loans @ 6% per annum. 
  Under the umbrella of the policies formulated by RBI, efforts are being 
made to reduce the transaction cost for the banks and simu ltaneously extending 
the financial services to the excluded population particularly in North Eastern 
Region, Eastern Region, Hilly and other highly excluded region identified by Dr. 
Rangarajan Committee Report.  Most significant of it being the adoption of  
technology for this purpose and implementation thereof through Business 
Correspondent (BC)/Business Facilitator (BF) models.  Various Technology 
Providers have also floated Section 25 non -profit companies to work as BC for 
Banks.  The Section 25 companies have appointed CSP for manning the point of 
sale devices which is operated through bio -metric smart card authentication, 
voice driven communication technology, smart card/number card driven mobile 
technology etc.  The projects initiated in this respect are as under: 
  
i.         Smart card based pilot project in Tirunelveli District of Tamil Nadu to help 
Pandyan Grama Bank (PGB) and NGOs in registration, loaning process and 
micro financing to SHGs. The project covers 500 Self Help Groups (SHGs) – 
6000 customers.  
  
ii.       Project on smart cards in three districts viz., Medak, Mahbubnagar and 
Warangal districts of Andhra Pradesh to facilitate payments to the beneficiaries 
of NREGS and Social Security Pensioners and opening of „No Frill Accounts‟ of 
other rural households by Andhra Pradesh Grameen Vikas Bank (APGVB). 
Services are being extended through Business Correspondent Model with the 
help of a biometric card and Mobile device. The project would cover 1288396 
beneficiaries in 1115 villages.  
  

 
 
 
iii.      Pilot project for capacity building of the Farmers‟ Clubs for providing services 
as Business Facilitators (BFs) by Tripura Gramin Bank (TGB). 25 Farmers‟ Clubs 
of three districts viz., West Tripura District, South Tripura District and North 
Tripura Distr ict will be covered in the pilot, to generate new accounts and 
business for TGB. 
  
iv.     It has been observed that various banks are employing the support of SHG 
members to act as  BC / BF for extending financial services to the poor. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
The Committee were disappointed to note that credit growth by the co -operatives 
to the agricultural sector had declined from 25% in 2005 -06 to 8% in 2006 -07. 
The number of accounts financed by cooperatives had also declined from 225 
lakh in 2004-05 to 189 lakh in 2006 -07. Co-operative societies were most potent 
means for widening and deepening access to institutional credit to farmers. Their 
revitalization was therefore vital. Though the Government had taken up 
measures for recapitalizing cooper ative credit institutions in accordance with the 
suggestions of Task Force on Revival of Rural Cooperative Credit Insitution, it 
was not clear as to by when this exercise was expected to be completed. The 
Task Force had recommended amendments to State Co -operative Societies Act 
with a view to restoring the autonomous character of credit co -operatives. Two 
States (Andhra Pradesh and Haryana) had so far amended their respective 
Cooperative Societies Acts. The Committee were, of the view that in order to 
make cooperative institutions a more effective channel of disbursing rural credit, 
it was necessary to pursue a time bound approach for reviving them. More 
importantly, State Governments must be persuaded to bring in legislations 
amending their respective Cooperative Societies Act without further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Twenty five States have signed the MoU to implement the Government of 
India (GoI) Revival package for Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure 
(STCCS). The states of Himachal Pradesh, Goa  and Kerala not signed the MoU.  

 
 
 
The GoI, after announcing the Revival Package for STCCS provided two years 
time frame to the States to accept the same.  This period was further extended 
by 6 months up to July 2008.  The package was a uniform for all the S tates.  
However, these three States had sought for certain modifications in the package, 
which was not found acceptable to the GoI.  The period of implementation is 3 
years from the date of signing of MoU. Of these, 8 States (Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, M.P.,  Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, U.P., Uttarakhand) will be 
completing the implementation period of three years by December 2009, 5 States 
(Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Haryana and West Bengal) by October 
2010 and remaining 12 States (Assam, J&K,  Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamilnadu, Tripura) by July 
2011.  
  Ten States have, hitherto, amended their respective State Cooperative 
Societies Act through Legislative Process, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,  Gujarat, 
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Orissa, Tamilnadu and 
Uttar Pradesh. The Government of Meghalaya had amended the Act before 
vetting by NABARD.  The amended Act has been examined by NABARD and 
forwarded to the State Government for further amendment. As the earlier Bills on 
amendments to erstwhile State Cooperative Societies Acts are awaiting 
Presidential assent. the State Governments of Chhattisgarh and West Bengal 
have taken a Cabinet decision approving the amendments in respect t o the 
reform measures. 
  
Draft amendments to Cooperative Societies Act in respect of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand and Sikkim have been vetted by NABARD and are under 
consideration of the respective State Governments. 
  The revival package for STCCS includes a financial outlay estimated at 
Rs.13,596 crores to be shared by Central Government, State Governments and 
the Cooperative Credit Structure in the ratio of 68:28:4 respectively for the 
country as a whole.  Central Government has already released Rs.7,430.63 crore 

 
 
 
for implementation of the package to NABARD.  Of this, Rs. 6.072.71 crore has 
already been released to the STCCS for their capitalisation. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 
The Committee observed that out of 96 Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) as on 31 
March, 2007, 15 were incurring losses. The poor performance of RRBs was 
attributed to poor recoveries, low earning capacity, hike in expenditure on 
account of higher wages and salaries and co mpetition from sponsoring banks in 
the area of operation. With a view to improving the performance of RRBs, a 
number of measures had reportedly been taken, which included, amalgamation 
of RRBs, infusion of funds to strengthen the capital base and allowing these 
banks to tap deposits from new sources and to enter into new business areas. It 
had been stated that there were 27 RRBs having negative net worth of Rs. 1795 
crore and Rs. 897.98 crore were being provided to recapitalise these banks. The 
Committee expected that as indicated by the Secretary, Department of Financial 
Services, RRBs would improve their operational and financial performance in the 
current year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The position of RRBs has improved over the years.  As on 31 March 200 9, the 
number of loss making RRBs has come down to 5.  
  
All 27 RRBs, with negative net worth, have received the recapitalisation support 
of Rs. 1795.97 crore. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 
The operating network of RRBs as on 31st March, 2007 was stated to be 
14,520 branches covering 534 districts in 26 States. According to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services), the number of uncovered districts by 

 
 
 
RRBs had now been reduced to 37. The Committee urged that RRBs network 
should be expanded to cover the remaining districts at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The branch network of RRBs has improved during the last 2 years.  As on 
31 March 2008, there were 14761 branches.  It is reported that the number has 
further increased to 15241 (provisional) as on 31 March 2009. 
  591 of the 622 districts have already been covered by the RRBs.  Of the 
31 uncovered districts, 23 are in Union Territories/ smaller States where RRBs 
have not been established.  RRBs would be persuaded to open branches in the 8 
districts viz. J&K - 5, Maharashtra - 2, Mumbai Urban and Rural) and Tamilnadu 
1 in Chennai. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
The Committee found that the progress in implementation of KCC 
Scheme was tardy in Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,  Sikkim and 
North Eastern States, which were still under -banked. Action needed to be taken 
to remedy the situation in these States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The progress is tardy in the above States because of their topography. In order 
to encourage the C ooperatives Banks and RRBs to increase their credit flow in 
these States, NABARD has been providing enhanced refinance facility to Co -
operative Banks and RRBs in these regions with relaxation in Net NPA norms. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil 

 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
Credit is a n essential requirement for revitalizing agriculture. Various 
Committees and Expert Groups had gone into the problems of rural credit and 
non-availability of institutional credit to farmers. Though numerous measures had 
been taken by the Government from ti me to time to address these problems on 
the basis of the recommendations of these Committees, the Committee were 
dismayed to note that even now vast majority of farmer households did not have 
access to institutional credit. According to the recent report o f the Committee on 
Financial Inclusion, headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, 64.95 million (73%), out of 
89.3 million farmer households and 46.6 million (78.2%) out of 59.6 million non -
cultivator households (Agricultural labourers, artisans and others) did not hav e 
access to formal sources of credit. The Committee hardly needed to point out 
that interest burden becomes a heavy liability to farmers, vast majority of whom 
take loans from non -institutional sources, like money lenders at high rates of 
interest due to n on-availability of institutional credit. The Committee therefore, 
urged that as recommended by the Committee on Financial Inclusion, at least 
50% (55.77 million) of the excluded cultivator and non -cultivator households 
should be provided access to credit t hrough commercial banks and RRBs by the 
year 2012 and the remaining households by the year 2015. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the specific steps taken by the Government to 
implement these recommendations and details of annual targets, fixed i n this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
On 18th June, 2004, the Government announced a package for doubling 
the flow of credit to agriculture and allied activities in a period of three years 

 
 
 
commencing from 2004-05 over the amount disbursed during the year 2003-04. 
This goal was achieved in just two years.  
 
The Government has been committed, during the last five years, towards 
availability of timely and affordable credit for rural/farm sector.  Agriculture 
credit disbursement increased nearly three and a half times from Rs. 86,981 
crore in 2003 -04 to Rs. 2,87,149.19 crore in 2008 -09 (provisional figures), 
which is also, in fact, 102.55% of the  target of Rs. 2,80,000 crore set for the 
year.  During the years 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, the agricultural loans were 
disbursed to a total of 4.39 crore and 4.56 crore farmer accounts respectively, 
which shows the commitment of banks in disbursing to this sector.  A 
comparison of agency -wise achievements vis -a-vis the annual targets during 
the current year viz-a-viz that of 2007-08, is given below: 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Agency 2007-08 
Amount (in Rs. Crore) 
2008-09 
Amount (in Rs. Crore) 
  Target Achievement Target Achievement 
1. Comm. Banks     
i. Public Sector Comm. 
Bank 1,50,000 
1,33,225.61 
1,95,000 
1,64,350.10 
ii. Private Sect or Comm. 
Bank 
47,862.00 59,312.92 
 Sub-total for Comm. Bank  1,81,087.61  2,23,663.02 
2. Coop. Banks 52,000 48,258.19 55,000 36,761.99 
3. RRBs 23,000 25,311.65 30,000 26,724.18 
 Grand Total  2,25,000 2,54,657.45 2,80,000 2,87,149.19 
 
The Government of India (GoI) has taken the following steps to ensure 
availability of timely and affordable credit for rural/farm sector: 
 The GoI has implemented the Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief 
Scheme for farmers covering nearly 3.68 crore farmers(provisiona l figures), 
thus declogging the line of credit and making these farmers eligible for fresh 
credit from the lending institutions.  
 The GoI is providing interest subvention to banks since Kharif 2006 -07 to 
ensure Short Term crop loans upto Rs.3 lakh to famer s at interest rate of @ 
7% per annum at the ground level.   
 Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Cooperative Banks have been 
successful in financing more than 80 lakhs new farmers during each of the 
last three year. 

 
 
 
 Banks have simplified the procedur e for documentation for agricultural loans.  
Loans upto Rs.50,000/ - have been made collateral and margin free and the 
requirement of „No Dues Certificate‟ has been dispensed with. 
 Banks have been advised to provide all eligible farmers with Kisan Credit 
Cards. 
 Norms for opening „no frills‟ account, has been simplified. 
 Banks have been advised to make available a basic banking „no frills‟ account 
either with „nil‟ or very low minimum balances. 
 Regional Rural Banks have been advised to allow limited overdraft  facilities in 
„no frills‟ accounts, without any collateral. 
 Small borrowers with loans settled under the one time settlement scheme 
have been made eligible to access fresh credit. 
 Banks have been advised to issue General Credit Cards to eligible 
beneficiaries without insistence on security, purpose or end use of credit. 
 Banks have been permitted to utilise the services of Non -Governmental 
Organisations, Self Help Groups, Micro Finance Institutions and other Civil 
Society Organisation as intermediaries in p roviding financial and banking 
services. 
 All State Level Bankers‟ Committee convener banks have been advised to 
initiate action for identifying at least one district in their States/Union 
Territories for 100% financial inclusion.  In many states, SLBCs hav e 
identified and taken steps to cover a larger number of districts for 100% 
financial inclusion.  Banks have been urged to scale up IT initiatives for 
financial inclusion. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee regreted to note that commercial banks,  despite having a 
vast chain of branches in rural areas had continued to fail to reach the mandated 
level of disbursing 18% credit to agriculture. The shortfall in bank lending to 
agriculture in the year, 2007 -08 was to the tune of as much as Rs. 21,818 cr ore. 
More disturbing was the fact that banks appeared to be averse to disburse credit 
to farmers despite the fact that the recovery of direct agricultural advances had 
been impressive and had been improving from 74.5% in 2004 to 78.6% in 2005 
and to 80.1% in 2006 in the case of public sector banks. The lower 
disbursements to agriculture were attributed to non completion of formalities by 
borrowers, lack of co -ordination between 39 banks and sponsoring agencies, 
bunching of applications, etc. The Committee f elt that these were matters which 
could be managed by a proper co -ordination mechanism and awareness 

 
 
 
campaigns by banks. The Committee urged that suitable measures be taken to 
address these problems and to ensure that the targeted level of credit reached 
farmers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Agriculture credit disbursement increased nearly three and a half times from Rs. 
86,981 crore in 2003 -04 to Rs. 2,87,149.19 crore in 2008 -09 (provisional figures) 
while the outstanding credit to agriculture by public secto r banks has gone up 
from Rs.70,501 crore in March 2004 to Rs.2,43,570 crore in March 2007 (figures 
provisional), showing a robust compounded annual rate of growth of over 30 per 
cent.  Lending to agriculture as a percentage of net bank credit has also impr oved 
from 14.5 per cent to 15.4 per cent during the same period.  However, it has been 
lower than the target of 18% of net bank credit prescribed by Reserve Bank.  This 
is partly due to a comparatively lower growth rate of agriculture sector compared 
to industry and services sectors…    
…Besides above, from April 30, 2007, the base on which the priority sector target 
is calculated has been modified.  Accordingly, banks are now required to lend to 
priority sector at 40% of adjusted net bank credit (ANBC) (AN BC represents net 
bank credit plus investments made by banks in non -Statutory Liquidity Ratio 
(SLR) bonds under Held to Maturity category or credit equivalent amount of Off -
Balance Sheet Exposures (OBE), whichever is higher, as on March 31 of the 
preceding accounting year.  This change may increase the priority sector lending 
obligations of banks in absolute terms. 
Considering the amount of shortfall in lending to priority sector (including 
agriculture), four additional funds were created after announcement  in the Budget 
Speech 2008 -09.  These funds, which are to be governed by the general 
guidelines that are now applicable to RIDF with some modifications, are as under: 
iv) A Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit (SRCRC) Fund of Rs.5,000 
crore with National Bank f or Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD) to enhance its refinance operations to Short Term 
Cooperative Credit Institutions. 
v) Two funds of Rs.4,600 crore have been created in Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) – one for risk capital fina ncing (Rs. 

 
 
 
1,000 crore) and other for enhancing refinance capability (Rs. 3,600 
crore) to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector. 
vi) A Rural Housing Fund of Rs.2,000 crore with National Housing Bank 
(NHB) to enhance its refinance operations in the rural housing sector. 
 
Besides above, for the year 2009 -10, it has been proposed to allocate Rs. 
14,000 crore for RIDF, Rs. 4,500 crore for separate window under RIDF for rural 
roads component of Bharat Nirman, Rs. 4,000 crore for SIDBI to lend to MSME  
sector by refinancing and Rs. 2,000 crore for Rural Housing Fund in NHB.  With 
the constitution of these Funds, the banks with shortfall in lending to priority 
sector, including agriculture and weaker section, would have to contribute higher 
amounts. In f act for the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, almost the total amount 
(near 100%) of shortfall has been utilized, thus causing a huge penalty to such 
banks. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee regreted to note that though the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
scheme had been extended to cover all categories of loans viz. short and long 
term loans and productive and nonproductive loans, the loans sanctioned under 
the scheme had declined from Rs. 47,601 crore in 2005 -06 to 40,300 crore in 
2006-07. Similarly, it was ob served that out of 685 lakh KCC holders, only about 
397 lakh farmers (60%) had availed agricultural credit during 2006 -07. Ineligibility 
to avail fresh loans by defaulters was stated to be the main reason in this regard. 
Consequently, as many as 40% of KCC  holders were ineligible for getting credit 
from the institutional sources and were driven to money lenders. It appeared that 
the scheme had led to unintended consequences. The Committee felt that it was 
high time, the scheme was critically reviewed with a  view to plugging the short 
comings and to ensure that non -wilful defaulters were not put to any difficulty in 
accessing institutional credit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
 
 
During 2006-07, in fact, Rs.46,729 crore has been sanctioned under KCC 
scheme by all ba nks as against the loan amount of Rs.47,601 crore sanctioned 
under KCC during 2005-06 by all banks.  
The banks have been advised that all in -operative accounts may be 
reviewed periodically by them to ascertain the reasons for accounts being 
inoperative and wherever possible the willing farmers may be allowed to operate 
the account subject to banking norms. Further, the banks have been also 
advised to ensure that KCCs are renewed in a hassle free manner and direct 
their efforts towards ensuring 'quality in o perations' on the KCCs.  Cooperative 
Banks and RRBs have also been advised to cover all eligible borrowers and 
have at least 150 new KCCs in each year in each branch.   
Regarding revisiting the scheme, NABARD has conducted study on 
implementation of KCC fo cusing on operation of account, rate of interest 
charged, the process of revisiting the credit limits, coverage of KCC borrowers 
under Personal Accident Insurance Scheme (PAIS) and difficulties in settlement 
of insurance claims.  The study findings are being compiled. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee found it surprising to note that the data reporting system of 
the nodal agency (NABARD) for implementation of the KCC Scheme did not 
include information on total amount of credit availed by KCC hold ers and 
recovery performance under the scheme. Such information was vital to assess 
the performance of the scheme and to overcome its weaknesses/shortcomings. 
The Committee, therefore, desired that the data reporting system of NABARD 
was geared up to inclu de this information of vital importance to enable 
assessment of the successfulness of the KCC Scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Presently, all banks are providing short term finance to farmers through KCC 
only.  KCC is a scheme in which credit limit is san ctioned to farmers for a period 

 
 
 
of 3 years.  During the period of operations, farmers are free to make drawals 
and repayments any number of times.  While assessing the finance made under 
KCC, maximum outstanding is reckoned for the purpose of loans and adv ances 
made during the year.   
The Credit flow to agriculture sector is compiled by NABARD on a monthly 
basis.  Data in respect of Commercial Banks are provided by Indian Banks‟ 
Association (IBA) and data in respect of Cooperative Banks and RRBs are 
collected through Regional Offices of NABARD.  Presently MIS does not capture 
the data on recoveries.  However, the details of Limits sanctioned, outstanding 
and recovery there against are available with NABARD Regional Offices in 
respect of Cooperatives and RRBs .  As such NABARD is in a position to furnish 
such information in respect of Cooperative Banks and RRBs. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee found that a number of shortcomings and weaknesses 
had been identified in the KCC scheme by the study unde rtaken by National 
Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER). The weaknesses included, 
issuing of KCCs only to pensioners by some banks, inadequacy of credit limits in 
many cases, fixing of minimum credit limit by some banks and variations in 
service ch arges. The Committee desired that remedial action should be taken 
immediately to remove the weaknesses in order to ensure that the scheme 
served as an effective means of meeting the credit  requirements of farmers. The 
Committee hoped that the Government w ouldl also take necessary action to 
implement the recommendations of the Expert Group on Agricultural 
Indebtedness particularly the one relating to making the KCC all inclusive by 
incorporating therein information on the credit history of the card holder. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The major findings of the National Council of Applied Economic Research 
(NCAER) study have already been circulated by NABARD vide its Circular dated 

 
 
 
06 November 2004 to all Banks advising them to take appropriate remedial 
action o n the findings of the study and remove the bottle -necks in the 
implementation of the Scheme. This is expected to facilitate farmers in providing 
adequate, timely and hassle free credit as envisaged under the scheme. 
Conversion / reschedulement of loan is a lso permissible under the KCC scheme, 
in case of damage to cultivated crops on account of natural calamities.  Crop 
loans disbursed under the scheme for notified crops are covered under Rashtriya 
Krishi Bima Yojna (National Crop Insurance Scheme) to ensure hassle free credit 
for borrowers while a better recovery mechanism for banks as well. 
Few pilots have been started with grant support from Financial Inclusion 
Technology Fund (FITF), in Andhra Pradesh, Tripura etc.  Based on the results 
the banks would be advised to upscale process. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee noted that the Expert Group on Agricultural 
Indebtedness had also recommended the creation of a Money Lenders Debt 
Redemption Fund with a corpus of Rs. 100 crore contributed by Centr al and 
State Governments. In view of the continued and increasing dependence of the 
rural households on money lenders for meeting credit requirements, as evident 
from the NSSO‟s survey data on rural indebtedness, the Committee expected the 
Government to im plement the recommendation of the Expert Group without 
delay and create the proposed fund, which would facilitate in the swapping of 
debt. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the Budget Speech 2009 -10, it has been announced to set up a 
Taskforce to examine the ma tter relating to loans availed from private money 
lenders in greater detail and suggest the future course of action. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi: 
 
10 March, 2010                                                   DR.  MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI, 
19 Phalguna 1931 (Saka)                                       Chairman, 
              Standing Committee on Finance. 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTY- EIGHTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘FLOW OF CREDIT TO AGRICULTURE SECTOR’ 
OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE  (DEPARTMENT OF  FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
         Total   % of total 
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations   13 
(ii)  Recommendations/observations which have    7  53.85% 
been accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 4,5,6,  
7, 8 and10) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations which the     00.00% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
the Government‟s replies 
(Nil) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect       6  46.15% 
of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee (Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,  
9,11,12 & 13) 
 
(v)  (Recommendation/observation in respect of     00.00% 
which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited 
(Nil) 
 