 
 
1 
60 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,  
FINANCIAL SERVICES & DISINVESTMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifty 
First Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services & 
Disinvestment)]  
 
 
SIXTIETH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


 
 
2 
SIXTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,  
FINANCIAL SERVICES & DISINVESTMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in Fifty First Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services & Disinvestment)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6 December, 2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  6 December, 2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


 
 
3 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......   (iv) 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………     1 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ............................……………  
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government‟s replies .........................................………  
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee ................................…………..  
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited ........................................................................……  
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 29 November, 2012................  25 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations   27 
Contained in the Fifty First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services & 
Disinvestment)…………………………………… 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ( 2012-13) 
 
Shri Yashwant Sinha  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Suvendu Adhikari  
3.  Dr. Baliram   
4.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle 
5.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6.  Shri Gurudas Dasgupta 
7.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
9.  Shri Chandrakant Khaire 
10.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
11.  Dr. Chinta Mohan 
12.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
13.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
14.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
15.  Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao 
16.  Shri Adv. A. Sampath 
17.  Vacant* 
18.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
19.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
20.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
21.  Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
24.  Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
25.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
26.  Shri Satish Chandra Misra 
27.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
29.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
30.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31.  Dr. Yogendra P. Trivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A.K. Singh      -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  -  Additional Director 
_______________________________________________________ 
* Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana, MP ceased to be the Member of the  Committee w.e.f 28.10.2012 consequent upon 
his induction to the Union Council of Ministers 

 
 
5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised by 
the Committee, present this Sixtieth Report on action taken by G overnment on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifty First Report of the Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic 
Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services & Disinvestment).  
 2. The Fifty First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2012.  Replies indicating action taken on all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were furnished by the Government on 1 August, 2012 and 19 
November, 2012.   
 3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 29 
November, 2012. 
 4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifty First Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
 5. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;            YASHWANT SINHA 
4 December, 2012                                                          Chairman, 
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Finance  
 

 
 
6 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This report of the Standing Committee on Finance (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) deals 
with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observati ons contained 
in their Fifty-first Report on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2012. 
 2.   The Report contained 15 recommendations.  Action taken notes received 
from the Ministry on 1 August 2012 in respect of all the recommendations contained in 
the report were scrutinized and the Ministry were asked to furnish revised action ta ken 
replies as most of the replies furnished by them were vague and sketchy.  Accordingly, 
the revised action taken replies have been received from the Ministry on 19 November, 
2012.  The replies have been categorised as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6,7, 8,9,10,12,13,14 and 15  
                                                                                                        Total: 13  
(Chapter II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:  Nil 
                                                                                                        Total: Nil 
(Chapter III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 4 and 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         Total: 02 
 (Chapter IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Nil 
                                                                                                   Total :     Nil 
(Chapter V) 
 

 
 
7 
 3.   The Committee in their earlier Report on Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment) had cautioned them to be 
careful and avoid furnishing replies which are inconclusive, vague or 
couched in general terms like ‘Noted’ or ‘Acc epted’.  The Committee, 
however, find from the action taken replies that the Ministry have even this 
time failed to adhere to the procedures in furnishing replies.  The Committee 
express their displeasure that the specific queries / clarifications raised i n 
this regard have not been addressed by the Ministry even in their revised 
action taken replies.  The Committee desire specific replies to the comments 
contained in Chapter I of this Report be furnished to them expeditiously, in 
any case not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 4.   The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations. 
 
A.   Analysis of Demands for Grants (2012-13) 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos.1, 2 and 3) 
 5. As there had been significant and persistent variation between Budget 
Estimates(BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actuals year after year in Demand 
No.32 of the Department of Economic Affairs and Demand No.33 of the Department 
of Financial Services, the Committee recommen ded the Ministry of Finance to take 
corrective measures to arrest such an unscientific trend of projection of fund 
requirements and for ensuring an objective and realistic formulation of budget 
estimates and balanced utilization of funds. 

 
 
8 
6. Further, the C ommittee while strongly disapproving of providing huge 
amount of Rs.400 crore in BE 2011 -12, which was surrendered in toto, to Security 
Printing and Minting Corporation of India Ltd. (SPMCIL), pending finalization of 
processes and procedures urged the Mini stry to avoid such ritualistic allocations, 
which remain only on paper.   
 7. The Ministry in their action taken replies while putting forth the major 
reasons for variation between BE/RE and Actuals have inter-alia stated that:- 
“Demand No.32 of the Department of Economic Affairs: 
 …The additionalities pertained to providing Rs.1066.46 crore for initial transfer to 
the „National Clean Energy Fund‟; Rs.501.90 crore for GOI‟s contribution to the corpus 
of NSDF and equity in NSDC; Rs. 1609.79 crore for payment  to IMF towards India‟s 
MOV obligations; and Rs.9003.04 crore was made at RE 2011 -12 for the Note 
Purchase Agreement (NPA) roll over towards loans to IMF under New Arrangements to 
Borrow(NAB).  All these additionalities were met through Supplementary Deman ds for 
Grants. 
 From the above mentioned item -wise explanation it may be observed that major 
savings and excesses were due to reasons beyond the control of the Department and 
due to requirements which could not be anticipated while finalising the Revised 
Estimates and Budget Estimates.  
Budgetary Support to SPMCIL:- 
 The proposal for providing financial assistance to SPMCIL had been under 
consideration of this Ministry and a decision was taken to make a provision for Rs.400 
crore in the Budget Estimates.  I t was anticipated that the procedural 
requirements/formalities would get completed within the Financial Year.  However, the 
exercise could not be completed.  Subsequently, the matter was re -examined and a 
decision was taken that there does not appear to be  any need to provide financial 
assistance to SPMCIL at this stage.  Accordingly, it was decided to surrender the 
provision made in the Budget Estimates 2012-13 at RE Stage.   
 The Observation made by the Committee has been taken note of and in future, 
due care will be taken by the Department while projecting the Budget Estimates. 
Demand No.33 of the Department of Financial Services 
 In 2009 -10, as against BE provision of Rs. 38,413.54 crore, RE was raised to  
Rs. 41,117.84 crore, on account of additional re quirement of funds amounting to Rs. 

 
 
9 
800.00 crore towards Government‟s contribution for revival package for strengthening 
the Short -Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) and Rs. 2466.00 crore to 
augment the capital base of certain nationalised banks. Ac tual expenditure was Rs. 
37,864.82 crore mainly because of savings in respect of following Schemes:- 
 
(a) Savings of Rs. 1692.15 crore in respect of payment of interest to lending institutions 
towards Agricultural Debt Waiver & Debt Relief Scheme (ADWDRS), 2008. … 
(b) Savings of Rs. 1000.00 crore in respect of revival of Long -Term Cooperative Credit 
Structure (LTCCS) which is discussed separately below. 
 
(c) Savings of Rs. 1542.00 crore (under Plan) in respect of acquisition of RBI stake in 
National Bank for Agricultur e and Rural Development (NABARD) and National 
Housing Bank (NHB) arose because procedural formalities involved in this 
transaction could not be completed and RBI requested for maintaining status -quo in 
the matter.  
 
 In 2010-11, as against BE provision of Rs. 49,609.10 crore, RE was raised to Rs. 
60,236.54 crore on account of additional requirements indicated below:- 
 
(a) Rs. 4000.00 crore in respect of Farmers‟ Debt Relief Fund. 
(b) Rs. 1000.00 crore in respect of interest subvention for providing short term credi t to 
farmers. 
(c) Rs. 3657.00 crore in respect of capitalisation of Public Sector Banks. 
(d) Rs. 1430.00 crore in respect of acquisition of RBI‟s stake in NABARD. 
(e) Rs. 350.00 crore for re-capitalisation of Regional Rural Banks.  
  
 Actual expenditure was Rs. 57,425 .37 crore because of savings, in respect of 
following Schemes:- 
 
(a) Rs. 1000.00 crore in respect of revival of Long -Term Cooperative Credit Structure 
(LTCCS) which is discussed separately below.  
(b) Rs. 661.45 crore in respect of 1% interest subvention on housing loans, since claims 
under the scheme were not received up to the expected level. 
(c) Rs. 659.53 crore in respect of ADWDRS, 2008 since reimbursement claims were 
lower than estimated. 
(d) Rs. 450.00 crore, in respect of acquisition of RBI stake in NHB which could  not 
materialise even during 2010 -11 since the required amendment in the NHB Act 
could not be completed. 
(e) Rs. 300.00 crore in respect of equity support to India Infrastructure Finance 
Company Limited (IIFCL) since the level of authorised capital of IIFCL co uld not be 
raised during 2010-11 to enable release of funds towards further equity support. 
(f) Rs. 283.51 crore in respect of Government‟s share for re -capitalisation of Regional 
Rural Banks. The saving arose since State Governments and concerned sponsor 
banks could not release their share which was required before releasing Central 
Government‟s share. 
  

 
 
10 
 During 2011-12, as against BE provision of Rs. 23,705.94 crore, RE was reduced 
to Rs. 21,761.97 crore. While expenditure up to December, 2011 was Rs. 2984.57  
crore, final expenditure was Rs. 20823.04 crore”.  
 
 8. To a specific query as to whether repetitive allocation and thereafter of 
Rs.1000 crore  each in the years 2009 -10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -12, which was 
surrendered in toto, to the scheme namely, “Revival of Long-Term Cooperative Credit 
Structure (LTCCS)” and further allocation of Rs.500 crore in BE 2012 -13, is budgetary 
prudent pending finalization of the package and measures proposed to avoid such 
practice in budget allocation in future, the Ministry in t heir revised action taken notes 
have stated as follows:-   
“…..The report of the Task Force has been accepted by the Government. A 
revival package for LTCCS is under consideration. In BE 2012 -13, there is a budget 
allocation of Rs 500 crore for implementat ion of the package.  As the revised package 
has not yet been approved, provision in 2012 -13 is proposed to be reduced to token 
amount of Rs. 0.01 crore in RE.  The observations of the Committee have been noted 
for compliance”. 
 
9. The Committee had in their earlier Report had advised the Ministry to avoid 
budgetary support to a profit making miniratna category -I company namely, 
Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Ltd. (SPMCIL).  In BE 2011 -12, 
a sum of Rs.400 crore was allocated to SPMCIL onl y to be surrendered at RE 
stage, pending finalization of revival package.  Again in BE 2012 -13, budgetary 
support of Rs.400 crore was made to SPMCIL.  The Committee find from the 
action taken reply that the Ministry would once again be surrendering BE of R s. 
400 crore in RE.     
 10. In another scheme namely, Revival of Long -Term Cooperative Credit 
Structure (LTCCS), the Committee had commented upon repetitive allocation of 
Rs.1000 crore in each of the years 2009 -10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 which was 
surrendered in toto pending finalization of revival package.   The Ministry also 

 
 
11 
provided further allocation of Rs.500 crore in BE 2012 -13 which would now be 
reduced to Rs.0.01 crore at RE stage.   
 11. While reiterating their earlier recommendation for not providin g 
budgetary support in normal circumstances to profit making PSUs like SPMCIL, 
the Committee would recommend the Ministry to avoid tokenism in provisioning 
of funds and premature allocations without approval of schemes.  
 
B. Release of funds for Central Assistance Schemes 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4) 
 12. The Committee noted that funds released through the Demand No. 35, 
Department of Expenditure remain grossly underutilized year after year under most of 
the Central Assistance Schemes for the reasons, as advan ced by the Ministry, such as 
shortfall mainly relate to mismatch between the funds earmarked and the amount 
recommended for release by the nodal Ministries to States, delay in receiving proposals 
from the nodal Ministries and fulfillment of requisite condi tions.   Since the funds for 
Central Assistance Schemes are released to States based on the recommendations of 
the line Ministries, the Committee expressed their view that the Demand for these funds 
may be raised through Demands of the nodal Ministries con cerned instead of through 
Demand No. 35.  The Committee, therefore, desired that instead of resorting to 
allocation exercise, the Department of Expenditure should focus on carrying out its 
principal activity of overseeing public expenditure management incl uding quality of 
development expenditure at a time when the Government is striving for fiscal 
consolidation.   
  13. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated the following:- 
“Transfer of funds to States under Demand No. 35 operated by the Depa rtment 
of Expenditure contains the transfer to State Governments on account of (a) 
Non-Plan grants, particularly the grants recommended by the Finance 
Commission and (b) Plan Grants on account of Block grants such as Normal 
Central Assistance (NCA), ACA fo r Externally Aided Projects (EAPs), Special 
Plan Assistance (SPA) and some State Plan Schemes. 

 
 
12 
As regards the Finance Commission related grants there cannot be any other 
nodal Ministry and the same would have to be essentially released by Ministry of 
Finance in consultation with concerned line Ministries ensuring dovetailing with 
similar related programmes.  Similarly, releases under Block Grants and some 
State Plans Schemes, such as NCA, ACA for EAPs, SPA, SCA (untied) and 
Backward Regions Grant Fund (Stat e Component), as allocated/recommended 
by Planning Commission need to be released by Ministry of Finance as it alone 
can deal with block/State and situation specific general project grants.  For other 
State Plan Schemes such as AIBP, JNNURM, National Socia l Assistance 
Programme (NSAP), necessary administrative mechanisms are established in 
the Department of Expenditure.  This system of release of plan and non -plan 
grants for the State‟s Annual Plan, Centre‟s share of State‟s Calamity Relief 
Funds, Assistanc e from National Calamity Contingency Fund, up -gradation 
grants and grants for rural/urban local bodies and other grants as recommended 
by the successive Finance Commissions through Demand No. 35 is supported 
by the Allocation of Business Rules of Governmen t of India.   The monitoring of 
the position of States‟ finances by the Ministry of Finance also allows overseeing 
resources and allocation in totality. 
The releases under different heads of Grant No. 35 are made in accordance with 
the recommendations of t he respective line Ministries/Planning Commission and 
fulfillment of prescribed conditions.  Hence, the reason for any underutilization of 
grants may not be attributable to the placement of funds in the Demand No. 35.   
Department of Expenditure, upon fulf illment of the scheme specific conditional 
ties, expeditiously processes the releases.   This is also supported by the fact 
that against an BE/RE provision of Rs. 80741.61 crore under Grant No. 35, 
releases amounting to Rs. 80075.79 crore were made during 2011-12, which is 
99% of the total RE under the Demand”. 
   14. As the reply furnished by the Ministry failed to address the above 
observation / recommendation made by the Committee, the Ministry were asked to 
submit a revised action taken replies.  Accord ingly, the Ministry in their written replies 
have stated as follows:-  
“Overlapping of expenditure Heads between the line Ministries and the Department of 
Expenditure:- 
 Central grants to the States by the Central Ministries are released under a 
common Major Head of account, i.e. 3601 -Grants-in-Aid to State Governments. 
Different line Ministries may operate through same Head of account. The 
scheme-wise and object -wise distinction takes place at Sub -head and Object -
head level of accounting which is generally  distinct for each scheme without 
overlapping of booking of expenditure.  

 
 
13 
Allocation of funds through Demands of the nodal Ministries concerned instead of 
through Demand No.35 by the Department of Expenditure:- 
 Releases under Demand No. 35, operated by De partment of Expenditure, 
includes Non-Plan grants recommended by Finance Commission, block grants 
and State Plan Schemes such as Normal Central Assistance (NCA), Special 
Central Assistance (SCA), One -time Central Assistance (OTCA), Backward 
Region Grants F und (State component) as allocated/recommended by the 
Planning Commission, etc. for providing central assistance to the State Plans. 
There is no nodal Ministry for releasing the Finance Commission grants and 
block grants. Central assistance to the State Pl ans is being released on the 
recommendation of the Planning Commission/line Ministries concerned to 
address needs of the States in critical areas. Release from a nodal Demand for 
all the schemes being operated for providing Central assistance to the State 
Plans enables Department of Expenditure (DoE) and Planning Commission to 
assess the State/situation specific quantum of assistance to be provided to the 
States for supporting their Annual Plans and review thereof.  
 Public expenditure management is being p erformed by DoE through its internal 
structures as well as through the system of Integrated Financial Advisers who closely 
work with all the line Ministries. Providing Central Assistance for State Plans through 
single Demand No. 35 is an operational requir ement for the reasons enumerated in the 
Para above.  
Measures proposed to rectify the discrepancies caused for shortfall in utilization of 
grants:- 
 There is no shortfall in utilization of grants related to block assistance. For project 
based grants, respe ctive line Ministries are advised to ensure that the proposals 
recommended in conformity with provisions of approved guidelines of the 
schemes are evenly spaced throughout the year ensuring that the funds released 
are utilized properly and adequately by th e States concerned. Further, line 
Ministries pursue with the States to complete the sanctioned projects as per 
prescribed time line, timely submission of proper utilization certificates and 
completion of requisite conditionalities before seeking release of  2nd and 
subsequent instalments”.  
 15. The Committee had inter alia recommended that instead of resorting 
to allocation exercise to various Central Assistance Schemes, Block Grants and 
State Plan Schemes through Demand No.35, the Department of Expenditure  
should focus on carrying out its principal activity of overseeing public 
expenditure management including quality of development expenditure at a time 

 
 
14 
when the Government is striving for fiscal consolidation.   The Ministry in their 
action taken reply hav e, however, not accepted the recommendation of the 
Committee by stating that (i)  there is no nodal Ministry for releasing the Finance 
Commission Grants and Block Grants; (ii) releases under different Heads of 
Central Assistance to the State Plans is being released on the recommendation of 
the Planning Commission/line Ministries; (iii) though the line Ministries operates 
through the same Head of Account i.e 3601 -Grants-in-Aid to State Governments 
for release of central grants to the States, distinction take s place at sub-head and 
object-head level without overlapping of expenditure; and (iv) the monitoring of 
the position of States’ finances by the Ministry of Finance allows overseeing 
resources and allocation in totality.  The Committee are, however, not co nvinced 
with reply of the Ministry, as the extant practice of allocation of funds for various 
central assistance schemes through Demand No.35 inevitably leads to ineffective 
monitoring, weak accountability, and above all, conflict of interest of the 
Department of Expenditure in allocating funds and monitoring expenditure.   In 
this context, the Committee while reiterating their recommendation, desire  the 
Ministry to set up an Expert Group to rationalize the existing Demands of the 
Ministries / Departments relating to Central Assistance Schemes, Block Grants 
and State Plan Schemes in the light of the recommendation of the Committee .   

 
 
15 
C. Fiscal Consolidation 
(Recommendation Sl.  No.6) 
 16. The Committee had been expressing their reservation over the 
Government‟s fiscal roadmap without specifying the action plan to achieve the same. 
They apprehended that the possibility of occurrence of fiscal slippages again in the year 
2012-13 is distinct. The Committee, therefore, desired that the Government should 
chalk out their fiscal roadmap in concrete terms to achieve the desired outcomes.   
 17. The Ministry have furnished their action taken replies as under:- 
“The Government resumed the process of fiscal consolidation in 2010 -11, after a 
pause of two difficult fina ncial years in 2008 -09 and 2009 -10.  However, uncertainty 
in the global economy impacted the growth trend in India as well and the process had 
to be paused during 2011 -12.  By bringing back the focus on fiscal consolidation 
process, government has undertak en measures to reduce the fiscal deficit from 5.9 
per cent of GDP in RE 2011-12 to 5.1 per cent of GDP in BE 2012-13.  
The fiscal deficit target for 2012 -13 is higher than 4.2 per cent of GDP recommended 
by the 13 th Finance Commission and 4.1 per cent of G DP targeted in MTFP 
Statement for 2011 -12. Higher deficit may be seen in the context moderation in 
growth in economy from the potential growth rate.  Impact of higher than 
recommended level of fiscal deficit on total debt and liabilities of the Central 
Government during 2011-12 and 2012-13 is partially offset due to better performance 
in 2010-11 and 2011 -12.  The government is committed to continue the process of 
fiscal consolidation during 2013 -14 and 2014 -15.  With necessary policy measures, 
fiscal defici t is projected to decline to 4.5 per cent of GDP in 2013 -14 and 3.9 per 
cent of GDP in 2014 -15.  At the same time, effective revenue deficit is projected to 
decline from 1.8 per cent of GDP in BE 2012 -13 to 1 per cent of GDP in 2013 -14 and 
get eliminated i n 2014 -15.  Though the deficit levels projected are higher than the 
13th Finance Commission recommended target of 3 per cent of GDP in 2013 -14 and 
2014-15, it is estimated that debt and liabilities would still be lower as percentage of 
GDP at 44.0 per cent  and 41.9 per cent  in the two respective years that  the 
recommended debt target for these two years at 47.5 per cent and 44.8 per cent of 
GDP respectively. 
The fiscal consolidation roadmap is designed with a mix of reduction in total 
expenditure as perce ntage of GDP and improvement in tax to GDP ratio. With 
economy estimated to grow at higher rate than 2011 -12, it would be possible to 
further improve the tax to GDP ratio. With re -prioritization of expenditure towards 
developmental side and curtailing the growth in non-developmental expenditure, total 
expenditure is projected to decline from 14.7 per cent of GDP in 2012 -13 to 14.1 per 
cent of GDP in 2013 -14 and 13.6 per cent of GDP in 2014 -15.  Efforts are being 

 
 
16 
made to bring down total expenditure of the government as percentage of GDP to the 
above projected level”.  
 18. When asked to list out the measures that have been taken to reduce the 
fiscal deficit, the Ministry have stated in their revised action taken replies as follows:-   
“The Government has rev erted back to the path of fiscal consolidation with 
gradual exit from the expansionary measures in a calibrated manner.  The 
reduction in fiscal deficit from 5.9 per cent of GDP estimated in RE 2011 -12 to 
5.1 per cent of GDP in BE 2012 -13 is designed with a mix of reduction in total 
expenditure as percentage of GDP and improvement in gross tax revenue as 
percentage of GDP. Government has taken the following steps to contain the 
fiscal deficit : 
 In the current financial year, Government has imposed economy m easures 
like rationalization of expenditure and optimization of available resources with 
a view to improve macroeconomic environment. This include 10% mandatory 
cut on Non Plan expenditure in the current financial year, ban on creation of 
Plan and Non Plan  posts, restrictions on foreign travel, restrictions on re -
appropriation of funds, strict observance of discipline in fiscal transfers to 
States, Public Sector Undertakings, Autonomous Bodies, etc. 
 
 Government has also proposed to introduce „Medium -Term Ex penditure 
Framework Statement‟, setting forth a three -year rolling target for expenditure 
indicators with a view to undertaking a de -novo exercise for allocating 
resources for prioritized schemes and weeding out others that have outlived 
their utility. It would also encourage efficiencies in expenditure management. 
 
 Government also endeavours to restrict the expenditure on Central subsidies. 
Similar steps are expected to be continued in the coming years to contain the 
fiscal deficit”. 
 
  

 
 
17 
 
 19. The Committe e are constrained to note that as apprehended, the 
fiscal deficit target for 2012 -13 has slipped to 5.3 per cent in RE from BE 5.1 per 
cent.  The action taken reply is elusive on specific details of the sectors / 
schemes identified in curtailing the growth  in non -developmental expenditure 
during the financial year and progress made so far.   Keeping in view the gloomy 
economic situation, estimated slowdown of GDP growth rate to 5.5 per cent or so 
in 2012 -13, widening Current Account Deficit (CAD) and impact  of lesser GDP 
growth on revenue mobilization, the Committee cannot but deplore the 
lackadaisical approach of the Government towards achieving fiscal deficit target.  
The Committee would strongly recommend that the Government must take 
specific measures with reference to sectors/schemes to contain the fiscal deficit.  
 
D. Classification of Expenditure 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
20.   The Committee noted that the recommendations of the Expert Committee 
on classifications of Plan and Non-Plan expenditures, and to review the list of major and 
minor heads of accounts were under consideration of the Government.  In this context, 
the Committee desired that in consonance with the effort of the Government in 
addressing the structural component of imbalance in the rev enue account, namely 
consumptive expenditure, without sacrificing development related expenditure, the 
Government might accordingly review the present classification of Plan and Non -Plan 
expenditures and consider reclassifying the same broadly as Developme ntal and Non -
Developmental Expenditure. 
 21. In their action taken replies, the Ministry have stated the following:- 
“The Government accounting follows the classification of receipts and 
expenditure primarily on functional basis like tax collection, defenc e expenditure, 

 
 
18 
education, health, welfare of SC/ST, transport, communication, etc.  through 
different sectors viz. general, social and economic sectors.  This is followed 
uniformly across various sections of Government accounts such as revenue 
receipts, re venue expenditure, capital outlays and loan heads.  The distinction 
between 'Plan' and 'Non -Plan' expenditure lies in the perception that while 'Non 
Plan' expenditure is generally towards maintenance costs of assets, expenditure 
for running an establishmen t, servicing of debt, defence expenditure, internal 
security, social security expenditure (pensions), subsidy, 'Plan' is on the other 
hand towards meeting the objectives/targets of the Government enshrined in 
five-year Plan document.  However, the same can not be categorized as 'non -
developmental' and 'developmental' as such classification dis -orients the 
purposes of different nature of expenditure.  For example, though the 
expenditure on defence services, internal security, etc. are categorized as 'non -
plan' expenditure for the purpose of allocation of resources, they cannot be 
strictly called 'non -developmental' in nature as the external and internal security 
of the nation is paramount in nature. Similarly, the expenditure on interest 
payment is towards servicing of debt, which is taken towards financing both Plan 
and Non-Plan expenditure.   
 
 In addition, this Ministry has been bringing out a booklet detailing  the 
Central Government budgetary transactions on economic classification to make 
the budget a mor e useful tool of economic analysis. This classification involves 
arranging the expenditures and receipts of the Central Government including 
those of railways and posts by significant economic categories distinguishing 
current from capital outlays, spendin g for goods and services from transfers to 
individuals and institutions, tax receipts from other receipts, and from borrowing 
and inter-governmental loans and grants etc. Since the national income type of 
government account is the most prevalent form of an  economic classification, the 
methodology and concepts used in this analysis are those used in the national 
income accounting system. Considering the economic planning in the country, 
annual plan outlays have been integrated with the budgetary outlays which called 
for a further analysis of budgetary outlays into functional categories. Such a 
functional classification helps in analysing how much the Central Government is 
allocating to different functions or purposes in accordance with the priorities laid 
down in the Plan.  
 
 With the different kinds of classification of Government budgetary 
transactions already in vogue, re -classification of the existing system of 
classification (Plan and Non Plan) into 'developmental' and „non -developmental' 
may not be appropriate and practical”. 
 
 22. On being pointed out that the reply is silent on the status of 
implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Committees on classifications of 
Plan and Non -Plan expenditures, and to review the list of major and minor heads  of 

 
 
19 
accounts.  It is also not clear as to whether the above -said recommendation of the 
Standing Committee on Finance has been taken up with the Planning Commission.   
 
 23. It was also pointed out that it has not been clarified as to how the 
Government, wi thout reclassification of Plan and Non -Plan expenditures into 
developmental and non -developmental, would make transparent the process of 
addressing the structural component of imbalance in the revenue account, namely 
consumptive expenditure, without sacrif icing development related expenditure.   On 
these issues, the Ministry have submitted their replies as under:- 
“The report of the High Level Expert Committee  on Efficient Management of 
Public Expenditure, headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, Chairman, Economic Ad visory 
Council to the Prime Minister, which contained as one of the recommendations 
for abolition of the Plan/Non -Plan distinction in the Budget, has been presented 
to the Planning Commission in July, 2011. This Ministry has also taken up with 
the Planning Commission for analyzing the recommendations of the Committee 
in order to take appropriate proposal to the Cabinet for approval vide our letter 
dated 14.12.2011…. In view of this position, it would not be appropriate to further 
classify the Government exp enditure into Developmental and Non -
Developmental. 
As regards the report of the Committee constituted under the Chairperson of the 
Controller General of Accounts to review the list of Major Heads and Minor 
Heads of Accounts. Government has already constitu ted an Implementation 
Committee under the chairpersonship of Joint Secretary (Budget) to oversee the 
ways of implementation of the recommendations of the Committee. The revision 
of Charter of Accounts, applicable to both Union and States, is strenuous task  
and is likely to take a considerable time”.  
 24. The Committee find from the action taken reply furnished by the 
Ministry that since abolition of the Plan / Non -Plan distinction in the Budget, as 
recommended by the Rangarajan Committee, is under consider ation of the 
Planning Commission, it would not be appropriate to further classify the 
Government expenditure into Developmental and Non -Developmental.  The 
Committee would like the Ministry to take up the issue with the Planning 
Commission and Prime Minister’s Economic Advisory Council for reclassification 
of expenditure as suggested by the Committee.  

 
 
20 
E. Expenditure Management 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
 25. The Committee while strongly conveying their disapproval of erratic 
expenditure management by the li ne Ministries and lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry 
of Finance towards them, recommended the Ministry of Finance to review the 
methodology of monitoring the progress of expenditure and strengthen the mechanism 
to avoid rush of expenditure in the last quarter.  In this context, the Committee 
recommended that the Ministries might be classified and rated based on their overall 
performance with reference to timely utilization of budgeted funds and progress in 
implementation of schemes etc.  
 26. The Ministry in their action notes have submitted the following:- 
“The Ministry of Finance/Government of India has extended the Cash 
Management System to 46 Demands for Grants with effect from 1.4.2012. 
Further, the following initiatives are being taken to strengthe n the mechanism for 
better monitoring of the expenditure;- 
(i)  Ministries not covered under the Cash Management System are also required 
to formulate Monthly Expenditure Projection (MEP) and Quarterly Expenditure 
Allocation (QEA) and furnish the same to Cash Management Cell; 
(ii) A system for exchange of data between the office of CGA and Cash 
Management Cell is being established”. 
 27.  Further, when specifically asked about the effectiveness of the aforesaid 
measures, the Ministry in their revised action  taken replies have just reproduced the 
above reply.  
28. Despite drawing the attention of the Ministry to the fact that the 
action taken reply is silent on the recommendation of the Committee in regard to 
classification and rating of the Ministries based on their overall performance with 
reference to timely utilization of budgeted funds and progress in implementation 
of schemes etc., the revised action taken replies furnished by the Ministry are 
silent on these issues.  The Committee would like to be appri sed of the specific 

 
 
21 
action taken on the recommendation of the Committee within a period of two 
months of presentation of the Report. 
F. Creation of Corpus with lending-shortfall under priority sector lending 
(Recommendation Sl.No.11) 
 29. The Committee had been repeatedly emphasizing the creation of a corpus 
exclusively with lending shortfall meant for agriculture under priority sector lending as 
the extant practice of diverting them into various funds and utilizing for development of 
other related sectors of agriculture is neither tenable nor acceptable. The Committee 
noted that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) had failed to 
address the specific issue raised by the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, while 
reiterating their earlier recommendation, expected the Government to furnish a specific 
reply within a month from the date of presentation of this Report. 
 30. The  action taken reply as furnished by the Ministry is given below:- 
“According to RBI guidelines on Priority Sector L ending, domestic scheduled 
commercial banks having a shortfall in lending to Priority Sector lending target 
(40%) or agriculture lending target (18%) or weaker section target (10%) shall be 
allocated amounts for contribution to RIDF established with NABARD  or funds 
with other financial institutions as specified by RBI. The corpus of RIDF is 
decided by Government of India (GoI) every year.  
GoI has been allocating funds every year to RIDF which is utilized for creation of 
basic infrastructure in rural areas.  The activities covered under RIDF are related 
to agriculture and related sectors, rural connectivity and social sectors. The 
investments made under agriculture and related sectors which include 22 broad 
activities like minor irrigation, community irrigati on wells, soil conservation, flood 
protection, watershed development, market yards, rural godowns, cold storages, 
fishing harbours/jetties, modern abattoirs, etc, are expected to give a fresh 
impetus to the growth of agriculture sector besides increased cr edit flow to the 
sector leading to fresh capital formation and increased productivity. Support 
under RIDF for providing rural connectivity through roads and bridges will lead to 
speedy transportation of inputs and marketing of agricultural produce. A lion‟ s 
share of the number of projects and amount sanctioned under RIDF are 
accounted for by agriculture and related sector coupled with rural connectivity 
sector. Viewed from this angle, infrastructure created through RIDF increases the 
access of farmers to market which has a multiplier effect including the absorption 
of credit in agriculture sector. Details of  sectors and disbursement during the 
years 2009-10,2010-11 and 2011-12under RIDF are given below: 

 
 
22 
 
 
RIDF - SECTOR-WISE DISBURSEMENT DURING LAST THREE YEARS  
(Rs. in crore) 
S.No. SECTORS 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1 Irrigation 3374 3294 3878 
2 Agri Related 1205 921 1903 
3 Roads & Bridges 5747 5411 6342 
4 Social sector 1986 2312 1995 
5 Power 76 122 50 
6 Ware-housing Refinance 0 0 759 
TOTAL 12388 12060 14927 
NRRDA 6500 0 0 
GRAND TOTAL 18888 12060 14927 
 
 ……In the Budget speech 2011 -12 an amount of Rs.2,000 crore was earmarked 
for rural warehousing in the country from the allocation of Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund (RIDF). In the year 2012-13 an amount of Rs.5,000 crore has 
been allocated exclusively for creating warehousing facilities under RIDF……….. 
In view of the position explained in above paras, the banks deposit the shortfall of 
the priority sector targets/ sub - targets into RIDF which is used for development 
of agriculture and related sectors, social sectors and rural connectivity. Hence, 
creation of a permanent corpus for financing exclusively for agriculture is 
presently is not required as amount under RIDF is used for agriculture and ru ral 
infrastructure development”. 
 31. The reply furnished by the Ministry again failed to address the specific 
issue raised by the Committee i.e. creation of a corpus exclusively with lending shortfall 
meant for agriculture under priority sector lending.  In contrast, the Ministry replied in 
detail about the flow of agricultural credit.   The Ministry were, therefore, asked to 
comment on the following:- 
i) Diverting the lending shortfall meant for agriculture under priority sector lending 
to RIDF may increase the access of farmers to market but the farmers lose 

 
 
23 
their cheaper credit under priority sector lending as compared to agricultural 
loan offered by the Banks. 
 
ii) The Committee recommended to create a corpus exclusively with lending 
shortfall meant for agricu lture under priority sector lending, not a permanent 
corpus for financing exclusively for agriculture as replied by the Ministry”. 
 
 32. Asked to comment upon the need for creation of separate fund with 
lending-shortfall meant for agriculture under priorit y sector lending during informal 
discussion held with the representatives of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD) on 18 June, 2012 in Guwahati, the NABARD submitted a 
written reply as under:-  
 “Rural infrastructure projects support ed under RIDF are not revenue generating 
projects and repayments by State Governments are mainly coming out of budgetary 
resources.  Considering this, RIDF is the low-cost long-term fund to State Governments.  
Over the years, many State Government Departme nts are participating in RIDF and 
coming up with greater diversification in submission of projects. 
 
 Presently, the allocation to RIDF is announced annually in the Union Budget and 
the funds are made available from the shortfall in lending to priority sec tor and or 
agriculture sector and  weaker sections targets of the commercial banks.  As a result, 
there is an element of uncertainty and anxiety in all quarters before every Union Budget 
as regards continuance of RIDF.   
 
 It is, therefore, suggested that instead of making allocation every year, creating a 
separate fund with NABARD would go a long way to give a boost to the rural 
infrastructure.  Since infrastructure funding requires long term funding because of the 
nature of investment, it is suggested tha t the capital gain bonds, tax free bonds may be 
restored to NABARD to get the access of cheaper sources of fund”. 
 
33. On the above -mentioned issues, the Ministry in their written replies have 
responded as follows:- 
 
“………The Government every year sets targ et for flow of agricultural credit. The 
target for 2012 -13 has been set at Rs. 5,75,000 crore which represents an 
increase of Rs. 1,00,000 crore over previous year. It may also be seen that the 
aggregate credit to agricultural sector has been not only incr easing but also 
exceeding targets every year. The share of small farmer / marginal farmer is also 
increasing. 
 
Since the corpus of RIDF and other funds is set aside from the short fall of banks 
in achieving priority sector lending in the preceding year, it  would not be possible 
to allocate funds to RIDF and other funds for more than one year.  
 

 
 
24 
In view of the position explained in above paras, the banks deposit the shortfall of 
the priority sector targets/ sub - targets into RIDF which is used for developmen t 
of agriculture and related sectors, social sectors and rural connectivity. Hence, 
creation of a permanent corpus for financing exclusively for agriculture is 
presently not required as amount under RIDF is used for agriculture and rural 
infrastructure development”. 
 
 34. The Committee in their earlier Reports had been expressing their 
concern that the extant practice of depositing shortfall in priority sector lending 
meant for agriculture in Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) is neither 
tenable nor acceptable mainly on the ground that farmers are being deprived of 
agricultural loans at cheaper interest rate available under priority sector lending.   
The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have chosen not to set 
up a corpus exclusively with lending shortfall meant for agriculture under priority 
sector lending.  In the light of the reply of the Ministry, the Committee while 
reiterating their recommendation, would suggest that the Ministry should take 
this opportunity to evaluate the e fficacy of RIDF.  They also recommend to 
restore the capital gain bonds and tax free bonds to enable NABARD to access 
cheaper sources of funds and strengthen the rural infrastructure.  
 
 
New Delhi;             YASHWANT SINHA 
 4 December, 2012                                                            Chairman, 
13 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance  

 
 
25 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29th November, 2012 from 1530 hrs to 1730 hrs. 
    PRESENT   
        Shri Yashwant Sinha  – Chairman  
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Dr. Baliram   
3.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
5.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  
6.  Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam 
7.  Shri Prem Das Rai 
8.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9.  Shri Thakur Anurag Singh 
10.  Dr. M. Thambidurai 
11.  Shri Shivkumar Udasi 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12.  Shri Piyush Goyal 
13.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
14.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri A. K. Singh     –  Joint Secretary  
2.     Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  – Additional Director 
3.     Shri Sanjay Sethi    –  Under Secretary 
 
2.    The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption: -  
(i)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services and Disinvestment); 
 
(ii)  Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue); 
 
 

 
 
26 
 
-2- 
 
(iii)  Draft Report on acti on taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Planning; 
   
 
(iv) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fourth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; and 
 
(v) Draft Report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.   
 
3.  The Committee adopted the draft reports at Sl.no. (iv) without any 
modification and those at Sl.nos. (i), (ii), (iii) and (v) with modifications.    The 
Committee also au thorized the Chairman to present all the Reports to Parliament in 
the current session.     
      The Committee adjourned at 1730 hours. 

 
 
27 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTY FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE, FINANCIAL SERVICES & DISINVESTMENT)  
                Total      % of Total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations   15   
(ii) Recommendations/observations which      
have been accepted by the Government  13  86.66 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2,  
3, 5, 6,7, 8, 9,10, 12,13, 14 & 15) 
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the   NIL    0.00 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view    
of the Government‟s replies 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect            
of which replies of the Government have  02  13.34 
not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4 &11) 
(v) Recommendation/observation in respect  NIL  0.00 
of which final reply of the Government is  
still awaited  
 