1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2014-15) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Fifty-Ninth Report of the Committee on Finance on ‘Current Economic 
Situation and Policy Options’] 
 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014, Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
8 


2 
 
 
 EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Fifty-Ninth Report of the Committee on Finance on ‘Current Economic 
Situation and Policy Options’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2014, Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE….………… 
 
INTRODUCTION ...........................................…......  
 
CHAPTER I  Report ................................…………  
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ................……………  
 
*CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s 
replies .......………  
 
*CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee …..  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final reply of the Government is still awaited 
.....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 18 December, 2014 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations Contained in the Fifty -ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Finance on 
„Current Economic Situation and Policy Options‟  
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2014-15 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily  - Chairperson 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3.  Shri Venkatesh Babu T.G.   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
5.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
7.  Dr. Gopalakrishnan C. 
8.  Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
9. Shri Prataprao Jadhav 
10. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12.  Shri Prem Das Rai  
13.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy  
15.  Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
16.  Shri Gajendra Singh Sekhawat 
17.  Shri Gopal Shetty 
18.  Shri Anil Shirole  
19. Vacant*  
20.  Dr. Kiritbhai Solanki 
21.  Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
24.  Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
25.  Vacant** 
26.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
27.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
28.  Shri C.M. Ramesh 
29.  Shri Ajay Sancheti 
30.  Shri Digvijaya Singh 
31.  Dr. Manmohan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.K. Jain     - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul     - Director 
3. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen    - Committee Officer 
______________________________________________ 
* Shri Jayant Sinha, MP ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09.11.2014 consequent upon his 
induction to the Union Council of Ministers 
** Shri Brajesh Pathak, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2014 consequent upon 
his retirement from Rajya Sabha 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, having been au thorized 
by the Committee, present this Eighth Report on action taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifty -ninth Report of the 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Current Economic Situation and Policy 
Options” of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs). 
2. The Fifty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2012. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations were received from the Government vide their communication 
dated 29 November and 30 November, 2012.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
18 December, 2014. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee is given in 
the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the observations / recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI           DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY, 
18 December, 2014      Chairperson, 
27 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                         Committee on Finance. 
 
 

6 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Fift y-
ninth Report on „Current Economic Situation and Policy Options‟, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 30 August, 2012 and simultaneously laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha. 
2.  The Report contained 20 Recommendations.  Action taken notes were 
received from the Government in respect of all 20 Re commendations contained 
in the Report in two batches.  The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic 
Affairs) furnished their responses on 29 November, 2012, while the Department 
of Revenue furnished theirs on 30 Nov ember, 2012.  These have been 
categorised as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19 and 20 
(Total: 18) 
(Chapter II) 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies: 
 
Nil 
(Total : Nil) 
(Chapter III) 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Nil 
(Total: 1) 
(Chapter IV) 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
Recommendation No. 1    
(Total : 1) 
 (Chapter V) 

7 
 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter I of this Report be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their Recommendations. 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3) 
Current state of the Indian Economy 
 
5. The C ommittee had expressed serious concern  over the current gloom 
and doom scenario in the domestic economy and f ound almost all 
macroeconomic indicators disturbing during the Financial Year 2011 -12. After 
achieving a GDP growth of 8.4 per cent and manageable current and fiscal 
deficits in 2010 -11, the Fiscal 2011-12 had seen a period of economic downturn 
with overall GDP growth declining to 6.5 per cent. In the fourth quarter of 2011 -
12, the growth slipped to 5.3 per cent, the lowest ever in the last 9 years. Inflation 
remained stubborn at uncomfortably high levels despite monetary tightening and 
a grim situation of high inflation and low growth ensued. Compression in 
aggregate demand, weakened industrial growth, poor agricultural output resulting 
mainly from e rratic monsoon, moderation in services sector, twin deficits on the 
current account and fiscal sides, steep downslide in the value of rupee, etc. have 
been symptomatic of the economic turbulence in the macroeconomic 
environment of the country. In addition to the domestic problems, the 
Government have also cited global factors as the major reason for the slump. 
However, the Committee were of the view that the need of the hour was to put 
the economy back on growth track through a well thought out revival poli cy which 
may include less layered yet more effective decision making, time -bound 
clearance of projects, more transparent tax regime and enhanced domestic 
investment. The Committee  had, therefore, urge d upon the Government to take 
clear-cut measures in this direction and implement them speedily and without fail. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) have stated that se veral steps are being undertaken to raise 
growth and improve the investment climate in the economy. These include steps 
aimed to facilitate access to finance while strengthening the manufacturing 

8 
 
sector, „fast-tracking‟ of large investment projects particularly through the creation 
of the National Investment Board, finding solutions to binding c onstraints in 
specific areas such as power, petroleum and gas, roads, coal, land acquisition, 
environmental clearances, and bank financing. Several specific reforms have 
been undertaken to address the recent slowdown in growth and boost investor 
sentiments. Some of the measures include permitting FDI in multi -brand retail 
trading subject to specific conditions, permitting foreign airlines to invest up to 49 
per cent in scheduled and non -scheduled air transport services, disinvestment of 
12.15 per cent, 10 per cent, 9.59 per cent and 9.33 per cent paid up equity in the 
National Aluminium Company Limited, Oil India Ltd., Hindustan Copper Limited 
and MMTC Ltd. Respectively.  Recent fiscal measures, including hike in the price 
of diesel by Rs. 5 per litre, impos ing a cap on the number of subsidized cylinders 
of LPG are expected to reduce the subsidy burden and complement efforts at 
fiscal consolidation that is important to revive growth.  The Report of the Kelkar 
Committee outlines the fiscal roadmap for the mediu m term and suggested 
various measures for attaining the same, which is being examined. Concerns of 
investors about policy, tax administration, and administrative discretion are also 
being addressed and in this regard the Expert committee headed by Dr. 
Parthasarathi Shome has laid out the broad principles and guidelines that should 
govern the anti-avoidance rules. 
 
7. The Department of Revenue in their Action Taken Note stated that a 
more transparent tax regime i.e.  No tax can be collected without due author ity of 
law. The Government consistently follows the policy of certainty, predictability 
and stability in tax laws. The law is applicable for all persons without any 
discretionary powers with the administration to increase or decrease tax liability 
of any person in contravention of legal provisions. The tax audits are largely done 
through selection by way of Computer -Assisted Scrutiny System (CASS) and 
manual selection is restricted to those approvals given at senior most level in the 
field i.e., by Chief Co mmissioner of Income -tax. There is greater use of 
technology so as to reduce interface of public with department personnel.  
Taxpayers have access to the tax administration as well as forums for dispute 

9 
 
resolution like Authority for Advance Ruling (AAR), S ettlement Commission etc. 
to resolve their issues besides the regular appellate channels available to them. 
 
8. The Committee feel  that the Indian economy is at cross roads 
with high fiscal deficit and Current Account Deficit ( CAD) alongwith 
recurring high  inflation notwithstanding several steps taken in 
specific direction.  The Committee also observe  a general decline of 
economic growth scenario and low GDP.   
 
9. The Committee while acknowledging the correlation between 
subsidy, fiscal deficit and inflati on would urge the Government to 
schematize diesel and kerosene prices in such a way that its 
cascading effect via various sectors like transport and agriculture on 
economy is minimized.   The Committee are of the opinion that the 
Government needs to set in motion a decisive policy regime with 
regard to fiscal deficit and current account deficit.  Also, slowdown in 
growth for the last 2 years (i.e. 2012 -13 and 2013 -14) which 
particularly affected the industrial sector alongwith impeding the 
process of transformation of the Indian Economy  into a 
manufacturing sector based economy alongwith a more robust and 
well established tertiary sector.  Finally, in 2014 -15 the Indian 
economy might be able to overcome the sub 5% growth of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) as ind icated by green shoots  visible in 
different sectors of the economy.   The Committee, therefore, desire 
the Government to initiate long term steps involving various sectors 
and especially infrastructure by fast tracking investment and 
introducing a well appraised policy at national as well as international 
level by strengthening  the country’s trade integration with other 
emerging and developed economies.    

10 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 5) 
Inclusive Development 
 
10. On the issue of inclusive development, the  Committee were concerned to 
note the emerging ever widening gap between the rich and poor and the 
increasingly disproportionate distribution of assets in our country.   They had 
observed that the purchasing power was getting concentrated in the hands of a 
few, whereas the majority are struck below the expenditure curve. Rise in prices, 
growing unemployment and diminishing real wages have made the poor 
languish, even as the better -off became more affluent, garnering the benefits of 
the economic growth our country had witnessed over the last few years. Even the 
indicators of the 68 th round of the National Sample Survey which covered the 
household consumer expenditure during 2011 -12 had confirmed this regressive 
phenomenon.  Observing that the poorest 10 per cent in urban areas lived on Rs. 
23.40 per day while their rural counterparts make do with even less at Rs 16.78 ,  
the Committee had opined that there were no short cuts to meet this challenge  
and in order to reduce poverty and bring the poor millions to the  mainstream of 
our economy, the Government ha d to strengthen social infrastructure through 
focused investments and extend food security and employment guarantee to the 
poor.  The Committee had urged the Government to focus their energies and 
prioritise the ir expenditure on goals of inclusive development, namely in the 
areas of healthcare, education and shelter. 
 
11. The Ministry of Finance (Dep artment of Economic Affairs) in their Action 
Taken Note have , inter-alia stated that “inclusive development is high  on 
government agenda which is evident from the fact that the expenditure on social 
services by the government (centre and states combined) has shown an increase 
in recent years. Expenditure on social services as a proportion of total 
expenditure increased from 21.6 per cent in 2006 -7 to 24.1 per cent in 2009 -10 
and further to 25 per cent in 2011 -12 (BE). As a proportion of the gross domestic 
product (GDP), its share increased from 5.57 per cent in 2006 -7 to 6.76 per cent, 
6.91 per cent, and 7.34 per cent i n 2008-09, 2009-10, and 2010-11 respectively, 
helping India face the global crisis without much adverse impact on the social 
sector. While expenditure on education as a proportion of GDP has increased 

11 
 
from 2.72 per cent in 2006 -7 to 3.11 per cent in 2011 -12 (BE), that on health has 
increased from 1.25 per cent in 2006 -07 to 1.30 per cent in 2011 -12 (BE). 
Similarly, the allocation for the major housing scheme i.e. Indira Awas Yojana 
(IAY) has increased from Rs. 2920 crore in 2006 -07 (BE) to Rs.10,000 crore i n 
2011-12 (BE) giving a step up of  242.5% in 2011 -12 over 2006-07.  Government 
proposes to enact a new law – the National Food Security Act – that will provide 
a statutory basis for a framework which assures food security for all. The draft Bill 
was considered and approved by the Cabinet. The National Food Security Bill, 
2011 has been introduced in Lok Sabha on 22 nd December, 2011. It proposes 
that every person shall be entitled to receive every month from the State 
Government under Targeted Public Distrib ution System, 7 kg. of foodgrains per 
person per month for priority households and not less than 3 kg. of foodgrains 
per person per month for general households identified as per act at subsidized 
prices. Further, identified persons, households, groups or communities living in 
starvation or conditions akin to starvation shall be provided meals, two times a 
day, free of charge in accordance with a scheme for six months from the date of 
identification of starvation case. Food Security Allowance shall be given  in case 
of non -supply of the entitled quantities of foodgrains or meals to the entitled 
person.  Besides, the Food Corporation of India has to maintain a part of stocks 
of procured foodgrains in the form of buffer as a measure of food security to 
guard ag ainst situations of scarcity of foodgrains and also enable the 
Government to intervene effectively to stabilize prices in times of undue increase 
in the market.   With regard to employment guarantee, the Mahatma Gandhi 
NREGA, a rights based legislation is u nder implementation with the objective of 
providing enhanced livelihood security to the households in rural areas by 
providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to 
any household whose adult members are willing to do unskil led manual work. As 
per latest available information (as available on MGNREGA - MIS as on 
29.10.2012), a total of 375.42 lakh households have been provided employment 
of 117.91 crore persondays with SCs, STs and Women share of 23 per cent, 15 
per cent and 5 4 per cent respectively during 2012 -13. The average person days 
of employment per households comes to 31. The persondays generation for 

12 
 
women is well above the stipulation of 1/3 as per the Act. The total available 
funds with the States/UTs including openi ng balance was Rs 36737.10 crore 
against which an amount of Rs 18293.60 crore has been utilized till the reporting 
date which is 49.8 per cent of available funds during the current year 2012-13. 
 
 
12. The Committee note the various steps enumerated by the 
Government in their Action Taken Note but the sad fact remains that 
there has been no substantial increase in the income of the majority 
of people who are at the bottom rung.  Disproportionate distribution 
of scheme benefits and economic measures has rende red the 
vulnerable sections of society unable to emerge out of their 
deprivation while mostly the affluent sections seems to be reaping 
the benefit of economic measures.  Rise in prices, grossly 
insufficient employment generation and low real wages has fur ther 
accentuated the crisis .  Substantial population still lingers below 
poverty line with ever widening gap in terms of rise in income of poor 
and rich.  The Committee observe that inclusive development should 
include social advancement along with financi al inclusion as people 
who are socially excluded are financially excluded as well and 
therefore fail to reap the benefit of Government action/Schemes.  The 
Committee, therefore, would like the Government to further revisit 
major dimensions of inclusive deve lopment like health care, 
education, shelter, food and employment security, woman 
empowerment and social welfare.   Before concluding on this issue 
the Committee would like the Government to leave no stone unturned 
in making the Food Security Act and MNREGA  a thumping success 
as they have the potential and capacity of turning inclusive growth 
into a reality. 
 
  

13 
 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 6) 
Savings and Investment 
13. Having understood that savings and investment are the two critical 
macroeconomic variabl es with microeconomic foundations for achieving 
sustainable economic growth ,  the Committee were deeply concerned about the 
marked decline in domestic savings, domestic investments and demand in our 
economy. As per the Report of the Prime Minister‟s Econom ic Advisory Council 
(PMEAC), the Gross Domestic Fixed Capital Formation(GDFCF) as a proportion 
of GDP ha d continued to decline from its highest level of 32.9 per cent in 2007 -
08 to 30.4 per cent in 2010 -11 and is estimated to fall 29.5 per cent in 2011 -12. 
They had  further observed that the gross domestic savings as percentage to 
GDP had also moderated from a peak of 36.8 per cent in 2007 -08 to 32.3 per 
cent in 2010-11 and is estimated to come down to 31.5 per cent in 2011 -12. This 
was mainly on account of a sharp decline in public savings from 5 per cent of 
GDP in 2007-08 to 1.7 per cent in 2010-11. Corporate savings also declined from 
9.4 per cent of GDP in 2007 -08 to 7.9 per cent in 2010 -11. The household 
savings, which had increased to the highest rate e ver achieved, i.e 25.4 per cent 
in 2009-10, moderated to 22.8 per cent in 2010-11. According to PMEAC, the net 
financial savings of households have fallen to their lowest levels in 15 years from 
11.6 per cent of GDP in 2007 -08 to 10 per cent in 2010 -11 and possibly below 9 
per cent in 2011-12. RBI‟s latest Financial Stability Report stated that the deposit 
growth rate at 14 per cent as on March 31, 2012  was the lowest recorded in last 
10 years. The Committee had also noted that the savings-investment gap during 
2011-12 remained at 2.8 per cent of GDP, the same level as in 2009 -10. Since 
2008-09, this gap ha d been at relatively elevated levels, i.e in excess of 2 per 
cent of GDP as compared to 0.4 to 1.3 per cent in 2004 -05 to 2007 -08. While 
inflation was one  of the factors for moderation in household savings, the decline 
in investment ha d been attributed by the Government to a sharp increase in the 
policy rates that resulted in higher costs of borrowings. On demand side also 
there had been a deceleration. Pri vate consumption, a key driver of growth too 
had nosedived. As the Committee strongly fe lt that our growth story was based 

14 
 
on domestic savings, investment and domestic demand rather than on external 
demands and supports, they had viewed the revival of dome stic demand, 
domestic savings and investments as the biggest challenges before the 
Government and recommended that to achieve and sustain growth at high levels, 
the Government and RBI should make concerted efforts to increase domestic 
savings and investments through calibrated adjustments in policies. 
14. In their Action Taken Note the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) have stated that a  high rate of investment is a prerequisite for 
sustained growth in GDP. The rate of investment has regi stered an increase 
between 2004-05 and 2007 -08. The rate of investment was over 38 per cent in 
2007-08. This was also the period of growth of over 9 per cent. As per the latest 
available data, the investment rate stood at around 35 per cent in 2011 -12. To 
boost growth, there is a need to boost savings and devise ways to channelize 
savings into investments so that strong investment rates of 37-38 per cent can be 
achieved. Given India‟s incremental capital output ratio, at such rates India‟s 
GDP growth may re cover to a rate of 8 per cent or more.  While the policy 
measures being currently undertaken are expected to revive growth and 
domestic demand in the economy, the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI) has recently undertaken several measures to boos t the mutual fund 
industry. Such measures are aimed at increasing mutual fund penetration in the 
country that would aid the cause of financial inclusion. This is expected to result 
in higher mobilization of household savings for the growth of the economy.  Fiscal 
consolidation by reducing the fiscal deficit is a top priority. Adherence to the 
process of fiscal consolidation as indicated by the Medium Term Fiscal Policy 
Statement could help raise public sector savings. For this, the focus has to be on 
higher revenue realization and moderating spending as well as through a fair 
adjustment of administered prices and reducing the exponential rise in subsidies 
on fuel, while ensuring that vulnerable sections are protected. The rise in the 
savings rate in the perio d 2003-04 to 2007 -08 owed to fiscal consolidation and 
the adherence to the same in the medium term is expected to release resources 
necessary for investment in crucial sectors of the economy. 

15 
 
15. The Committee find that reply of the Government lackin g specifics. 
Bringing back the investment rates to the high of 2007 -08 and above 
obviously requires higher savings which in turn require positive p olicy 
interventions for making them attractive.  A trend towards higher savings 
in turn w ould also have some positi ve impact on the ballooning fiscal 
deficit.  This issue is, therefore, to be attended to not only in Medium Term 
Fiscal Policy terms but short term and long term as well.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their Recommendation that the Government and 
Reserve Bank of India should make concerted effort s to increase domestic 
savings and investments through caliberated adjustment in policies.    
 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 17) 
Financing the Current Account Deficit 
 
16. The Committee had observed  that an unsustainable Current Account 
Deficit (CAD) ha d become a serious threat to the macroeconomic stability. In 
2011-12, the country had reported an all time high CAD both in absolute terms as 
well as proportion to GDP at US$ 78.2 billion (4.2 per cent of GDP) vis-à-vis US$ 
45.9 billion forming 2.7 percent of GDP in 2010 -11. In January - March 2012 it 
was even higher at 4.5 per cent of GDP in stark contrast to just 1.3 per cent in 
the corresponding quarter of the previous year . As the sustainable level of CAD 
in o ur country is historically believed to be below 2 per cent of GDP , a CAD 
exceeding 4.0 per cent of GDP ha d caused a net drawdown on reserves of US$ 
12.8 billion in 2011 -12. This rise in CAD, the Committee understand, was 
because of widening trade deficit o n account of subdued external demand and 
relatively inelastic imports of Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants (POL) as well as gold 
and silver. The slower GDP growth in 2011-12 coupled with depreciation of rupee 
added to the CAD -GDP divide. In this context, the C ommittee strongly fel t that 
concerted efforts should be made by the Government to bring down the import of 
POL, discourage unproductive imports like gold and silver and boost competitive 
domestic production. In order to bring down the drain on domestic eco nomy on 
account of import of petroleum products, the Committee desire d that the use of 

16 
 
alternate fuels may be considered and the Ethanol blending programme for petrol 
which has remained in limbo for too long may be implemented forthwith. Ways 
and means to reduce the use of hydrocarbons may also be given thrust. 
 
17. In their Action Taken Note , the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Economic Affairs) have stated that to lower the impact of gold imports on CAD 
under balance of payment (BoP), Government in the  Union Budget 2012-13 has 
increased basic custom duty on standard gold bars; gold coins of purity 
exceeding 99.5 per cent and platinum from 2 per cent to 4 per cent and on non -
standard gold from 5 per cent to 10 per cent. Further, the Reserve Bank of India  
had also taken certain prudential measures in respect of Non -Banking Financing 
Companies (NBFCs) predominantly engaged in lending against collateral of gold 
jewellery, to restrict the loans against gold. As part of the strategy to reduce oil 
imports and t o reduce the burden on the Government exchequer, the 
Government had allowed oil market companies to fix the prices of petrol as per 
market condition and more recently has hiked the diesel prices in September, 
2012 in order to allow greater pass -through of international oil prices to 
consumers. The observation of the Committee on ethanol blending programme is 
being forward to Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take note of it and 
necessary follow up action in the matter.  
 
18. The Current Account Deficit is a serious malaise gnawing at the 
vitals of the Indian economy and needs to be treated on an overriding 
priority. The Committee, therefore,  are of the view that Government 
needs to initiate measures with regard to supply side policies to 
improve the c ompetitiveness of the economy.  As another emergent 
measure the depreciation of rupee needs to be contained to bridge 
the Current Account Deficit (CAD)- Gross Domestic Product ( GDP) 
divide.  Simultaneously, the competitive domestic production needs 
to be r einforced alongwith  opportune policies to keep growth of 
exports certainly would go a long way towards maintaini ng 
sustainable Current Account Deficit at an acceptable range of GDP.   

17 
 
Presently, the Committee are pleased to note that the unrelenting 
situation of CAD of the past few years has eased a bit alongside fiscal 
deficit.  The petroleum prices have also shown a southward trend. 
The situtation is, therefore, ripe for bold policy initiatives to maintain 
the trend and the  Committee expect that the Gover nment will not let 
this opportunity abegging.   
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 19) 
Subsidy 
 
19. The Committee f ound from the submissions of the Reserve Bank of India 
that the fiscal deficit target for 2012 -13 may be breached due to likely 
overshooting of s ubsidies and shortfall in receipts. The Central bank ha d also 
called for adjustment of subsidies in the interest of fiscal consolidation and to 
encourage efficient use of scarce resources. At the same time, the Governor, 
RBI had submitted that the estimates based on certain assumptions show ed that 
the proposed elimination of fuel subsidy can trigger an inflation spike of about 2.6 
per cent. The Government ha d, however, informed the Committee that the 
measures taken by them like introduction of Nutrient Base d Subsidy (NBS) 
mechanism for certain fertilizers and deregulation of petrol pricing, etc. have 
helped to an extent in reducing the expenditure on major subsidies. In view of the 
above and the socio -economic commitments towards common people, the 
Committee had strongly desire d that better targeting of subsidies is what is 
required as a significant share of the subsidized products are being enjoyed by 
affluent sections of the society. 
20. The Government, in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows :- 
(i) While there are concerns relating to overshooting of subsidies and shortfall in 
receipts, the overall position relating to the revenues and expenditure during 
the current financial year and thereby the Fiscal Deficit for the year will be 
clear only after co mpletion of the mid -year review exercise. The outcome of 
the mid-year review will get reflected in the form of Revised Estimates for the 
year, and will be presented along with the Budget for the next financial year.  
(ii) The Government aims to limit the overal l spending on major subsidies, 
primarily based on effective targeting and eliminating leakages. Towards that 

18 
 
end, the recommendations of the Task Force on Direct Transfer of Subsidy 
(chaired by Shri Nandan Nilekani) as under are at various stages of 
consideration of the Government. 
In the case of LPG, in the first instance a cap on the entitlement has been 
implemented, to be followed by direct transfer of subsidy to customers based 
on Aadhar authentication. For both, LPG and Kerosene, the final stage would 
involve targeting of beneficiaries and subsidy transfer directly to the 
segmented users.   Further, all the three Oil Marketing Companies have 
launched LPG transparency portals to improve customer service and prevent 
leakages. A pilot project for selling LPG at market price and reimbursement of 
subsidy directly in to the beneficiary‟s bank account has been conducted in 
Mysore. A similar project on direct transfer of kerosene subsidy in to the bank 
accounts of the beneficiaries has been initiated in Alwar Dis trict in Rajasthan. 
These pilot projects show that substantial economies in subsidy outgo can be 
achieved by direct transfer.  In the case of food subsidy, information regarding 
Supply Chain Management System from the procurement agency to the 
beneficiaries is proposed to be placed in the public domain.  
 
The strategy is expected to reduce subsidy outgo by: 
 
(i) Weeding out ghost beneficiaries/duplicates/ double counting by Aadhar 
authentication at the point of sale; 
(ii)  Bringing necessary information in public domain; and 
 
(iii) Proper targeting of segmented beneficiaries. 
 
 The Government has initiated several measures for containing the fiscal 
deficit during the current financial year and for better targeting/reduction of 
subsidies. The benefits of meas ures taken towards subsidy rationalization/ 
targeting are however expected to flow over a period of time”. 
 
 
21. Subsidies play a vital role in the economy of a country as it is 
provided to ensure equitable distribution of essential  resources to 
the people  particularly the vulnerable section . Subsidies should be 
effectively used for the welfare of deserving sections of society as 
over subsidization often leads to deleterious effect on the economy.     
The Committee are of the view that subsidies in India nev er reach 
their intended target i.e. the poor and deserving, which contrarily is 

19 
 
mostly enjoyed by the rich and affluent.  People in real need of 
subsidy for their sheer survival are being forced out of the system.  
The Committee would , therefore,  like the Government to introspect 
upon the fact that whether it is being ensured by them that the right 
good/service is being subsidized or there is an urgent need to re -
target the subsidies.  Since, ill targeted subsidies constrain the fiscal 
space for public inve stment and distort allocation of resources.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that efficient subsidies must be 
transparent, targeted and in many cases temporary.  Government 
should not be averse towards new mechanisms to facilitate subsidies 
to reach pe ople as focus should not be towards rem oving subsidies 
but about how to make them effective ly reach the targeted populace 
and ensure that people are benefitted from it.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI           DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY, 
18 December, 2014      Chairperson, 
27 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                         Committee on Finance. 

20 
 
Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18th  December, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs.  
in Committee Room „B‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Venkatesh Babu T.G. 
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4. Dr. Gopalakrishnan C.  
5. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta  
6. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Sekhawat 
9. Shri Gopal Shetty  
10. Shri Anil Shirole  
11. Dr. Kirit Somaiya  
  
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Naresh Gujral  
13. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
14. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
15. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
16. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Director  
3. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
2. x  x  x  x  x    
3. x  x  x  x  x  

21 
 
4. x  x  x  x  x   
5. x  x  x  x  x  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 
6. Thereafter t he Committee took up following draft Reports for 
consideration: -  
 
(i) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the Ministry of 
Planning: 
(ii) Memorandum No. 4 regarding draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Fifty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject „Current 
Economic Situation and Policy Options‟; and  
(iii) Memorandum No. 5 regarding draft Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observati ons/Recommendations contained in the 
Seventy-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject „Economic 
Impact of Revision of Natural Gas Price‟. 
7. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications in the R eports mentioned at Sl. Nos. (i) to (iii) above and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them in the light of factual verification from 
concerned Ministries/Departments. 
   
    The Committee then adjourned.  
  A verbatim Record of the proceedings has been kept. 

22 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT 
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIFTY-NINTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON „CURRENT 
ECONOMIC SITUATION AND POLICY OPTIONS‟ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS) 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of 
Recommendations 
 
20  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (Vide 
Recommendation at Sl. Nos.  2, 3, 
4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10,  11, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20) 
 
18 90% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the 
Government‟s replies   
Nil 0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations 
in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee (Vide 
Recommendation at Sl. No.  6) 
 
01 5% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations 
in respect of which final reply of 
the Government are still awaited 
by the Committee (Vide 
Recommendation at Sl. No.  1) 
 
01 5% 
 