1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2014-15) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
‘POLICY ON NEW LICENCES IN THE 
BANKING SECTOR’  
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2014, Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
  
7 


2 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in                       
Seventy-Ninth Report of the Committee on Finance on ‘Policy on New Licences in the 
Banking Sector’] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2014, Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
*CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ............................……………  
 
*CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies .......………  
 
*CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
*CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
I       Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on  
     11 December, 2014 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the Seventy -ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Fina nce on „Policy on New Licences in the Banking 
Sector‟  
 
 
 
 
* to be appended  
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – 2014-15 
 
  
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily  - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3.  Shri Venkatesh Babu T.G.   
4.  Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay 
5.  Shri Nishikant Dubey 
6.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
7.  Dr. Gopalakrishnan C. 
8.  Shri Shyama Charan Gupta 
9. Shri Prataprao Jadhav 
10. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
11.  Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
12.  Shri Prem Das Rai  
13.  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy  
15.  Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
16.  Shri Gajendra Singh Sekhawat 
17.  Shri Gopal Shetty 
18.  Shri Anil Shirole  
19. Vacant*  
20.  Dr. Kiritbhai Solanki 
21.  Dr. Kirit Somaiya 
  
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Shri Naresh Agrawal 
23.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
24.  Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
25.  Vacant** 
26.  Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
27.  Shri P. Rajeeve 
28.  Shri C.M. Ramesh 
29.  Shri Ajay Sancheti 
30.  Shri Digvijaya Singh 
31.  Dr. Manmohan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.K. Jain     - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul     - Director 
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung    - Committee Officer 
______________________________________________________________________________________ 
* Shri Jayant Sinha, MP ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 09.11.2014 consequent upon his induction to 
the Union Council of Ministers 
** Shri Brajesh Pathak, MP ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.11.2014 consequent upon his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance, having been authorised by the 
Committee, present this Seventh Report on action take n by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Seventy -ninth Report of the 
Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Policy on New Licences in the Banking Sector‟ of 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
2. The S eventy-ninth Report was presented to Hon‟ble Speaker on 18 October, 
2013.  It was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09 
December, 2013.  Action Taken Note on Recommendations were as per the direction of 
the Committee, furnished by  the Government vide their communication dated 24 
January, 2014.   
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on     11 
December, 2014. 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the Recommendations contained 
in the Seventy-ninth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                                DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY,  
12 December, 2014                                                                      Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                                                  Committee on Finance.  
  

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained  in their Seventy-ninth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “Policy on New Licences in the Banking 
Sector” which was presented to Hon‟ble Speaker on 18 October, 2013 and presented to 
the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09 December, 2013. 
2.  Action Taken N otes have been re ceived from the Government on 23 January , 
2014 in respect of all the 10 Recommendations contained in the Report. These have 
been analyzed and categorized as follows:- 
(i)  Recommendations / Observations that have been accepted by the  
Government: 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 4, 7, 8 and 9       
           Total: 06                                                                                                               
                                                                                        (Chapter II) 
(ii)  Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies:             
Recommendation No. 3  
                                                                                                     Total: 01 
                                                                                                  (Chapter III) 
(iii)  Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
- Nil - 
                                                                                                      Total: Nil 
                                                                                                  (Chapter IV) 
(iv)  Recommendations / Observations in re spect of which final replies       
of the Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation Nos.  5, 6 and 10       
           Total: 03                                                                                            
                                                                                                    (Chapter V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the comments contained in  
Chapter I of this Report may be f urnished to them expeditiously. Further, the final 

7 
 
replies to the Committee’s comments in Chapter V of the Report may also be 
furnished expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by t he Government on some 
of their Recommendations. 
 
 A MORE BANKS  
(Recommendation Serial Nos. 1 & 2) 
5. The Committ ee had noted that with a view to injecting competitiveness and 
improving efficiency and productivity in the banking sector, the Narasimham Committee 
(1991) had recommended that the RBI should permit establishment of new banks in the 
private sector. Following this, guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector 
were issued by RBI in January, 1993 and 10 new banks were set up in the private 
sector. Almost a decade later revised guidelines were issued in January 2001, which 
have begotten two more banks. Subsequent to the announcement made by the Finance 
Minister in the Budget Speech in 2010 -11, RBI issued fresh  / revised guidelines for 
issuing banking licenses on 22 February, 2013. 
 
6. Out of the 12 new banks set up after 1993 and 2001 guidelines, four were 
promoted by financial institutions (Axis Bank, ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank, IDBI Bank) one 
each by conversion of co -operative bank (DCB) and NBFC into commercial banks 
(Kotak Mahindra), five by individual banking professionals (GTB Ltd., Bank of Punjab  
Centurion, Yes Bank, IndusInd Bank) and the remaining one by an established media 
house (Times Bank). Out of the banks promoted by individuals in 1993, only one has 
survived with muted growth. One bank has been compulsorily merged with a 
nationalized bank  due to erosion of net worth on account of large capital market 
exposure. The other two banks have voluntarily amalgamated with other private sector 
banks due to the decisions of the majority shareholders arising out of poor governance 
and lack of financia l strength. The Committee observed that mere issuing of new 
banking licenses by itself at this juncture cannot guarantee growth in the banking sector, 
and ipso facto lead to financial inclusion. The Committee were more inclined to assume 
that criteria/parameters set out in the 1993 guidelines and monitoring thereof may not 
have been adequate enough to prevent floundering of some banks in a short period and 
mergers and muted growth in some. 
 

8 
 
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated that the 199 3 guidelines 
were issued as part of the financial sector reforms enunciated by the Narasimham 
Committee. The main considerations were that the new private sector banks would be 
financially viable, provide competitive, efficient and low cost financial inter mediation 
services for the society at large and usher in up -gradation of technology in the banking 
sector. The basic criteria were that the bank shall have a minimum capital of `100 crore; 
open branches at various centres including urban / metropolitan cen tres as per the 
existing policy, without prior approval of the RBI once they satisfy the capital adequacy 
and prudential norms; observe priority sector lending targets as applicable to other 
domestic banks. These were fixed keeping in view the socio -economic conditions 
prevailing at that time. Under these guidelines, 10 new licences were issued in the year 
1994 and 1995.  
Subsequently, after a review of the experience gained on the functioning of the 
new banks, the guidelines were revised in February 2001. The 2001 guidelines inter alia 
stipulated the minimum paid -up capital for the new bank at `200 crore with a condition 
that the same should be increased to `300 crore within three years of the 
commencement of business; provided for opening of 25 per cent of  branches in rural 
and semi -urban areas to avoid concentration of their branches in metropolitan areas 
and cities and for observing priority sector lending target of 40 per cent of net bank 
credit; and permitted companies, directly or indirectly with large  industrial houses to 
participate in the equity of a new bank up to a maximum of 10 per cent without having 
controlling interest in the bank. Two more licences were issued in the year 2003 and 
2004 under the 2001 guidelines issued by RBI.  
 
  

9 
 
As can be seen from the table below, the objectives  of the guidelines were 
largely achieved: 
 
Market share of banks 
(% to total assets of all Scheduled Commercial Banks except Regional Rural Banks) 
 1993-94 1998-99 2004-05 2012-13 
1.  Public Sector Banks 87.1 81.0 75.4 72.7 
2. Total Private Sector 
Banks of which: 
5.2 10.9 18.1 20.8 
(a) Old Private  Sector 
Banks 
 (8.8) (6.0) (4.6) 
(b) New Private Sector 
Banks 
-- (2.1) (12.1) (16.1) 
3. Foreign Banks 7.7 8.1 6.5 6.5 
Total 100 100 100 100 
 
Performance Indicators (in %) 
  2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
  Return on Assets (RoA) 
Public Sector Banks 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.8 
Old Private Sector Banks 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.3 
New Private Sector Banks 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 
  Return on Equity (RoE) 
Public Sector Banks 
17.
9 16.9 15.3 13.2 
Old Private Sector Banks 
14.
7 14.1 15.2 16.2 
New Private Sector Banks 
10.
7 13.6 15.3 16.5 
  Gross NPAs 
Public Sector Banks 2.2 2.4 3.3 4.1 
Old Private Sector Banks 2.3 1.9 1.8 1.9 
New Private Sector Banks 2.9 2.7 2.2 2 
 
Of the 12 new banks, over a period of time, three banks (Times Bank, Centurion 
Bank and Bank of Punjab) voluntarily merged with another new private sector bank viz., 
HDFC Bank. Such voluntary amalgamations amongst the private sector banks are 
largely driven by synergy and the desire to expand in scope and scale. One bank was 
compulsorily amalgamated with a public sector bank (Global Trust Bank with Oriental 
Bank of Commerce) and another bank (IDBI Bank Ltd) became a public sector bank 
upon its voluntary amalgamation with the parent.  
It may be stated that RBI put in place a robust off -site monitoring system in 
March 1996 in addition to its onsite inspection. Post the global financial crisis, there has 

10 
 
been a shift towards risk based supervision (RBS) away from the erstwhile CAMELS 
(Capital Adequacy, Asset Quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity & Systems) 
approach. The Reserve Bank has since introduced risk based supervision (RBS) in 
respect of the scheduled commercial banks. As part of the RBS phase I rol lout, 29 
banks constituting about 66 percent of the total assets of the banking system have been 
brought under RBS from 2013-14. 
Despite significant progress made by the banks in India, just about 40 per cent of 
the adults have formal bank accounts. Deepening the engagement of formal banking for 
low income households and providing access to the unbanked will require increasingly 
innovative approaches (including channels, products, interface, etc.). 
Given the large number of under -banked and unbanked r ural areas, the new 
banks would complement the efforts made by the existing banks, by bringing additional 
capital, new management, more human resources, new technology and new products. 
Under the 2013 guidelines, the promoters have been called upon to prov ide a business 
plan along with the application and to address how they propose to achieve financial 
inclusion. Further, the guidelines require the new banks to open at least 25 per cent of 
their branches in unbanked rural centres (population upto 9,999 as per the latest 
census). These banks are expected to foster financial inclusion in unbanked rural 
centres.” 
 
8. The Committee are not at all convinced by the reasoning extended by the 
Ministry that the mergers by the new banks amongst themselves/with other banks 
were strategic business moves largely driven by synergy and the desire to 
expand in scope and scale. This is a gross understatement of the distress 
situations the new banks were mired into, which had compelled them to resort to 
mergers with older ban ks for survival.  The Committee are surprised that the 
Ministry chose to make such a cavalier reply even overlooking the submission of 
the RBI, on RBI’s experience with the new private banks since 1993 quoted in that 
very Seventy-ninth Report of the Commit tee wherein the Bank stated -           “ 
..over these 17  years.. banks promoted by individuals, though banking 
professionals, either failed or merged with other banks or had muted growth.”  
The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry have only a ttempted to 
downplay the failures and shortcomings of banks in general and that of the new 

11 
 
private banks in particular.   Therefore, with a view to ensuring that such 
instances do not recur in detriment to the banking system as such, the 
Committee would lik e to emphasise that nobody be allowed to take unfair 
advantage of the new guidelines.  The Committee would therefore, urge the 
Ministry and RBI to take active cognizance of the risks and challenges facing the 
banking sector while formulating licensing poli cy and issuing new banking 
licenses. 
 
 
9. The Committee further note that as a major shift towards a robust offsite 
monitoring system Risk Based Supervision (RBS) has been put in place instead 
of the erstwhile Capital Adequacy Asset Quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity 
and Systems (CAMELS) approac h and 29 banks constituting about 66 per cent of 
the total assets of the banking system have been brought under. The Committee 
observe that such a shift to RBS is a move in the right direction, as the global 
economic crisis that shook the world few years ago has clearly signalled the need 
for overhaul of the financial regulatory architecture and risk management 
standards. The Committee hope that the RBI will accordingly put necessary 
monitoring systems in place for the banking sector in general and the new bank 
licenses, in particular.  
BANKING LICENCES TO LARGE INDUSTRIAL HOUSES: 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 3) 
 
10. Noting that one of the major changes in the current guidelines from the earlier 
one 2001 is that the 2013 guidelines for banking license have al lowed large industrial 
houses to apply for banking license, contrary to the guidelines issued in 2001 which has 
clearly spelt out that large industrial houses were not allow ed to apply for banking 
license and not convinced by the rationale extended by the RBI that large 
industrial/business houses were allowed to promote banks under 2013 guidelines as 
capital requirement can be easily provided by large industrial houses; industrial and 
business houses have already been allowed entry into other financial serv ice sectors 
and are competing with banks on both asset and liability sides; airports, highways and 
ports etc. However, the  Committee had felt that  banking being a highly leveraged 
business involving public money and public welfare, the Committee had opined that it 
will be more in the fitness of things to keep industry and banking separate. The 

12 
 
Committee had further noted that as on March 2013, out of 15630 existing private 
sector bank branches, only 2699 branches were located in the rural areas i.e. to say 
only about 17% of the total branches were in the rural areas. Given such a background, 
the Committee were apprehensive that industrial/business houses may not be geared to 
achieve the national objectives of financial inclusion, priority sector lending etc.  not sure 
whether the “safeguards” put in place by RBI such as “Fit and Proper” criteria. Exposure 
Norms” etc. would be effective enough to prevent banks promoted by industrial houses 
from “cosying up” to their industrial owners, the Committee, had, urged the Government 
/ RBI to ensure that no recurrence of the pre -nationalized situation happens, when the 
management of private banks deployed their funds to extend undue favour to their own 
industrial owners without regard to social priorities determined by G overnment. As post-
nationalization, great strides have been made in social banking by public sector banks, 
the Committee had also desired that this momentum nurtured thus far should be carried 
forward to extend the geographic coverage of banks and improve access to banking 
services through the new licenses to be awa rded under the 2013 guidelines and t his 
goal of reaching banking services to unbanked areas should thus not be lost sight of 
while granting licenses to new entities. 
 
11. The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that it is a fact that the 
guidelines on entry of new banks in the private sector dated January 03, 2001 did not 
permit a large industrial house to promote new bank.  However, individual companies, 
directly or indirectly conn ected with large industrial houses, have been permitted to 
participate in the equity of a new private sector bank up to a maximum of 10 per cent, 
but without having controlling interest in the bank. The guidelines for licensing of new 
banks in the private sector issued on February 22, 2013 do not have such restrictions. 
Therefore, corporates are eligible to promote new banks, subject to compliance with the 
provisions of the guidelines. 
The Reserve Bank of India appreciates the concerns and apprehensions of the 
Committee on the issue of permitting large industrial houses to promote new banks. The 
related issues have been widely discussed. The Reserve Bank came out with a 
Discussion Paper on Licensing of New Banks in August 2010 pursuant to the 
announcement made by the Union Finance Minister in his budget speech for the year 

13 
 
2010-11 for giving some additional banking licences to private sector players, including 
non-banking financial companies. 
The Discussion Paper brought out the international experience, Indi an approach 
and pros and cons of allowing industrial houses to promote new banks. The Reserve 
Bank had collated i nternational experience on allowing corporates to promote banks . It 
was observed that jurisdictions  like Australia, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Fr ance, Japan 
and UK do not specifically restrict industrial houses from setting up banks. On the other 
hand, many jurisdictions like  USA and Korea have restrictions. The international 
experience is, therefore, varied. 
Based on the comments received on the D iscussion Paper and discussions with 
various stakeholders, it was decided to permit corporates to promote new banks with 
adequate safeguards to ring fence the financial business from the non -financial 
business of the promoters. The rationale for allowing t he corporate for promoting new 
banks is as under: 
i) Industrial and business houses have already been allowed entry into other 
financial services sectors, and are competing with banks both on the asset and liability 
sides.  
 
ii) Industrial and business houses hav e a long, and credible, history of building and 
nurturing new businesses in highly regulated sectors like telecom, power, airports, 
highways, dams and ports, etc. 
 
iii) Industrial and business houses can be an important source of capital, 
entrepreneurial abilities, business experience and management expertise.  
 
iv) Equities of large industrial and business houses are widely held; they are listed 
on the stock exchanges, and are subject to Companies laws and SEBI regulations on 
transparency, disclosure and corporate governance. Moreover, with huge business 
interests across a variety of sectors and regions, industrial and business houses can be 
expected to be quite keen on not compromising their business reputation. That itself will 
act as a safeguard. 
 
The following s afeguards have been provided in the guidelines to mitigate the 
possible conflict of interests and self-dealings: 
i) The promoters / promoter groups are required to first set up a wholly owned Non-
Operative Financial Holding Company (NOFHC), which will hold the new bank as well 
as other regulated financial services entities of the group. The holding company 
structure will ring fence the  regulated financial services entities of the group, including 

14 
 
the bank, from other commercial, industrial and financial activities of the group which 
are not regulated by financial sector regulators; and also ring fence the bank from other 
regulated financial activities of the group.  
 
ii) The NOFHC will be registered with the Reserve Bank as an NBFC and it will be 
regulated by the Reserve Bank. The NOFHC will comply with corporate governance 
guidelines and prudential norms issued from time to time. 
 
iii) The new banks will not be permitted to take any credit and investment (including 
investments in the equity/debt capital instruments) exposure on the promoters / 
promoter group entities or on individuals associated with the promoter group or their 
NOFHCs. Further, banks promoted by groups having 40 per cent or more assets and/or 
income from non -financial businesses will require RBI‟s prior approval for raising paid -
up voting equity capital beyond `10 billion for every block of `5 billion. This provision will 
allow the Reserve Bank to control the growth of the bank consistent with our policy. 
 
iv) The Reserve Bank is now empowered under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 
to call for information relating to the business or affairs of any associate enterprise of 
the banking company, and also to cause an inspection of its books of account. The Act 
also empowers the Reserve Bank to supersede the boards of banks to secure proper 
management. 
 
The Reserve Bank is of the view that additional safeguards provided in the 
guidelines would keep the industrial activities and the banking activities separate. 
  

15 
 
Financial Inclusion 
The guidelines mandate banks to open at least 25 percent of the branches  in 
unbanked rural centres to avoid over concentration of their branches in metropolitan 
areas and cities, which are already having adequate banking presence.  
It is submitted that the new private sector banks have performed well in terms of 
opening up branche s. The 7 new private banks had 9528 branches, as against 6049 
branches of 13 old private sector banks, as on March 31, 2013. It is acknowledged that 
the penetration of the private sector banks into rural centres is less than that of public 
sector banks. However, since July 15, 2011 the Reserve Bank of India has mandated all 
scheduled commercial banks (except Regional Rural Banks) opening at least 25 per 
cent of the total number of branches (proposed to be opened during a year) in 
unbanked rural centre that does not have a brick and mortar structure of any scheduled 
commercial bank. The new private sector banks have opened 41.5 per cent of the total 
number of branches opened during the year 2012 -13 in Tier 5 and Tier 6 centres (rural 
centres) compared to 28.9 per cent by the old private sector banks. 
It is submitted that a single mode of presence in the form of a brick and mortar 
branch may not be always viable for providing access to banking services in rural areas. 
Therefore, banks have been extensively using the services of Business Correspondents 
(BCs) for extending the geographic coverage of the existing branches. Further, banks 
have been adopting information and communication technology (ICT) based financial 
inclusion in a big way, in lieu of branch prese nce. It is widely acknowledged that new 
banks bring new business models, superior banking technology and innovative products 
to suit to the requirements of the customers.  
The new private sector banks are expected to adopt financial inclusion as a 
viable business model and use modern technology to achieve this objective. As per the 
guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector, the applicant for new bank 
licences are required to furnish their business plans and how they propose to achieve 
financial inclusion. A high level advisory committee (HLAC) will screen the viability of 
the business plans of the proposed new banks; their business focus, including 
evaluation of the proposals to promote financial inclusion in a significant way; range of 
financial services proposed to be offered; ability to render cost effective customer 
service; potential to contribute to economic growth; evaluation of the proposed 

16 
 
technology platform and special expertise of the promoters / promoter groups‟ in 
underserved/niche areas; and ability of the promoters and management to manage 
risks. 
Priority Sector Lending 
The proposed new banks are mandated to comply with the priority sector 
lending(PSL) targets and sub -targets as applicable to the existing domestic banks and 
for this purpose, the banks should build up their priority sector lending portfolio from the 
commencement of their operations.  
It is, however, a fact that 6 out of 20 privat e sector banks failed to achieve the 
priority sector lending target of 40 per cent of the adjusted net bank credit for the year 
ended March 31, 2012. It may be submitted that 16 out of 26 public sector banks also 
could not achieve the overall target of 40 per cent. Further, while the public sector 
banks‟ PSL achievement was at 37.2 percent, the achievement of private sector banks‟ 
PSL target was higher at 39.4 percent for the year ended March 31, 2012.  In 2012-13, 
credit to priority sectors by public and pr ivate sector banks was 36.3 per cent and 37.5 
per cent (of Adjusted Net Bank Credit / Credit equivalent of Off -Balance Sheet 
Exposure, whichever is higher) respectively, indicating a short fall against the overall 
target of 40 per cent. 
 
Share in the Banking space 
The public sector banks are the dominant players in the banking space. The 26 
public sector banks have a market share of over 72 per cent of the total assets of the 
commercial banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks), as against about 20 per cent by  
the private sector banks. Therefore, the apprehension that allowing industrial and 
business houses to promote new banks will result in concentration of control of the 
Indian banking system, is quite low given that our banking system is composed of public 
sector banks and non-industrial sector promoted private banks. 
 
12. The Committee had voiced their concerns on the banking license 
guidelines permitting large industrial houses to promote new banks, 
apprehending that Industrial/Business houses may not be g eared up to achieve 
national objectives of financial inclusion, priority sector lending etc. From the 

17 
 
reply of the Ministry, the Committee learn  that 6 out of 20 private sector banks 
failed to achieve the priority sector lending target of 40 per cent of th e adjusted 
net bank credit for the year ended March 31, 2012. The Ministry have also stated 
that even 16 out of 26 public sector banks failed to achieve the target. It has been 
further stated that during the next fiscal too the credit to priority sector by  public 
and private sector books was 36.3% and 37.5% respectively i.e. less than the 
stipulated 40%. The Committee feel that such comparisons are odious given the 
scale of operations and reach and spread of the public sector banks vis -à-vis 
those in private sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Government / 
RBI should ensure that no recurrence of the pre -nationalization situation 
happens, when the management of private banks deployed their funds to extend 
undue favour to their own industrial owners without regard to social priorities 
determined by Government. As post -nationalization, great strides have been 
made in social banking by public sector banks, the Committee desire that this 
momentum nurtured thus far should be carried forward to exte nd the geographic 
coverage of banks and improve access to banking services through the new 
licenses to be awarded under the new guidelines. The Committee would thus 
reiterate that the goal of reaching banking services to unbanked areas should 
thus not be l ost sight of while granting licenses to new entities  and framing the 
licensing/expansion policy in general. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTESTABILITY OF DECISION OF RBI  
 
(Recommendation Serial No.  9) 
13. The Governor of RBI, while deposing before the Committee had stated on the 
issue of “Fit and Proper” ….if there is some subjectivity, the test for us, the challenge for 
us will be … is your decision contestable?” The Committee surprised that in spite of the 

18 
 
above submission made by the RBI Governor, and also conside ring the extent of 
subjective discretion available with RBI in the criteria / guidelines, there was no 
mechanism provided to facilitate contest ing or reviewing RBI decisions had w ith a view 
to ensuring fair play and justice in the licensing process, recomm ended that a suitable 
mechanism may be instituted to enable aggrieved applicants to seek review of 
decisions 
14. The Ministry in their action tak en reply have stated as follows that t he Reserve 
Bank will give out new bank licences consistent with the highest standards of 
transparency and diligence. The HLAC will screen the applications after the preliminary 
evaluation by the RBI staff. The Committee will make recommendations to the RBI  
Governor and Deputy Governors, who will propose the final list to the Committee of the 
Central Board (CCB) for grant of in -principle approval or the rejection of the application. 
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 does not provide for any grievance redressa l 
mechanism for refusal of a banking licence to any applicant. The Act provides for an 
appeal against cancellation of licence. However, with due deference to the 
recommendations of the Committee, the Reserve Bank of India would put in place an 
appeal mecha nism for the applicants aggrieved by the decision and if an appeal is 
made against the decision. While a specific decision is fully within the purview of the 
RBI given its regulatory mandate, the process followed by the RBI can be appealed to 
the RBI‟s Cen tral Board of Directors, where parties directly involved in the decision 
making will not vote.  
15. The Committee note with some satisfaction that the Ministry, have finally in 
consonance with the Recommendations of the Committee decided that the 
Reserve Bank of India would put in place an appeal mechanism for the applicants 
aggrieved by the decision , if an appeal  is made against the decision. The 
Committee expect that though the B anking Regulation Act 1949 does not provide 
for any grievance redressal mecha nism for refusal of a banking license to any 
applicant, RBI will expedite putting in place a suitable and efficient mechanism 
available for aggrieved applicants to seek review of decisions in respect of issue 
of banking license. 
New Delhi;                         DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY, 
12 December, 2014                           Chairperson, 
21 Agrahayana,1936 (Saka)                       Committee on Finance 

19 
 
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee on Finance 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11th  December, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs.  
in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Venkatesh Babu T.G. 
3. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar   
4. Shri Shyama Charan Gupta  
5. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
7. Shri Gopal Shetty  
8. Shri Anil Shirole  
9. Dr. Kirit Somaiya    
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
11. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
13. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
 
     SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Director  
3. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
X  X  X  X  X  X 
 
 
2.      X  X  X  X  X  X 

20 
 
3.      X  X  X  X  X  X 
 (The Witnesses then withdrew.) 
 (The Committee then adjourned for Tea) 
 
 (At around 1605 hours the Sitting resumed with the Chairperson in Chair) 
4. Thereafter the Committee took up following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption: -  
 
(i)  Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services and 
Disinvestment); 
(ii)   Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue); 
(iii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Planning; 
(iv) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs; 
(v) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation; and 
(vi)  Memorandum No. 2 regarding draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Seventy-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject „Policy on New 
Licences in the Banking Sector‟. 
 
5. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports at Sl. Nos. (i), 
(ii), (iv), (v) and (vi) above without any modification and authorised the Chairperson to 
finalise them in the light of factual verification from concerned Ministries/Departments. 
6. As regards the draft Report at Sl. No. (iii) above some Members pointed out to 
the Chairperson that due to paucity of time they could not go through it while some 
others wanted it to be further discussed.  The consideration of draft Report at Sl. No. (iii) 

21 
 
was accordingly deferred to the next Sitting of the Committee scheduled to be  held on 
18th instant. 
   
    The Committee then adjourned.  
  A verbatim Record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 