 
 
 
 
 
35
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
 
(2015
-
16)
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
MINISTRIES OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, 
FINANCIAL SERVICES) & CORPORATE  AFFAIRS
 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Twenty First Report
 
o
f
 
the 
Standing Committee on Finance on
 
'
Efficacy of regulation of C
ollective 
I
nvestment 
 
S
chemes (cis), 
C
hit 
F
unds, etc.
'
 
]
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY
-
FIFTH REPORT
 
 
                                        
 
 
                                              
 
                                                    
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
August, 2016 Sravana, 1938 (Saka)
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY
-
FIFTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
 
(2015
-
2016)
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRIES OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF 
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, 
FINANCIAL SERVICES) & CORPORATE  AFFAIRS
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Twenty First Report o
f
 
the 
Standing Committee on Finance on
 
'
Efficacy of regulation of C
ollective 
I
nvestment 
 
S
chemes (cis), 
C
h
it 
F
unds, etc.
']
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
10 August, 2016
 
 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 10 August, 2016
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
                   
August, 2016  Sravana, 1938 (Saka)
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE.................................……….…………
 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………...... 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Report ...................................................................………   
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Recommendatio
ns/Observations which have been accepted  
 
 
by the 
Government ............................…………… 
 
 
           
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 
 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
 
.......……… 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
 
 
the Government have not bee
n accepted by the Committee …..
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 
 
reply of the Government is still awaited ......
.............................… 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 
04 Aug, 2016
 
 
         
 
 
                 
APPENDIX
 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations Contained in the Twenty First Report 
 
(Six
teenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
 
 
 
       
Finance on 
'
Efficacy of regulation of Collective Investment 
 
                      
Schemes (cis), Chit Funds, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________
 
* 
Not appended in the
 
cyclostyled copy
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
–
 
2015
-
16
 
 
Dr. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA
 
                                          
 
 
2.       Vacant **
 
 
3. 
 
Shri Venkatesh Babu T.G.
 
 
4. 
 
Shri Sudip Bandyoypadhyay
 
 
5. 
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
 
6. 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
 
 
7. 
 
Dr. Gopalakrishnan C.
 
 
8. 
 
Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
 
 
9.
 
Shri Chandrakant B. Khaire
 
 
10. 
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
 
11. 
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
 
 
12. 
 
Shri Prem Das Rai
 
 
13. 
 
Shri Rayapati 
Sambasiva Rao
 
 
14. 
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
 
15. 
 
Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia
 
 
16. 
 
Shri Gajendra Singh Sekhawat
 
 
17. 
 
Shri Gopal Shetty 
 
 
18.
 
Shri Anil Shirole
 
 
19. 
 
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
 
 
20. 
 
Dr. Kiritbhai Solanki
 
 
21.
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
22. 
 
Shri Naresh Agrawal
 
 
23. 
 
Shri Naresh Gujral
 
 
24. 
 
Vacant *
 
 
25. 
 
Shri Satish Chandra Misra***
 
 
26. 
 
Dr. Mahendra Prasad
 
 
27. 
 
Shri T.K. Rangarajan
 
 
28. 
 
Shri C.M. Ramesh
 
 
29. 
 
Shri Ajay Sancheti
 
 
 
30. 
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh
 
 
31. 
 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri P.C. Tripathy
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3.
 
Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
4.
 
Shri Kulvinder Singh
 
 
           
-
 
Executive Officer
 
_________________________________________________
 
* Vacancy caused due to retirement of Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan, MP from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.06.2016
 
** Consequent upon his appointment to the Council of Ministers, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, MP ceased to be t
he 
member of the Committee w.e.f. 05.07.2016
 
*** Shri Satish Chandra Misra, MP, Rajya Sabha Nominated w.e.f. 08.07.2016
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty
-
F
ifth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the 
Twenty
-
First 
Report o
f
 
the Standing Committee on Finance on '
Efficacy of 
R
egulation of Collective 
Investment Schemes (CIS), Chit Funds, etc. 
 
 
2.
 
The 
Twenty
-
Fi
rst
 
Report was presen
ted to Lok Sabha / laid on the T
able of 
Rajya Sabha on 03rd December, 2015.  The Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations were received from the Government 
vide 
their communication 
dated 29 February, 2016. 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee considere
d and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 04 August, 
2016.
 
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the 
Twenty
-
First 
Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix.
 
 
5.
 
For facility of reference, 
the observations / recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
 
 
 
.
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
 
 
DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY,
 
04 August, 
201
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
      
 
       
 
  
Chairperson,
 
13 Sravana, 1938
 
(Saka)
 
 
      
 
      
 
         
   
S
tanding Committee on Finance
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
REPORT
 
 
CHAPTER 
–
 
I
 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 21st Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the
 
subject "Efficacy of Regulation of Collective Investment 
Schemes, Chit Funds etc." which was presented to the Hon'ble Speaker on 07 October 
2015 and presented to  Lok Sabha / Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03 December  2015.
 
2. 
 
The Action Taken Notes have been 
received from the Government in respect of 
all the 13 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows:
 
(i) 
 
Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:
 
 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,3, 4,6,
7,8,11,12 and 13
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Total 10)
 
(Chapter
-
 
II)
 
 
(ii) 
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
 
 
Recommendation Nos. Nil
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
(Total Nil)
 
(Chapter
-
 
III)
 
(iii) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
 
 
 
 
Recommendation Nos. 5, 9 and 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
(Total  03) 
 
(Chapter 
-
IV)
 
 
(iv) 
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
 
replies by the 
Government are still awaited:
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
(Total 
-
 
NIL) 
 
(Chapter
-
 
V)
 
3. 
 
The Committee desire that the replies to the observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter
-
I may be furnished to them expeditiously.
 

 
 
 
 
 
4.
 
 
The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.
 
Unauthorised collection of money and deposits
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
 
5.
 
For the past few years, there have been several cases of unauthorised 
collec
tion of money and deposits fraudulently inducing public to invest in dubious 
schemes promising unusually high returns or offering gifts in kind. The menace of such 
illegal financial and marketing schemes has grown big in recent years. The exclusion 
of larg
e segment of the population from access to formal financial channels makes 
them vulnerable to the machinations of unscrupulous operators and nefarious 
schemes. Further, the inability/inaction of the financial sector regulatory 
mechanism/investigative agenc
ies including States to identify and clamp down on the 
promoters of such schemes and the regulatory gaps and overlap have created grey 
areas where dubious firms could flourish. Besides, the fact that financial literacy in our 
country is still poor and peop
le being unable to discern genuine financial instruments 
from bogus ones has compounded matters. In the absence of financial literacy and 
knowledge, people are inevitably driven by greed alone. The Committee would 
therefore like the Government to promote f
inancial literacy and awareness on a big 
scale by launching countrywide campaign through different media. There is also a 
need to encourage and incentivise institutionalised small savings and safe avenues of 
investment and make them more attractive to the 
common public, weaning them away 
from dubious schemes. 
 
 
6.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows:
-
 
 
"
The Government has undertaken a massive exercise of Financial Inclusion 
through the Pradhan Mantri Jan
-
D
han Yojana, wherein, about 21 crore bank 
account have been opened with a view to provide regulated financial services. 
Further, through the three Jan
-
Suraksha Schemes, namely, Pradhan Mantri Jeevan 
Jyoti Bima Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana and
 
Atal Pension 
Yojana, over 12.53 crore citizens have been covered under the social security 
schemes of life or accidental insurance or old age pension. The objective of the 
Government is to maximise the access and use of regulated financial products 
throug
hout the country in a cost effective manner. Further, the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) has decided to grant “in
-
principle” approval on 19
th
 
August, 2015 to the 
11 applicants to set up Payments Banks. Further, RBI decided to grant “in
-
principle” 
approval on 
16
th
 
September, 2015 to the 10 applicants to set up Small Finance 

 
 
 
 
 
Banks. With the setting up of these new types of banks, the access of the people to 
regulated financial services would increase. 
 
 
It is agreed that an informed investor is the best form of 
defense against the lure of 
a dubious money collection schemes promising unreasonable rate of returns. SEBI, 
RBI, Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) and Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
(MCA) conduct their own campaigns. A coordinated strategy is being form
ulated to 
launch a massive Nation
-
wide consumer / depositor education and awareness 
campaign by using the Depositor Education and Awareness Fund (DEAF) of RBI, 
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) of MCA, the Investor Protection and 
Awareness Fund
 
(IPEF) of SEBI. RBI has informed that it is agreeable to allow a 
part of the DEAF to be used for promoting depositor education and awareness 
through mass media campaign, advertisements and other means. Further, SEBI 
has informed that an amount of Rs. 200 
crores is allocated to SEBI under IPEF for 
creating awareness and cautioning investors 
against the ponzi schemes, etc."
 
 
7.
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government have taken  
some measures for promoting small savings, creating public 
awareness and 
financial literacy while cautioning investors against fraudulent schemes. These 
include (i) opening of about 21 crore bank accounts, (ii) introduction of three 
Jan
-
Suraksha schemes namely Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, 
Pradhan Mantr
i Suraksha Bima Yojana and Atal Pension Yojana under which 
over 12.53 crore citizens have been covered, and (iii) formulation of a 
coordinated strategy to launch a massive nation
-
wide campaign by using the 
Depositor Education and Awareness Fund (DEAF) of R
BI, Investor Education 
and Protection Fund (IEPF) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Investor 
Protection and Awareness Fund of the Securities Exchange Board of India. The 
Committee hope that the co
-
ordinated strategy being formulated will soon be 
imp
lemented. They also hope that these measures will help promote enhanced 
financial literacy and awareness in the country, weaning away the public from 
fraudulent schemes promising attractive returns.
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Different Regulatory Bodies
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
 
8.
 
The Committee note that entities which raise money from public fall under the 
jurisdiction of different regulatory bodies. For instance, the Non
-
Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) are under the regulatory and supervisory jurisdiction of the RBI, 
Chit 
Funds and Money Circulation including multilevel marketing schemes are under 
the domain of State Government; Collective Investment Schemes come under the 
purview of SEBI; schemes offered by Cooperative Societies are under State 
Government; Multi State Coop
erative Societies come under Central Registrar, Ministry 
of Agriculture and deposits taken by non
-
NBFCs are regulated by the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs under the Companies Act. Inspite of such diverse and dispersed 
regulation, there are several entities
/schemes which are not regulated by any of the 
financial sector watchdogs. These entities, therefore, take advantage of this regulatory 
vacuum/lacuna to raise large amounts of money from gullible people. In most such 
cases, public is defrauded and the prom
oters of these schemes disappear with the 
money collected. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Government to plug 
forthwith the regulatory loopholes and vacuum prevailing in the vast, expanding 
financial services industry, presently existing on the fr
inges of regulation or in the grey 
regulatory zones or in the midst of non
-
regulation and regulatory failures. For this 
purpose, the Committee desire that appropriate legislative provisions, coupled with 
effective administrative and enforcement measures sh
ould be brought in without 
further delay so that the hard
-
earned savings and investment made by millions of 
people are duly protected, and the fraudulent operators are also brought to book fast 
besides bringing about deterrent effect for such mushrooming o
perators. 
 
9.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows:
-
 
 
"The Central Economic Intelligence Bureau in the Department of Revenue, Ministry 
of Finance and its Regional Economic Intelligence Councils, along with
 
the State 
Level Coordination Committees, provide an existing administrative structure for 
capturing information regarding ponzi schemes early. It would be appropriate to 
attune, with strengthening if necessary, the existing structure to directly address t
he 
problem of unauthorised deposit taking. As the unauthorised money mobilisation is 
majorly done in the hinterland, the primary responsibility for preventing and dealing 
with unauthorised deposit taking activities rests with the State Government not only 
due to its local presence and criminal enforcement power, but also due to the 
provisions of the Chit Funds Act, 1982, and the Prize Chits and Money Circulation 

 
 
 
 
 
Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 (PCMCSB Act), wherein the authority to implement 
the provisions of t
hese Acts is with the State /Union Territory Governments.  
 
 
As regards proposing appropriate legislative measures, a comprehensive Central 
Law on   unauthorised deposit taking schemes is being formulated to deal with the 
menace of such schemes. "
 
 
 
 
10.
 
T
he Committee have been informed that the Central Economic Intelligence 
Bureau in the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance and its regional 
Economic Intelligence Councils along with the State level coordination 
committees, provide the necessary admini
strative structure for capturing 
information regarding ponzi schemes early and it would be better to attune, with 
strengthening if necessary, the already existing structure to address the problem 
of unauthorised deposit taking. As even now several cases of
 
unauthorised 
collection of money and deposits are being reported, the Committee would like 
the concerned agencies including the State level agencies to work with greater 
cohesion, coordination and effectiveness for concrete results at the ground 
level. As
 
regards appropriate legislative measures, the Committee have been 
informed that a comprehensive central law on unauthorised deposit  taking 
schemes is being formulated to deal with the menace. The Committee would like 
the central law on unauthorised depos
its and related matters be expedited so 
that a comprehensive Bill can be introduced in Parliament at least during the 
Winter Session later this year. The Committee would expect this proposed 
legislation to plug once and for all the regulatory loopholes, ga
ps and vacuum 
prevailing in the vast and  expanding financial services industry. 
 
Different forms of fund raising
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
 
11.
 
Fund
-
raising has assumed different forms adopting different business models, 
ranging from installment schemes to buy agricultural land to unauthorised money 
collection schemes to dupe the 
unsuspecting public. The Committee 

 
 
 
 
 
believe that considering the devi
ous and complex nature of these schemes, far greater 
degree of vigilance, activism and intelligence gathering / sharing is called for by the 
existing regulators such as RBI, SEBI, Registrars of Cooperative Societies, Registrars 
of Companies, SFIO and the s
tate enforcement agencies. There is a need to quickly 
identify the underlying nature of the scam so that it can be handed over to the 
appropriate investigative agency. The Committee feel that time factor is of great 
significance here, both to prevent a fra
udulent scheme from snow
-
balling to epic 
proportions and to ensure that the deposited money is not siphoned off. Therefore, to 
restore investor confidence in the financial system, regulators and enforcement 
agencies must act proactively to nip the fraud in
 
the bud rather than take action after 
complaints pile up and situation gets out of hand. The State Government machinery 
should be utilised to gather market intelligence about incipient scams and promptly 
disseminate the same to the investors/prospective i
nvestors. Dedicated desks require 
to be set up for citizens to lodge their complaints, as on
-
line forums for complaints 
redressal are not adequate. This warrants coordinated action by the concerned 
regulators and agencies at a decentralised level. 
 
 
12.
 
In
 
their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows:
-
 
 
"The existing mechanisms of intelligence gathering and information sharing of the 
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, its Regional Economic Intelligence Councils 
and
 
State Level Coordination Committees are to be strengthened by suitably 
strengthening and technologically leveraging these to facilitate real
-
time information 
gathering and dissemination amongst all stakeholders. The State Government 
enforcement agencies a
re invariably part of the existing mechanisms. A module for 
public in the State Level Coordination Committee portal (under development) to 
post information on suspected unauthorised financial activities, as also for 
registering their complaints against any
 
regulated / unregulated entity directly or 
assisted through the Administrator, is envisaged. This should help in taking action 
against such entities in an expeditious manner through information sharing among 
the Regulators and Enforcement agencies".
 
 
13.
 
The Committee are happy to note that a module for public in the State 
level Coordination Committee portal is being developed to post information on 
suspected unauthorised financial activities and also for registering their 
complaints against any regulated/
unregulated entity. The Committee would 

 
 
 
 
 
recommend that the said module relating to the SLCC portal becomes functional 
soon. The Committee be kept abreast of the same. 
 
Unauthorised acceptance of deposits
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
 
14.
 
The Committee were i
nformed by RBI that as a matter of public policy, Reserve 
Bank has decided that only banks should be allowed to accept public deposits and as 
such, since 1997, they have not issued any certificate of registration for NBFCs 
authorising acceptance of public 
deposits. However, it is common knowledge that 
several scams have come to light in the NBFC sector from time to time. Lakhs of low 
income households have been lured into these 'deposit schemes' promising unviable 
and exorbitant rates of interest. Several o
f these households have lost their entire life's 
savings, as these companies / firms went bust. The Committee note in this regard that 
there are two categories involved here
-
unauthorised acceptance of deposits by 
incorporated entities and, the other by uni
ncorporated bodies. As far as the first 
category is concerned, the RBI Act vests the responsibility for pursuing such violations 
exclusively with the Reserve Bank. The obligation to pursue the second category of 
acceptance of deposits, that is, by the unin
corporated entities (which is absolutely 
prohibited by the RBI Act) rests concurrently with the Reserve Bank and the State 
Governments concerned. The Committee find that although most of the scams relate 
to such entities, the RBI has been routinely and rat
her helplessly requesting the State 
Governments to pursue such cases and have also suggested to the States to enact the 
Protection of Interest of Depositors Act, which would enable them to attach the money 
and properties of the defaulter / promoter / partn
ers/ directors etc. As the larger public 
is at the receiving end of such legal complexities and is obviously bewildered by the 
utter lack of control or regulation, the Committee desire that the Central Government 
should take up the matter with both RBI and
 
the States to incorporate adequate legal 
provisions so that the legal prohibition on deposit
-
taking by unincorporated bodies is 
strictly enforced. All State Governments are required to be specially sensitised for this 
purpose and asked to enact the Protec
tion of Interest of Depositors Act without delay. 
In this regard, the Committee would recommend that a Central Legislation may be 
enacted incorporating the best features of the State Acts wherever enacted. The 
respective State Acts may then be accordingly 
amended in line with the Central law. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
15.
 
In this context, the Committee would like to point out with concern that although 
several States have enacted State level Protection of Interest of Depositors Act, there 
appears to be hardly any case / instance 
where the purpose of returning the small 
investors/depositors money could be achieved. This Act mandated the State level 
investigating agencies including EoW / District Magistrates / District Collectors to take 
preventive action and authorised the State ag
encies to investigate the process where 
abnormal returns are promised and extraordinary commission of the agents are given. 
It is not evident as to whether any State / investigating agency has taken any 
preventive action as provided in the Act. The Committ
ee, therefore, are of the view that 
in the light of such a dismal situation, there is an urgent need to galvanise and 
strengthen the enforcement and vigilance mechanism at the State level so that 
scamsters are severely punished and small investors are duly
 
protected. An effective 
whistle blower mechanism should also be developed for this purpose.
 
 
16.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows:
-
 
"The Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial 
establishments) Act (PID Act), 
wherever enacted, normally has provisions enabling the State Authorities to attach 
the moneys and properties of not only the defaulting financial establishment, its 
directors, officials, etc., but also the moneys and properti
es believed to have been 
acquired by the financial establishment, either in its own name or in the name of 
any other person from out of the deposit collected by the company. Offences under 
the Act are cognizable. Designated courts are set up to try offence
s under the Act 
and to pass orders confirming attachments made by the State Government, to 
distribute the sale proceeds, etc. Most of the State Acts have also provisions by 
which orders of the State Authorities / Designated Court of one State can be 
enforc
ed by the authorities or Designated Court of other State.
 
 
It is pertinent to note that the first State PID Act was enacted in 1997 by Tamil 
Nadu. In 18 years, that is, upto 2015, 24 States and 2 UTs have enacted PID Acts 
and 2 States have finalised their 
PID Acts and are awaiting Presidential Assent. 3 
States and 5 UTs are yet to finalise their PID Acts and send for Presidential assent. 
Government and RBI have written to the States/ UTs, which have not enacted such 
law, to enact one, to avoid any regulator
y vacuum in the area of control of deposit 
taking activity.
 
 
Further, it is a well established fact that the State Police Authorities are the first to 
take cognizance of a fraudulent, unauthorised money collection scheme, when the 
investors start complaini
ng of non
-
receipt of the promised returns and when FIR is 

 
 
 
 
 
lodged. It is essential to build capacities of district level officers, as well as police 
officials regarding the characteristics and modus operandi of ponzi schemes so that 
suspicious activities ar
e recognised early. As mentioned in reply to 
recommendation No. 2 and 3, the existing mechanisms of intelligence gathering 
and information sharing of the Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, its Regional 
Economic Intelligence Councils and State Level Coor
dination Committees is 
proposed to be strengthened by suitably amending, strengthening and 
technologically leveraging these to facilitate real
-
time information gathering and 
dissemination amongst all stakeholders. The State Government enforcement 
agencies 
are invariably part of the existing mechanisms. 
 
 
Further, a comprehensive Central Law on unauthorised deposit taking schemes is 
being formulated to deal with the menace of such schemes."
 
 
17.
 
The Committee note that the Protection of Interest of Depositor
s Act (PID 
Act) has been enacted by twenty four States and two Union Territories and two 
States have finalised their PID Acts and are awaiting Presidential assent. 
However, three States and five Union Territories are yet to finalise their PID Acts 
despite 
a request being made by the Government and RBI in this regard. The 
Committee therefore reiterate that the matter of enacting the PID Act be pursued 
vigorously with these States/UTs and they be apprised of the outcome in the 
matter. The Committee also recom
mend that the Comprehensive Central Law on 
unauthorised deposit taking schemes being formulated to deal with the menace 
of such scheme be finalised and enacted expeditiously.
 
Report of Key Advisory Group
 
Recommendations (Para No. 9)
 
 
18.
 
'Chits' are define
d under the Chit Funds Act, 1982. Chit Funds are indigenous 
financial institutions in the country, especially in the southern parts, that particularly 
cater to the financial needs of low
-
income households, bringing together borrowers and 
savers. In a chit 
fund scheme, a group of individuals come together for a pre
-
determined time period and contribute to a common pool at regular intervals. They 
operate under the regulatory ambit of the Registrar, Chit Funds of the State of their 
operation. Chit Funds are, h
owever, prohibited from accepting deposits by RBI 
regulations. It has been submitted to the Committee that there are about 25,000 chit 
fund operators involving more than 50 
lakh subscribers. In view of the operational 

 
 
 
 
 
difficulties being faced by this secto
r, the Department of Financial Services has 
constituted a Key Advisory Group on Chit Funds / Nidhi Companies to review the 
existing legal / regulatory framework for orderly growth of the registered chit funds 
sector. The report of this Key Advisory Group i
s stated to have been submitted to the 
Department way back in February, 2013. The Committee are surprised that the 
Department of Financial Services has still not taken any follow
-
up action on this report, 
although more than two years have elapsed. They, th
erefore, strongly recommend the 
Department to finalise their legislative and administrative proposals on the 
strengthening and streamlining of the registered Chit Funds Sector within a period of 
three months from the presentation of this Report. 
 
19.
 
In th
eir action taken reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) have submitted as follows:
-
 
 
"A Key Advisory Group was constituted on Chit Funds (KAG) in September, 2011 to 
review the existing legal, regulatory and institutional framework
 
for Chit Funds and 
its efficacy and suggest legal and regulatory initiatives required for orderly growth of 
the sector. KAG had submitted its report in September, 2013 and had given a 
number of recommendations relating to improvements in the institutional
 
and legal 
structure to further develop the Chit Funds industry. 
 
 
The Report of KAG was circulated among RBI, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority (IRDA), Indian Banks’ Association, All India Association of 
Chit Funds (AIACF) and the States / 
UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Puducherry and Delhi in October, 2013. RBI, IRDAI, IBA 
and AIACF shared their comments on the KAG report with DFS, however, no 
comments were received from the States / UTs. The recommendati
ons of KAG and 
suggestions of stakeholders were being processed in March, 2014 to propose 
amendments to the Chit Funds Act, 1982, however, the decision was deferred in 
view of the then pending General Elections. Department of Financial Services is 
examinin
g the recommendations of the KAG on Chit Funds for taking a final view 
on administrative and legislative measures including amendments to the Chit Funds 
Act, 1982 and would inform the Committee shortly about the decision taken to 
implement specific recomme
ndations of KAG, both non
-
legislative and legislative."
 
 
20.
 
The Committee note that a Key Advisory Group (KAG) was constituted on 
Chit Funds way back in September, 2011 to review the existing legal, regulatory 
and institutional framework for Chit Funds an
d its efficacy and also to suggest 
the legal/regulatory initiatives required for the purpose. The KAG accordingly 
presented its report in September, 2013 and had given a number of 
recommendations relating to improvements in the institutional and legal 
stru
cture to further develop the Chit Funds Industry. In the Action taken reply, 

 
 
 
 
 
the Department of Financial Services have informed the Committee that the 
report of KAG was circulated among RBI, Insurance Regulatory Development 
Authority (IRDA), All India Asso
ciation of Chit Funds (AIACF), Indian Banks' 
Association (IBA), States/UTs etc. Comments have since been received from 
RBI, IRDA, AIACF and IBA, however no comments have been received from the 
States/UTs. The Ministry have assured to inform the Committee s
hortly about the 
decision taken to implement specific recommendations of KAG, both non
-
legislative and legislative. The Committee in their original report on the subject 
had strongly recommended that the Department of Financial Services should 
finalise the
ir legislative and administrative proposals on the registered Chit 
Funds sector within a period of 
three months from the presentation of the 
Report. The Committee are unhappy to note that the compliance period of three 
months has not been adhered to by the
 
Department of Financial Services. They 
have taken
 
unusually long time in finalising their position in the matter. The 
Committee would now expect the Department of Financial Services to firm up 
their proposals for the chit funds sector without further loss of time and bring 
the legislative and administrat
ive proposal before the Committee forthwith. 
Furthermore,  necessary legislation in the Chit Fund Sector be brought before 
Parliament during the Winter Session without fail.
 
Transfer of money out of ponzi schemes
 
 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 10)
 
 
 
21.
 
It ha
s been brought to the notice of the Committee that huge amount of money 
has been transferred out of ponzi schemes to Multi
-
State Cooperatives, which has a 
weak regulatory regime at present. It seems that the present Regulator for Multi State 
Cooperatives i
.e., Central Registrar falls under Ministry of Agriculture, which do not 
have any financial regulatory 
infrastructure. As number and amount of 

 
 
 
 
 
Multi State Cooperatives have increased hundred times since 2010, the Committee 
would suggest that the enforcemen
t aspect with regard to financial schemes operating 
through Multi State Cooperatives be shifted to Department of Economic Affairs under 
Ministry of Finance, since the Multi
-
State Cooperatives have now become some kind of 
a shelter for illegitimate funds, w
hich seemed to have surprisingly escaped the notice 
of the concerned Authorities, particularly the Central Registrar under Ministry of 
Agriculture. The Committee would also recommend that the Government should 
institute special audit with regard to these M
ulti
-
State Cooperatives so that this scam 
can be unearthed and corrective action taken immediately. In this regard, the 
Committee would also suggest that the regulatory regime in respect of Multi
-
State 
Cooperatives should be streamlined and tightened so th
at they do not become an 
instrument of diverting and shielding illegal funds from ponzi companies etc.
 
 
22.
 
In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows:
-
 
 
"The subject of multi
-
state cooperative societies is with
 
the Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ 
Welfare. It has been informed by the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers’ Welfare that so far, no such irregularity has been proved that h
uge 
amount of money has been transferred out of ponzi schemes to Multi
-
State 
Cooperative Societies (MSCSs). However, certain complaints have been received 
in the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farme
rs’ Welfare alleging that the following companies against 
whom strictures have been passed by SEBI for financial bungling in Collective 
Investment Schemes (CIS), have transferred their funds by forming the Multi
-
State 
Cooperative Societies and vice
-
versa a
nd the same has been referred to the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs vide the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare letter dated 04.11.2015 for investigation through Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO):
 
 
Sl No.
 
Name of the entity
 
Registered Office / State
 
1
 
Samruddha Jeevan Foods Ltd.
 
Samruddha Jeevan Multi
-
 
State  Multipurpose 
Cooperative Society Ltd., Pune, Maharashtra
 
2
 
Saiprasad Foods Ltd. 
 
Sai Prasad Properties Ltd.
 
Sai Prasad Corporation Ltd.
 
Sai Prasad Global Multi
-
Purpose
 
Cooperative Society 
Ltd., Pune, Maharashtra
 
3
 
Utkarsh Plotters & Multi Agro 
Solutions India Ltd.
 
Utkarsh Agro Multi State
 
 
Cooperative
 
 
Ltd., Jalgaon, 
Maharashtra.
 
4
 
PGF Ltd.
 
Lotus Agricultural and Marketing Cooperative Society 
Ltd., Pitampura, Delhi.
 
5
 
PACL Ltd.
 
Kisan Agrotech Cooperative Society Ltd; Pitampura, 
Delhi.
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare depends on 
Registrars, Cooperative Societies of State Governments to do inspection, inquiry 
etc. into the affairs of MSCSs in case of complaints. The Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and
 
Farmers’ Welfare is also in the process of establishing a panel of 
chartered Accountants / Auditors etc. to look into the affairs of MSCSs in case of 
complaints etc. Further, it is mentioned that as on 31.12.2010, 545 MSCSs had 
been registered under the M
SCS Act, 2002 and as on 31.12.2015, a total number 
of 1250 societies have been registered. From this, it is observed that registration 
has not increased 100 times as stated in the report since 2010. To conduct special 
audit on the affairs of the Multi
-
Stat
e Cooperative Credit Societies as stated in the 
Report, it requires not less than 51% of the paid up share capital holding of the 
Government of India / State Government in the total paid up share capital of the 
society as per the provision of section 77 of
 
the MSCS Act, 2002 and therefore, 
conduct of special audit of these societies is not feasible as per the provisions of 
the MSCS Act, 2002. 
 
 
The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare has stated that it 
is in agreement with the sugges
tion of the Committee that the regulatory regime in 
respect of MSCSs should be streamlined to protect the interest of the small 
investors / members of these societies."
 
 
23.
 
The Committee note with concern that the Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation an
d Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture Farmer's Welfare have 
shed their responsibility by confirming that no irregularity has been proved 
about transfer of huge amount from Ponzi Schemes to Multi State Co
-
operative 
Societies (MSCSs). At the same time t
he Committee have been informed that 
some complaints have been received in the Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture Farmer's Welfare 
alleging that some companies have transferred their funds by forming Multi
-
 
State Cooperative Societies and the same have been referred to Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs for investigation through Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
(SFIO). The Committee, therefore, desire that  the SFIO should expeditiously 
investigate those complai
nts and finalise the same in a time
-
bound manner. 
Further, the Committee note that the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare are in agreement with the observations of the Standing 
Committee that the regulatory regime 
in respect of MSCS
s should be 

 
 
 
 
 
streamlined to protect the interest of the small investors/members of these 
societies. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the regulatory regime in respect of MSCSs should be streamlined and tightened, 
so that 
they do not become an instrument of diverting and shielding illegal funds 
from ponzi companies etc. The Committee emphasize that necessary 
steps in 
this direction  should be taken up urgently.  The Committee would also reiterate 
that strong, time
-
bound act
ion be taken against all such MSCSs, against whom 
(promoters, stakeholders group), SEBI has taken action or against whom 
complaints have been received.  The Committee should be apprised of the action 
taken in
 
this regard on urgent basis.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT:
 
Recommendation
 
(
Serial No
. 1) 
 
 
 
For the past few years, there have been several cases of unauthorised 
collection of money and deposits fraudulently inducing public to invest in dubi
ous 
schemes promising unusually high returns or offering gifts in kind. The menace of such 
illegal financial and marketing schemes has grown big in recent years. The exclusion 
of large segment of the population from access to formal financial channels make
s 
them vulnerable to the machinations of unscrupulous operators and nefarious 
schemes. Further, the inability/inaction of the financial sector regulatory 
mechanism/investigative agencies including States to identify and clamp down on the 
promoters of such 
schemes and the regulatory gaps and overlap have created grey 
areas where dubious firms could flourish. Besides, the fact that financial literacy in our 
country is still poor and people being unable to discern genuine financial instruments 
from bogus ones 
has compounded matters. In the absence of financial literacy and 
knowledge, people are inevitably driven by greed alone. The Committee would 
therefore like the Government to promote financial literacy and awareness on a big 
scale by launching countrywide c
ampaign through different media. There is also a 
need to encourage and incentivise institutionalised small savings and safe avenues of 
investment and make them more attractive to the common public, weaning them away 
from dubious schemes. 
 
 
Reply of the Gov
ernment
 
 
The Government has undertaken a massive exercise of Financial Inclusion through the 
Pradhan Mantri Jan
-
Dhan Yojana, wherein, about 21 crore bank account have been 
opened with a view to provide regulated financial services. Further, through the thr
ee 
Jan
-
Suraksha Schemes, namely, Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana and Atal Pension Yojana, over 12.53 crore citizens have 
been covered under the social security schemes of life or accidental insurance or old 
age 
pension. The objective of the Government is to maximise the access and use of 
regulated financial products throughout the country in a cost effective manner. Further, 
t
he Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) has 
decided to grant “in
-
principle” approval on 19
th
 
Augu
st, 2015 to the 11 applicants to set up Payments Banks
. Further, 
RBI decided to 
grant “in
-
principle” approval on 16
th
 
September, 2015 to the 10 applicants to set up 
Small Finance Banks
. With the setting up of these new types of banks, the access of 
the people to regulated financial services would increase. 
 
 
It is agreed that an informed investor is the best form of defense against the lure of a 
dubious money collection schemes promising unreasonable rate of returns. SEBI, RBI, 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) and Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) 

 
 
 
 
 
conduc
t their own campaigns. A coordinated strategy is being formulated to launch a 
massive Nation
-
wide consumer / depositor education and awareness campaign by 
using t
he 
Depositor Education and Awareness Fund (
DEAF
)
 
of RBI, Investor 
Education an
d Protection Fun
d (IEPF) of MCA
, the Investor Protection and Awareness 
Fund (IPEF) of 
SEBI
. RBI has informed that it is agreeable to allow a part of the DEAF 
to be used for promoting depositor education
 
and awareness through mass media 
campaign, advertisements and other m
eans. Further, SEBI has informed that an 
amount of Rs. 200 
c
rores is allocated to SEBI IPEF for creating awareness and 
cautioning investors against the ponzi schemes, etc. 
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
2
9.02.2016.
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I)
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No 2
) 
 
 
 
The Committee note that entities which raise money from public fall under the 
jurisdiction of different regulatory bodies. For instance, the Non
-
Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) are under the regulatory and supervisory jurisdiction of the RBI, 
Chit Fund
s and Money Circulation including multilevel marketing schemes are under 
the domain of State Government; Collective Investment Schemes come under the 
purview of SEBI; schemes offered by Cooperative Societies are under State 
Government; Multi State Cooperat
ive Societies come under Central Registrar, Ministry 
of Agriculture and deposits taken by non
-
NBFCs are regulated by the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs under the Companies Act. Inspite of such diverse and dispersed 
regulation, there are several entities/sch
emes which are not regulated by any of the 
financial sector watchdogs. These entities, therefore, take advantage of this regulatory 
vacuum/lacuna to raise large amounts of money from gullible people. In most such 
cases, public is defrauded and the promoter
s of these schemes disappear with the 
money collected. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Government to plug 
forthwith the regulatory loopholes and vacuum prevailing in the vast, expanding 
financial services industry, presently existing on the fringe
s of regulation or in the grey 
regulatory zones or in the midst of non
-
regulation and regulatory failures. For this 
purpose, the Committee desire that appropriate legislative provisions, coupled with 
effective administrative and enforcement measures should
 
be brought in without 
further delay so that the hard
-
earned savings and investment made by millions of 
people are duly protected, and the fraudulent operators are also brought to book fast 
besides bringing about deterrent effect for such mushrooming opera
tors. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The Central Economic Intelligence Bureau 
in the Department of Revenue, Ministry of 

 
 
 
 
 
Finance 
and its Regional Economic Intelligence Councils, along with the State 
L
evel 
C
oordination 
C
ommittees, provide an existing 
administrative 
structure for capturing 
information regarding ponzi schemes early. It would be appropriate to attune, with 
strengthening if necessary, the existing structure to 
directly 
address the problem of 
unauthorised deposit taking.
 
As the unauthoris
ed
 
money mobili
s
ation is majorly done 
in the hinterland, the primary responsibility for preventing and dealing with
 
unauthoris
ed deposit taking activities rest
s
 
with the State Government 
not only 
due to 
its local presence and criminal enforcement power
, but 
also due to the provisions of 
the Chit Funds Act, 1982, and the Prize Chits and Money Circulation Schemes 
(Banning) Act, 1978 (PCMCSB Act), wherein the authority to implement the provisions 
of these Acts is with the State /Union Territory Governments. 
 
 
 
A
s regards proposing appropriate legislative measures, a comprehensive Central Law 
on   unauthorised deposit taking schemes is being formulated to deal with the menace 
of such schemes. 
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services
) 
O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
B
O.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 
10
 
of Chapter I)
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No 3
) 
 
 
 
Fund
-
raising has assumed different forms adopting different business models, 
ranging from installment schemes to buy agricultural land 
to unauthorised money 
collection schemes to dupe the unsuspecting public. The Committee believe that 
considering the devious and complex nature of these schemes, far greater degree of 
vigilance, activism and intelligence gathering /
 
sharing is called for b
y the existing 
regulators such as RBI, SEBI, Registrars of Cooperative Societies, Registrars of 
Companies, SFIO and the state enforcement agencies. There is a need to quickly 
identify the underlying nature of the scam so that it can be handed over to the 
a
ppropriate investigative agency. The Committee feel that time factor is of great 
significance here, both to prevent a fraudulent scheme from snow
-
balling to epic 
proportions and to ensure that the deposited money is not siphoned off. Therefore, to 
restore 
investor confidence in the financial system, regulators and enforcement 
agencies must act proactively to nip the fraud in the bud rather than take action after 
complaints pile up and situation gets out of hand. The State Government machinery 
should be util
ised to gather market intelligence about incipient scams and promptly 
disseminate the same to the investors/prospective investors. Dedicated desks require 
to be set up for citizens to lodge their complaints, as on
-
line forums for complaints 
redressal are n
ot adequate. This warrants coordinated action by the concerned 
regulators and agencies at a decentralised level. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The existing mechanisms of intelligence gathering and information sharing of the 
Central Economic Intelligence Burea
u, its Regional Economic Intelligence Councils 
and 
State 
L
evel 
C
oordination 
C
ommittees
 
are to be strengthened by suitably 
strengthening and technologically leveraging these to facilitate real
-
time information 
gathering and dissemination amongst all stakeho
lders. The State Government 
enforcement agencies are invariably part of the existing mechanisms. 
A module for 
public in the 
State 
L
evel 
C
oordination 
C
ommittee
 
portal
 
(under development)
 
to post 
information on suspected unauthorised financial activities, as also for registering their 
complaints against any regulated / unregulated entity directly or assisted through the 
Administrator, is envisaged. This should help in taking action against
 
such entities in 
an expeditious manner through information sharing among the Regulators and 
Enforcement agencies.
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No.
 
13
 
of Chapter I)
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
4
)
 
 
 
As the Secretary, Department of Financial Services submitted during his 
deposition before the Committee, there is a great deal of confusion and uncertainty 
about deposit
-
taking by different entities. On 
the one hand, 'deposits' are covered 
under the Companies Act and the rules made thereunder, which, however, covers only 
the non
-
bank non
-
financial companies. The deposits collected by Banking Companies 
and Non
-
Banking Financial Companies (NBFCS) are curren
tly regulated and 
supervised by RBI. However, the Committee find that there may be entities which are 
engaged in both financial as well as non
-
financial activities. Therefore, in such a 
situation, it may become difficult to identify the actual regulator. T
he Committee, would, 
therefore recommend unification and harmonisation of regulation of all entities 
engaged in acceptance of deposits from public, whether it is a NBFC or a non
-
NBFC. 
The present mechanism in respect of vanishing companies should also be t
ightened.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
A comprehensive Central Law on unauthorised deposit taking schemes is being 
formulated to deal the menace of such schemes. The recommendation of the 
Committee on uniformity in
 
regulation of all entities engaged in acceptance of deposits 
from public
 
would be kept in view while finalising the Law. A comprehensive Central 
Law on unauthorised deposit taking schemes is being considered to deal with such 
cases. 
 
 
As regards strengthe
ning the existing mechanism to check vanishing companies, the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed that 
a Central Monitoring Committee
 
(CMC)
 

 
 
 
 
 
was constituted 
in the year 1999. The purpose of constitution of CMC is to devise a 
common strategy for taking stringent action against unscrupulous promoters who raise 
money from investors and mis
-
utilise them. 
 
 
A total of 238 companies were initially identified as vani
shing companies, out of which
,
 
160 companies have since been deleted from the list as the criteria for treating a 
company as vanishing is no longer applicable to them. As such, only 78 companies 
remain as vanished. FIRs have been lodged against all 78 comp
anies and their 
Directors to trace their whereabouts and also to take action under Indian Penal Code 
(IPC). Prosecutions have also been filed against these companies and their Promoters/ 
Directors under sections 162 and 220 of the Companies Act, 1956 for n
on
-
filing of 
Statutory Returns and under 
s
ections 62
 
/ 63, 68 and 628 of the Companies Act, 1956 
for mis
-
statement in prospectus/ fraudulently inducing persons to invest money/ false 
statements made in the offer documents, etc.
 
 
Instructions have been issu
ed to the Registrars of Companies for physical verification 
of the registered offices of the vanishing as well as the listed companies which have 
defaulted in filing their Balance Sheets and Annual Returns.
 
 
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also taken
 
further steps to check the incidents of 
vanishing companies:
 
i)
 
In 2006, the Ministry has amended the Companies Act, 1956 by inserting 
Sections 266A to 266G which makes it mandatory for every existing or 
prospective director to obtain a ‘Director Identificat
ion Number’. This process 
requires detailed verification of particulars of a person along with a photograph, 
identity proof, residence proof, etc. so that traceability of the directors is 
ensured. This has been confirmed in Companies Act, 2013.
 
ii)
 
In case of 
incorporation of a new company or change of address of an existing 
company, Ministry has made it mandatory for the professionals verifying its 
details to personally visit the premises and certify that the premises are indeed 
at the disposal of the company.
 
Further, in such cases, proof of registered 
address has also been made mandatory to be furnished at the time of 
incorporation or change of registered office address;
 
iii)
 
Instructions have also been issued to the Registra
rs of Companies to scrutinis
e 
the Balan
ce Sheets and other records of the companies which raise money 
through public i
ssue so as to monitor the utilis
ation of such funds;
 
iv)
 
Details of vanishing companies and their promoters
 
/ directors have been 
published in the Newspapers as well as placed on th
e website of the Ministry 
(www.mca.gov.in) to facilitate the investors to come forward and lodge their 
complaints against the vanishing companies.
 
v)
 
The term ‘Fraud’ has been defined in the new Companies 
Act
, 2013 along with 
its punishment in 
s
ection 447. Th
e term ‘fraud’ and its punishment has also 
been linked to more serious offences in the new Act, viz.
,
 
criminal liability for 
mis
-
statement in prospectus 
(
s
ection 34); fraudulently ind
ucing persons 

 
 
 
 
 
to invest money (s
ection 36); frauds in con
nection with dup
licate shares (s
ection 
46); f
raudulent conduct of business (s
ections 206(4) and 213); fraud during 
investig
ation of affairs of a company (s
ection 229) and for making false 
statements/fili
ngs under the new legislation (s
ection 448).
 
 
The above steps are lik
ely to have a deterrent effect against unscrupulous conduct of 
affairs by companies and their managements under the Company Law itself.
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial 
No
.
 
6
)
 
 
In order to plug the loopholes in regulation and the propensity of operators to 
design "deposit products" that do not strictly fall within the statutory definition of 
deposits or conduct activities not strictly falling under any regulator, the Comm
ittee 
note that the mechanism of State Level Coordination Committee (SLCC) constituted 
under the auspices of RBI, provides a forum for information sharing and coordination 
among different regulators as well as the State government agencies in the absence o
f 
a unified central regulator. The Committee desire that this State
-
level mechanism 
should be institutionalised, strengthened, and duly empowered in view of the 
decentralised and dispersed nature of this money collection phenomenon. The Chief 
Secretary of 
the State should invariably chair the meetings of this body. Central 
agencies like Registrars of Companies, Income Tax, Enforcement Directorate etc. 
should also be made part of this forum. Recent trends of money collection from ponzi 
schemes etc. flowing t
o multi
-
state cooperatives should be taken cognisance of and 
neighbouring States in the Region should also be involved through the mechanism of 
SLCC. The Economic Offences Wing of the State Police should report to the SLCC in 
regard to investigation and pr
osecution of cases relating to unauthorised deposits, 
money collection schemes and other such activities banned under the Prize Chits and 
Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act. The Economic Offences Wing should have 
a specially trained dedicated team at 
the district
-
level, so that acts of illegal money 
mobilisation can be detected at the micro
-
level at the initial stage itself. A pro
-
active 
vigilance system should be integrated into the SLCC for this purpose. The Committee 
would also suggest that in order
 
to complement strict enforcement action, economic 
offences courts may be set up or designated in every State for trial of such economic 
offences including those under SEBI Act, RBI Act, State Depositors Protection Act, 
Prize Chits and Money Circulation Sc
hemes (Banning) Act etc. The special courts 
provided for in the recently enacted Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2014 may be 
extended in its scope for this purpose. Such a designated court will not only lead to 
speedy and timely trial but also eliminate u
nnecessary / overlapping litigation besides 
containing the volume and size of fraud by such operators. This will also prompt 
compliance to orders passed by regulators such as SEBI, who have been facing 
serious difficulties in this regard. The Committee fee
l that all the concerned authorities 
should have taken note of observations passed in the Madhya Pradesh High Court 

 
 
 
 
 
orders of July 2012 on the ponz
i
 
companies. CBI findings quoted by the Court, 
required more attention. The 12 major ponz
i
 
companies indulging in thousands of 
crores of scam, as mentioned in the Madhya Pradesh High Court order, should have 
been dealt with strongly by the concerned Regulators
 
/
 
agencies. The Committee 
recommend that the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry
 
of Finance should 
monitor the follow
-
up action on these ponzy companies by Regulators
 
/
 
investigating 
agencies on regular basis and make necessary administrative arrangements for 
ensuring better enforcement. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The 
existing structu
re of State Level Coordination Committees (SLCCs)
 
may 
also 
be 
used for the purposes of information sharing and for receiving complaints from the 
aggrieved depositors and sending these to the appropriate regulatory authority. 
Sub
-
Committees have been formed
 
in many states which are generally represented by 
operating level officials and meet at more frequent intervals to share the information 
among the regulators. 
RBI has informed that it is in the final stages of preparing a web
-
enabled portal to be used by 
all SLCCs, which will contain information on registered 
entities of the SLCC participants, activities of various SLCCs, besides other 
information. The participants would be able to share information amongst each other 
on real time basis, as also have facil
ity to start and contribute to discussion threads 
(blogs). A module for public in the SLCC portal to post information on suspected 
unauthorised financial activities, as also for registering their complaints against any 
regulated / unregulated entity direct
ly or assisted through the Administrator, is 
envisaged. This should help in taking action against such entities in an expeditious 
manner through information sharing among the Regulators and Enforcement agencies. 
RBI has also indicated that the website of S
LCC is expected to go live 
shortly
. 
RBI has 
set up market intelligence units / cells across all regional offices, which gather inputs 
from various sources and send the information on unauthorised financial activity to the 
supervisory department in RBI. The
 
contents of the report are also shared with the 
relevant agencies at SLCC.  
 
 
In all cases of illicit deposit taking, which are brought to the notice of the 
Department of 
Economic Affairs (
DEA
)
, the Department takes prompt action by referring these cases 
to the concerned law enforcement and regulatory agencies of both the Central and 
State Governments. 
 
 
In cases that do not fall within the regulatory purview of SEBI, the matter is pursued 
with the relevant Central Agency
 
/ Regulator as well as the State G
overnment to take 
action under the relevant Acts and the IPC and under the respective State Protection 
of Interest of Depositors (in Financial Establishment) Acts
,
 
respectively.
 
 
With regard to cases of unregistered Collective Investment Schemes (CIS) that
 
fall 
within the purview of SEBI, the DEA has written to SEBI to review and streamline the 
procedure for handling these cases so 
that the proceedings against the 

 
 
 
 
 
perpetrators can be completed in a time bound manner. SEBI has also been requested 
to initiate
 
penal action 
-
 
levying penalty and filing prosecution in all cases of 
unregistered CIS.
 
 
It is seen from examination of complaints
 
/ references against more than 1200 entities 
that these ac
tivities are essentially mobilis
ation 
of 
deposit under the garb of
 
various 
schemes or Money Circulation Schemes
 
/ M
ulti 
L
evel 
M
arketing
.
 
Such unauthorised 
money mobilis
ation can be effectively handled through the local enforcement agencies. 
SEBI has referred complaint against these entities bilaterally to the concerned 
r
egulator and also placed before various SLCCs.  
 
 
With respect to Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh High Court Order (dated July 13th, 2012 
regarding Writ Petition No 3332 of 2010), 
it
 
may 
be 
mention
ed
 
that the Hon'ble Court in 
the said order has held that 33 named c
ompanies entered into contract with the 
investors and prima facie, committed offences under Section 3(1), 3(2) & 3(4) of 
Madhya Pradesh Nikshepakon Ke Hiton Ka Sanrakshan Adhiniyam 2000, Section 58B 
(5 and 5A) and Section 58 C of RBI Act, 1934, Sections 4,
 
5 and 6 of Prize Chits and 
Money Circulation Scheme (Banning) Act, 1978 and Section 420 of Indian Penal Code. 
SEBI has already taken appropriate action in the matter, and passed orders in 11 
cases which were found to be, prima facie, unregistered CIS /
 
De
emed public issue 
and referred 22 cases to other authorities concerned. 
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
7
) 
 
 
 
One of the major factors for unauthorised money mobili
sation could be 
attributable to the high rates of commission paid to the agents, who in turn go all out to 
lure gullible public, particularly in non
-
metro areas. Thus, with a view to discouraging 
this trend and dis
-
incentivising the same, the Committee wou
ld recommend that 
payment of commission to agents may be legally capped at a nominal rate of say 2%. 
With regard to presentation of audited accounts by various entities, it should also be 
made mandatory to separately reflect deposits / borrowings, if any, 
whenever it 
exceeds a certain multiplier of say, 50 times the paid
-
up share capital. The Committee 
would also recommend Deposit
-
linked Insurance for all the collective investment 
schemes. There should also be a provision for a minimum capital reserve to be
 
maintained with the regulator as a safety valve against default. Banks should be 
instructed to inform related departments like Income Tax or concerned regulators like 
SEBI
 
/
 
RBI whenever cash deposits by such persons
 
/
 
entities exceed a certain limit. 
Pre
-
emptive provisions such as these would doubtlessly help curb the growing menace 
of illegal money circulation / collection schemes and also enable adequate protection 
to depositors
 
/
 
investors. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As far as illegal unregulated deposit taking activities are concerned, the activities / 
schemes are themselves illegal and therefore there is no case for capping payment of 
commission to the agents. 
 
 
As for the regulated deposit taking schemes, the same a
re regulated under different 
statutes and the rules
 
/ regulations framed therein. The concerned regulators 
would
 
examine these suggestions
.
 
 
RBI has prescribed guidelines for NBFCs wherein deposits for an NBFC have been 
limited to 1.5 times of its net owne
d funds and these are required to submit periodical 
returns regarding the same. Further, deposit taking / holding NBFCs are required to 
maintain not less than 15% of the aggregate amount of the liabilities to the depositors 
invested in Government securitie
s / Government guaranteed bonds.    
 
 
SEBI (C
IS) Regulations, 1999 provides
 
detailed norms with respect to investment and 
expense ceiling. As units of securities are marketable instrument, no assured return is 
permitted. As per the SEBI CIS regulation
,
 
suc
h
 
assured return is prohibited. 
Any 
investment in securities market is subject to market risk. 
 
 
It is
 
agree
d
 
that b
anks should be instructed to inform related departments like Income 
Tax or 
the agencies concerned, 
whenever cash deposits by such persons
 
/
 
entities 
exceed a certain limit.
 
In fact, banks do report the cash transaction reports and 
suspicious transactions reports to Financial Intelligence Unit, India.
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
8
) 
 
 
 
The Committee note that there are two central legislations, namely Prize Chits 
and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978 and the Chit Funds Act, 1982, 
both of which fall under the legislative jurisdiction of the M
inistry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). Both these Acts are, however, administered by the 
State Governments. While 'chit funds' are permissible activity and legitimate business 
under the Chit Funds Act, 1982, it has been conceded by Secretar
y, Department of 
Financial Services in his deposition before the Committee that in "most of the recent 
instances, it was a flagrant violation of the Prize Chits and Money Circulation (Banning) 
Act, 1978". The Committee note that most of the Schemes, where 
complaints are 
received thus fall in this category, which also includes the multi
-
level marketing 
schemes. In case of 'ponzi' schemes, the act of collection of money also constitutes an 
independent offence of 'money circulation' under the afore
-
mentioned B
anning Act. 
The Committee, therefore, cannot but conclude that the Ministry of Finance 

 
 
 
 
 
(Department of Financial Services) have only remained a reticent by
-
stander, as they 
singularly failed to address the issue of non
-
enforcement and rampant violation of t
he 
Prize Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, which falls squarely under 
their legislative competence, even though the enforcement remains the primary 
responsibility of the State Government. Neither did the Department initiate any 
legislative
 
measures to plug the loopholes, nor were administrative steps taken as the 
nodal Department, to pursue prompt enforcement action by State governments. As this 
subject falls in the Concurrent List of the Constitution, it was the bounden duty of the 
Departm
ent of Financial Services to review and tighten up the Act in the light of 
ground
-
level experiences and initiate necessary legislative changes, in consultation 
with State governments, particularly when scam after scam were erupting depriving 
millions of th
eir life time savings. The Committee are constrained to seek an 
explanation from the Department on their inaction in this crucial matter and future 
proposals if any, to contain such menace.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
As regards proposing appropriate legislative measures, a comprehensive Central Law 
on   unauthorised deposit taking schemes is being formulated to deal with the menace 
of such schemes. 
On the need for amending the PCMCSB Act, 
this 
would depend 
whether
 
a separate law on Direct Selling,
 
is required or not
 
which is being examined by 
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA). On the need for amendments to the Chit 
Funds Act, 1982, the Key Advisory Group (KAG) on Chit Funds has suggested some 
legislative and non
-
legislative measures, which are being 
examined by the 
Government and suitable legislative and administrative action would be taken as soon 
as possible
.
 
 
Further, 
DFS has 
been constantly pursuing 
all States
 
/
 
UTs for 
enactment of State PID 
Acts, which have
 
not so far enacted such laws, to strengthen the regulatory and 
enforcement regime throughout the country
. Even RBI has impressed upon the States
 
/
 
UTs in its annual conference with the State Government officials to enact a PID Law 
in States
 
/
 
UTs.
 
 
Minist
ry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
11
) 
 
 
 
The Committee note that there are several cases relating to unauthorised 
financial schemes pending at different levels for investigation / prosecution / 
adjudication / compliance. They desire that a nodal Department of the Central 
Government, say Departmen
t of Economic Affairs under Ministry of Finance should 
compile and consolidate updates on these cases and facilitate coordinated action with 
concerned agencies like SEBI, RBI, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of 
Financial Services, Department of 
A
griculture & Cooperation and Ministry of 

 
 
 
 
 
Consumer Affairs through digital backbone. The Central investigative agencies like the 
CBI, Enforcement Directorate, Investigation Wing of Income Tax as also the 
enforcement agencies from the concerned States may al
so be involved in this 
exercise. The Committee desire that follow
-
up action initiated on this count along with 
a status note be submitted within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
 
The Committee also express their concern about SEBI
's action
 
or lack of it on ponzi
 
companies since 2010. The Committee note that in the last one year, SEBI has 
initiated action against 200 pon
zi 
/
 
fraudulent
 
/
 
bogus
 
/
 
deemed public issues u/s 67 of 
the Companies Act, 1956. The Committee also observe that after rec
eiving complaints, 
SEBI initiated enquiry, but the interim order took 2 to 3 years, whereas the final order 
took more than 5 years and during this interim period the ponz
i
 
company's promoters 
one way or the other collected thousands of crores of additional
 
amounts from the 
small investors. The Committee would now expect SEBI to become more transparent, 
vigilant and accountable in their regulatory action, showing the same level of alacrity as 
in the case of M/s Sahara. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
T
he Central Economic Intelligence Bureau and its Regional Economic Intelligence 
Councils, along with the State 
L
evel 
C
oordination 
C
ommittees, would
 
develop a 
database of violations in deposit collection schemes
 
to 
effectively 
address the problem 
of unauthor
ised deposit taking.
 
Further, a comprehensive Central Law on unauthorised 
deposit taking schemes is being formulated to deal with the menace of such schemes. 
 
 
With regard to cases of unregistered Collective Investment Schemes (CIS) that fall 
within the pu
rview of SEBI, the 
Department of Economic Affairs 
has 
asked 
SEBI to 
review and streamline the procedure for handling these cases so that the proceedings 
against the perpetrators can be completed in a time bound manner. SEBI has also 
been requested to initi
ate penal action 
-
 
levying penalty and filing prosecution in all 
cases of unregistered CIS.
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
12
) 
 
 
 
As Ponzi
 
/
 
pyramid schemes become more and more complex and 
sophisticated, taking the appearance of legitimate businesses, it is all the more 
important to be able to easily distinguish between fraudulent schemes and legitimate 
businesses such as Direct Selling, Colle
ctive Investment Schemes, etc. 
 
 
In their deposition before the Committee, the Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs 
(IICA), Ministry of Corporate Affairs, presented a "Whitepaper on Regulation of Direct 

 
 
 
 
 
Selling in India". They also presented an exposure 
draft of a legislation that 
distinguishes between Ponzi
 
/
 
pyramid schemes and legitimate direct selling 
companies and proposed a mandatory regulatory and registration process for the 
direct selling industry in India. Given that there is considerable ambigu
ity in identifying 
Ponzi
 
/
 
pyramid schemes and distinguishing them from legitimate Direct Selling 
businesses, there is merit in considering the findings of the "Whitepaper on Regulation 
of Direct Selling in India" by IICA. Most importantly, the exposure dr
aft in the IICA 
Whitepaper proposes a statutory provision under Section 5 of the draft that defines a 
Pyramid Scheme. This definition seems to provide, as evidenced from their legal 
research on Indian and international jurisprudence, an objective 'smell te
st' for law 
enforcement agencies to apply at the time of investigation. It is hoped that this will lead 
to more timely detection and efficacious investigations. The Committee would 
recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and M
inistry of 
Consumer Affairs consider the IICA Whitepaper and more specifically, the exposure 
draft and establish a regulatory framework and compulsory registration process for all 
Direct Selling businesses in order to provide an oversight mechanism as to w
hether 
they are legitimate direct selling businesses or Ponzi
 
/
 
pyramid schemes. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The white paper, inter
-
alia, has suggested a regulatory framework and compulsory 
registration process for all Direct Selling businesses in order to 
provide an oversight 
mechanism 
to determine as
 
to whether the
se
 
are legitimate direct selling businesses or 
Ponzi
  
/
 
Pyramid Schemes.
 
The Department of Consumer Affairs has informed that the m
atter is being examined 
by Inter
-
Ministerial Committee (IMC) set
 
up under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Consumer Affairs) for finali
s
ing guidelines on Direct Selling
 
and also considering 
whether a separate Law on Direct Selling is required
. The term of the Committee has 
been extended up to 18/05/2016.
 
 
Ministry of 
Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
13
) 
 
 
 
In the view of the Committee, the way forward with regard to regulation of 
various money collection / investment schemes operating in differe
nt form and names 
across the country would be to have a model central law that would be comprehensive 
and all
-
encompassing including in its ambit collective investment schemes, chit funds, 
Direct Selling Schemes and such other activities which are presentl
y permissible but 
are defined and regulated in a dispersed manner. This law should also contain a 
separate Section / Chapter on non
-
permissible schemes as well, clearly spelling out 
the nature of such prohibited activities [including the provisions of the 
Prize Chits and 
Money Circulation (Banning) Act] with its penal consequences. Clear
-
cut definitions are 
required to be provided so that prohibited schemes do not operate by camouflaging as 
legitimate schemes like 'direct selling. The 
chief reason for failu
re of the Prize Chits 

 
 
 
 
 
and Money Circulation (Banning) Act has been found to be its broad and open
-
ended 
definition of 'money circulation', which has left scope for large
-
scale circumventing by 
unscrupulous operators. The Committee would therefore recommend
 
that the 
proposed model law should define the nature and scope of various schemes in 
unambiguous and specific terms. Such a law should also have provisions such as 
attachment of property, recovery and distribution of proceeds in a stipulated time
-
frame, d
eterrent penalties with imprisonment, time bound repayments/compensation 
and provision for class action suits/litigation. These offences should be treated as 
"offences committed against the State" analogous to the Indian Penal Code and 
accordingly made non
-
bailable and cognisable. The proposed law should also invoke 
the concurrent administrative jurisdiction of both the Central and State Governments in 
the implementation of the law in the light of recent enforcement experiences with the 
money circulation
 
/
 
collection schemes. The present arrangement of sharing of 
responsibility of regulation of these schemes between central agencies such as SEBI
 
/
 
RBI and the State Governments may continue in the interim, till a considered decision 
is taken on the constituti
on of a separate/principal regulator to be provided for in the 
proposed law. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
A comprehensive Central Law on unauthorised deposit taking schemes is being 
formulated to deal with the menace of such schemes. The recommendations of the 
Committee to provide for clear identification of unauthorised deposit collection scheme, 
attachment, 
recovery and distribution of proceeds in a stipulated time
-
frame, deterrent 
penalties with imprisonment
 
for violations, and making the offence cognizable and non
-
bailable would be kept in view while finalising the law.   
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of 
Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
-
 
II
I
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
-
 
IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN 
RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
5
)
 
 
The Committee were informed by RBI that as a matter of public policy, Reserve 
Bank has decided that only banks should be allowed to accept 
public deposits and as 
such, since 1997, they have not issued any certificate of registration for NBFCs 
authorising acceptance of public deposits. However, it is common knowledge that 
several scams have come to light in the NBFC sector from time to time. L
akhs of low 
income households have been lured into these 'deposit schemes' promising unviable 
and exorbitant rates of interest. Several of these households have lost their entire life's 
savings, as these companies /
 
firms went bust. The Committee note in t
his regard that 
there are two categories involved here
-
unauthorised acceptance of deposits by 
incorporated entities and, the other by unincorporated bodies. As far as the first 
category is concerned, the RBI Act vests the responsibility for pursuing such v
iolations 
exclusively with the Reserve Bank. The obligation to pursue the second category of 
acceptance of deposits, that is
,
 
by the unincorporated entities (which is absolutely 
prohibited by the RBI Act) rests concurrently with the Reserve Bank and the St
ate 
Governments concerned. The Committee find that although most of the scams relate 
to such entities, the RBI has been routinely and rather helplessly requesting the State 
Governments to pursue such cases and have also suggested to the States to enact the
 
Protection of Interest of Depositors Act, which would enable them to attach the money 
and properties of the defaulter / promoter / partners/ directors etc. As the larger public 
is at the receiving end of such legal complexities and is obviously bewildered
 
by the 
utter lack of control or regulation, the Committee desire that the Central Government 
should take up the matter with both RBI and the States to incorporate adequate legal 
provisions so that the legal prohibition on deposit
-
taking by unincorporated 
bodies is 
strictly enforced. All State Governments 
are 
require
d
 
to be specially sensitised for this 
purpose and asked to enact the Protection of Interest of Depositors Act without delay. 
In this regard, the Committee would recommend that a Central Legislat
ion may be 
enacted incorporating the best features of the State Acts wherever enacted. The 
respective State Acts may then be accordingly amended in line with the Central law. 
 
 
 
 
In this context, the Committee would like to point out with concern that alth
ough 
several States have enacted State level Protection of Interest of Depositors Act, there 
appears to be hardly any case
 
/
 
instance where the purpose of returning the small 
investors/depositors money could be achieved. This Act mandated the State level 
investigating agencies including EoW
 
/
 
District Magistrates
 
/
 
District Collectors to take 
preventive action and authori
s
ed the State agencies to investigate the process where 
abnormal returns are promised and extraordinary commission of the agents are give
n. 
It is not evident as to whether any State
 
/
 
investigating agency has taken any 

 
 
 
 
 
preventive action as provided in the Act. The Committee, therefore, are of the view that 
in the light of such a dismal situation, there is an urgent need to galvanise and 
str
engthen the enforcement and vigilance mechanism at the State level so that 
scamsters are severely punished and small investors are duly protected. An effective 
whistle blower mechanism should also be developed for this purpose.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
 
T
he Protection of Interest of Depositors (in Financial establishments) Act
 
(PID 
Act)
, wherever enacted, 
normally 
has provisions enabling the State Authorities to 
attach the moneys and properties of not only the defaulting financial establishment, its 
direct
ors, officials, etc., but also the moneys and properties believed to have been 
acquired by the financial establishment, either in its own name or in the name of any 
other person from out of the deposit collected by the company. Offences under the Act 
are c
ognizable. Designated courts are set up to try offences under the Act and to pass 
orders confirming attachments made by the State Government, to distribute the sale 
proceeds, etc. Most of the State Acts have also provisions by which orders of the State 
Aut
horities / Designated Court of one State can be enforced by the authorities or 
Designated Court of other State.
 
 
It is pertinent to note that the first State PID Act was enacted in 1997 by Tamil Nadu. In 
18 years, that is, upto 2015, 24 States and 2 UTs ha
ve enacted PID Acts and 2 States 
have finalised their PID Acts and are awaiting Presidential Assent. 3 States and 5 UTs 
are yet to finalise their PID Acts and send for Presidential assent. Government and RBI 
have written to the States/ UTs, which have not 
enacted such law, to enact one, to 
avoid any regulatory vacuum in the area of control of deposit taking activity.
 
 
Further, it is a well established fact that t
he State Police Authorities are the first to take 
cognizance of a fraudulent, unauthorised money
 
collection scheme, when the investors 
start complaining of non
-
receipt of the promised returns and when FIR is lodged. It is 
essential to build capacities of district level officers, as well as 
police officials
 
regarding 
the characteristics and modus oper
andi of ponzi schemes so that suspicious activities 
are
 
recognised early.
 
As mentioned in reply to recommendation No. 2 and 3, the 
existing mechanisms of intelligence gathering and information sharing of the Central 
Economic Intelligence Bureau, its Region
al Economic Intelligence Councils and 
State 
L
evel 
C
oordination 
C
ommittees
 
is proposed to be strengthened by suitably amending, 
strengthening and technologically leveraging these to facilitate real
-
time information 
gathering and dissemination amongst all stakeholders. The State Government 
enforcement agencies are invariably part
 
of the existing mechanisms. 
 
 
Further, a comprehensive Central Law on unauthorised deposit taking schemes is 
being formulated to deal with the menace of such schemes.
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
 
(Please see Para No. 
1
7 of Chapter I)
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
9
) 
 
 
 
'Chits' are defined under the Chit Funds Act, 1982. Chit Funds are indigenous 
financial institutions in the country, especially in the southern parts, that particularly 
cater to the financial needs of low
-
income households, bringing together borrowers and 
savers. In a chit fund scheme, a group of individuals come together for a pre
-
determined time period and contribute to a common pool at regular intervals. They 
operate under the regulatory ambit of the Registrar, Chit Funds of the State of their 
operation.
 
Chit Funds are, however, prohibited from accepting deposits by RBI 
regulations. It has been submitted to the Committee that there are about 25,000 chit 
fund operators involving more than 50 lakh subscribers. In view of the operational 
difficulties being f
aced by this sector, the Department of Financial Services has 
constituted a Key Advisory Group on Chit Funds / Nidhi Companies to review the 
existing legal / regulatory framework for orderly growth of the registered chit funds 
sector. The report of this Ke
y Advisory Group is stated to have been submitted to the 
Department way back in February, 2013. The Committee are surprised that the 
Department of Financial Services has still not taken any follow
-
up action on this report, 
although more than two years have
 
elapsed. They, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Department to finalise their legislative and administrative proposals on the 
strengthening and streamlining of the registered Chit Funds Sector within a period of 
three months from the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
A 
Key Advisory Group 
was constituted 
on Chit Funds (KAG) 
in September, 2011 to 
review the existing legal, regulatory and institutional framework for Chit Funds and its 
efficacy and suggest legal and regulatory initiatives
 
required for orderly growth of the 
sector. KAG had submitted its report in September, 2013 and 
ha
d
 
given a number of 
recommendations relating to 
improvements in the 
institutional and legal 
structure
 
to 
further develop the 
Chit Funds industry
. 
 
 
The Report of KAG was circulated among RBI, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority (IRDA), Indian Banks’ Association, All India Association of Chit 
Funds (AIACF) and the States / UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, Maharashtra, Pu
ducherry and Delhi in October, 2013. RBI, IRDAI, IBA and 
AIACF shared their comments on the KAG report with DFS, however, no comments 
were received from the States / UTs. The recommendations of KAG and suggestions 
of stakeholders were being processed in Ma
rch, 2014 to propose amendments to the 
Chit Funds Act, 1982, however, the decision was deferred in view of the then pending 
General Elections. 
DFS 
is examining 
the recommendations of the KAG on Chit Funds 
for taking a final view on 
administrative 
and legis
lative measures including 

 
 
 
 
 
amendments to the Chit Funds Act, 1982
 
and would inform the Committee shortly 
about the decision taken to implement specific recommendations of KAG, both non
-
legislative and legislative
.
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Se
rvices) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 
20
 
of Chapter I)
 
 
Recommendations 
(
Serial No
.
 
10
) 
 
 
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that huge amount of money 
has been transferred out of 
ponzi schemes to Multi
-
State Cooperatives, which has a 
weak regulatory regime at present. It seems that the present Regulator for Multi State 
Cooperatives i.e.
,
 
Central Registrar falls under Ministry of Agriculture, which do not 
have any financial regulato
ry infrastructure. As number and amount of Multi State 
Cooperatives have increased hundred times since 2010, the Committee would suggest 
that the enforcement aspect with regard to financial schemes operating through Multi 
State Cooperatives be shifted to D
epartment of Economic Affairs under Ministry of 
Finance, since the Multi
-
State Cooperatives have now become some kind of a shelter 
for illegitimate funds, which seemed to have surprisingly escaped the notice of the 
concerned Authorities, particularly the C
entral Registrar under Ministry of Agriculture. 
The Committee would also recommend that the Government should institute special 
audit with regard to these Multi
-
State Cooperatives so that this scam can be unearthed 
and corrective action taken immediately. 
In this regard, the Committee would also 
suggest that the regulatory regime in respect of Multi
-
State Cooperatives should be 
streamlined and tightened so that they do not become an instrument of diverting and 
shielding illegal funds from ponzi companies et
c.
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
The subject of multi
-
state cooperative societies is with the 
Department 
of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare. It has 
been informed by the 
Department 
of Agriculture, Coope
ration and Farmers’ Welfare
 
that s
o far, no such irregularity has been proved that huge amount of
 
money has been 
transferred out of ponzi schemes to 
M
ulti
-
State Cooperative
 
Societies (MSCSs)
.
 
Ho
w
ever, certain complaints have been received i
n
 
th
e 
Department
 
of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare 
alleging that the follo
w
ing companies against whom strictures
 
have been passed by 
SEBI for financial bungling in Collective Investment
 
Schemes (CIS), have trans
ferred 
their funds by forming the 
M
ulti
-
State
 
Cooperative Societies and vice
-
versa and the 
same has been referred to the
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs vide 
the Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare 
letter dated 
0
4.
11
.2015 for
 
investiga
tion 
through Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
(SFIO):
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Sl No.
 
Name of the entity
 
Registered Office / State
 
1
 
Samruddha Jeevan Foods Ltd.
 
Samruddha Jeevan Multi
-
 
State  Multipurpose 
Cooperative Society Ltd., Pune, Maharashtra
 
2
 
Saiprasad Foods Ltd. 
 
Sai
 
Prasad Properties Ltd.
 
Sai Prasad Corporation Ltd.
 
Sai Prasad Global Multi
-
Purpose Cooperative 
Society Ltd., Pune, Maharashtra
 
3
 
Utkarsh Plotters & Multi Agro 
Solutions India Ltd.
 
Utkarsh Agro Multi State
 
 
Cooperative
 
 
Ltd., 
Jalgaon, Maharashtra.
 
4
 
PGF 
Ltd.
 
Lotus Agricultural and Marketing Cooperative 
Society Ltd., Pitampura, Delhi.
 
5
 
PACL Ltd.
 
Kisan Agrotech Cooperative Society Ltd; 
Pitampura, Delhi.
 
 
The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare
 
depends on 
Registrars, 
Cooperative S
oci
e
ties
 
of State Governments to do inspection, inquiry etc. 
into the affairs of MSCSs
 
in case of complaints. 
The Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare
 
is also in the process of establishing
 
a panel of 
chartered Accountants
 
/
 
Auditors etc. to 
l
ook into the affairs of
 
MSCSs in case of 
complaints etc. Further, it is mentioned that as on
 
31.12.2010
, 545 MSCSs had been 
registered under the MSCS Act, 2
002
 
a
n
d
 
as on 3
1.12.2015
, a total number of 1250 
societies have been registered.
 
F
rom this, it is observed that registration has not 
increased 100 times as
 
stated in the report since 2
010
. To conduct special audit on the 
affairs of the
 
Multi
-
State Cooperative Credit Societies as stated in the Report, it 
requires not
 
less than 51
%
 
of the
 
paid up share capita
l
 
holding of the Governmen
t
 
of
 
India
 
/
 
State Government in the total paid up share capital of the society as
 
per the 
provision of section 77 of the MSCS Act,
 
2002 and therefore, conduct
 
of special audit 
of these societies is not feasib
le as per the provisions of the
 
MSCS Act, 2
00
2.
 
 
 
The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare
 
has stated that it 
is 
in agreement with the suggestion of the Committee
 
that the regulatory regime in 
respect of MSCSs should be streamlined t
o
 
protect the interest of the small investors
 
/
 
members of these societies.
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance (Dept. of Financial Services) O.M. No 09/02/2014
-
BO.II
 
dated 
29.02.2016.
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
(Please see Para No. 
23
 
of Chapter I)
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 
-
 
V
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN
 
RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY,
 
04 August
, 201
6
 
 
 
 
                             
             
         
Chairperson,
 
13 
Sravana, 1938 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
        
Standing Committee on Finance
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the 
Twentieth
 
sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 
04
 
August
, 2016 from 1
5
00 hrs. to 
1700
 
hrs. 
in Committee Room '
B
', Parliament Hous
e Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
2
.
 
Shri Venkatesh Babu T.G.
 
 
 
3
.
 
Dr. Gopalakrishnan C.
 
 
4
.
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
 
5.
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar
 
 
6.
 
Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
 
 
7.
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
 
8.
 
Shri Prem 
Das Rai
 
 
9.
 
Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
 
 
10.
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
 
1
1
.
 
Shri Gajendra Singh Sekhawat 
 
 
1
2
.
 
Shri Gopal Shetty
 
 
13.
 
Shri Anil Shirole
 
 
1
4.
 
Dr. Kiritb
hai Solanki
 
 
15
.
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 
 
16.
 
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
1
7
.
 
Shri Naresh
 
Gujral
 
 
1
8
.
 
Dr. Mahendra Prasad
 
 
19.
 
Shri C.M. Ramesh
 
 
 
20
.
 
Shri Ajay Sancheti
 
 
21.
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh
 
 
22.
 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri P.C. Tripathy
 
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri Ramkumar Sur
yanarayanan
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
 
2.
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX
 
 
XX. 
 
 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept
 
 
 
3.
 
Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft 
reports for consideration 
and adoption:
 
(i)
 
Draft Report on the subject "State of Rural / Agricultural Banking and 
Crop Insurance".
 
(ii)
 
Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) 
on "
Efficacy of Regulation of Collective Investment Schemes (CIS), Chit 
Funds, etc."
 
(iii)
 
Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty
-
Second Report on Demands For Grants (2016
-
17) 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with  
modification and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present these 
Reports to Parliament.
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX
 
(Vide Para 4 of the 
Introduction)
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWENTY
-
FIRST
 
REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON THE SUBJECT "EFFICACY 
OF REGULATION OF COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT SCHEMES, CHIT 
FUNDS ETC."
 
 
 
 
Total
 
% of 
total
 
(i)
 
Total number of Recommendations
 
 
13
 
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos. 
1,2,3,4,6,7,8,11,12 and 13)
 
10
 
76.92%
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to
 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies
 
 
Nil
 
0.00
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 
5, 9 and 
10
)
 
 
03
 
23.07%
 
(v)
 
Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited
 
NIL
 
0.00
 
 
 
 
 
 