1
 
 
71
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
 
(2018
-
19)
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
 
& 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
 
 
 
CENTRAL ASSISTANCE 
 
FOR
 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RELIEF
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
SEVENTY
-
FIRST REPORT
 
 
                                        
 
 
                                              
 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 


2
 
 
 
S
EVENTY
-
FIRST
 
REPORT
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
 
(201
8
-
201
9
)
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
 
& 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
 
 
 
 
CENTRAL ASSISTANCE 
 
FOR 
 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND RELIEF
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
_________________
 
Laid 
in Rajya Sabha on _______________
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page
 
Composition of the Committee (2018
-
19)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
Introduction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
PART
-
I
 
 
1.
 
Disaster Management in India
 
A.
 
Introduction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 
B.
 
Hazard profile of India and 
Institutional Mechanism
 
 
 
 
2
 
C.
 
Preparedness and Disaster Risk Reduction
 
 
 
 
 
4
 
D.
 
Role and preparedness of National Disaster Management Authority.
 
 
6
 
E.
 
Role and preparedness of Geological Survey of India
 
 
 
 
9
 
F.
 
Response of NDMA in States of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu and 
 
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
 
 
G.
 
Response of GSI in Karnataka and Kerala
 
 
 
 
 
15
 
2.
 
Overview of Natural disasters / Calamities in States of Kerala, Karnataka, 
 
 
Tamil Nadu & Andhra Pradesh
 
 
 
 
 
 
A.
 
Background
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
 
B.
 
Rainfall and Flood situation in Keral
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
 
C.
 
Rainfall and Flood situation in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
 
 
 
22
 
D.
 
Cyclonic storm 'Thitli', 'Gaja' and 'Pithai'.
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
 
E.
 
Suggestions / Assessment on Central Assistance for Disaster 
 
 
 
25
 
 
Management by Government of Odisha and Tamil Nadu.
 
 
    
F.
 
Assessment of Damages / Losses to the States of Kerala, Karnataka,
 
 
 
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha
 
 
 
 
 
32
 
 
3.
 
Overview of Central Assistance and relief for Disaster Management and 
 
 
Natural Calamities
 
A.
 
Financial Mechanism and role of Central & State
 
Governments
 
 
 
41
 
B.
 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
 
 
 
 
 
43
 
C.
 
State Disaster Response Force (SDRF)
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
 
D.
 
Response of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
 
 
 
 
46 
 
E.
 
Assistance provided by National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) & 
 
 
State Disaster Respo
nse Force (NDRF)
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
 
F.
 
Financial Assistance to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
 
 
 
 
Kerala and Tamil Nadu
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61
 
4.
 
Role of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in disaster 
 
 
forecasting / management.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64
 
 
PART
-
II
 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS
/
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
               
72
-
77
 
 
APPENDIX
 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 18th December, 19th December, 2018, 
 
 
78
 
and 3rd January, 30th January and 11th February, 2019
 

4
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
–
 
2018
-
19
 
 
Dr. M
. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
2.
 
Shri T.G. Venkatesh Babu
 
 
3.
 
Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
 
 
4. 
 
Shri Bandaru Dattatreya
 
 
5
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
 
6
 
Shri Harish Dwivedi
 
 
7
 
Shri Gopalakrishnan Chinnaraj
 
 
8
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
 
9
 
Shri Chandrakant Bhaurao Khaire
 
 
10
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 
 
11
 
Shri Prem Das Rai
 
 
12
 
Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
 
 
13
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
 
14
 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
 
 
15
 
Shri Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
 
 
16
 
Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty
 
 
17
 
Shri 
Prathap Simha
 
 
18
 
Dr. (Prof.) Kiritbhai  Premjibhai Solanki
 
 
19.
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 
 
20.
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi
 
 
21.
 
Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
 
 
23.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
 
 
24.
 
Dr. Narendra Jadhav
 
 
25.
 
Shri
 
A. Navaneethakrishnan
 
 
26.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
 
27.
 
Dr. Mahendra Prasad
 
 
28.
 
Shri C.M. Ramesh
 
 
29.
 
Shri T.K. Rangarajan
 
 
30.
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh
 
 
31.
 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
S
hri N.C. Gupta
 
 
           
 
 
-
         
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.     
 
 
Shri 
Ramkumar Suryanarayanan    
 
 
-
         
Director
 
 
3
.       Shri 
Tenzin Gyaltsen
                         
 
 
-
         
 
Under Secretary
 
 

5
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance, having 
been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Seventy
-
first Report on the subject 
'Central Assistance for Disaster Management and Relief' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs & Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
 
2.
 
The Committee heard the v
iews of the representatives of the State government 
of Kerala on 18 December 2018 and of the State governments of Karnataka and Tamil 
Nadu on 19 December 2018.  At their sitting held on 03 January, 2019, the Committee 
also heard the views of the State gove
rnment of Andhra Pradesh. 
 
3.
 
The Committee at their sitting held on 30 January 2019 heard the views of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services and 
Department of Expenditure), Ministry of Defence, Indian Space Re
search Organisation 
(ISRO), Geological Survey of India ( GSI), Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), 
Central Water Commission (CWC), Agriculture Insurance Company Ltd. (AICL), 
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd (OICL), New India Assurance Company Ltd (NIACL)
, 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), National Disaster Reserve Force 
(NDRF) and State government of Odisha.
 
4.
 
The Committee at their sitting held on 11 February, 2019
 
considered and 
adopted the draft report and authorised the Chairperson to 
finalise the same and 
present it to the Parliament.
 
5.
 
The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials, representatives and 
experts of the aforementioned Ministries, State Governments of Kerala, Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, IS
RO, GSI, IMD, CWC, AICL, OICL, NIACL, 
NDMA and NDRF for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the requisite 
material and information which were desired in connection with the examination of the 
subject.
 
6.
 
For facility of reference, the observation
s/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
        
DR. M. VEERAPPA MOILY
 
11  February, 2019
 
 
 
 
 
                               
Chairperson
 
22  Magha, 1941 (Saka)                          
                    
Standing Committee on Finance
 
 

6
 
 
PART 
-
 
I
 
Chapter 
-
 
I
 
Disaster Management in India
 
A
 
Introduction
 
 
The Unit
ed Nations defines disaster as '
the occurrence of sudden or major 
misfortune which disrupts the basic fabric and normal functioning
 
of the society or 
community
'
. Section 2 (d) of DM act 2005 defines disaster as a catastrophe, mishap, 
calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising from natural or manmade causes, or 
by accident or negligence which results in substantial loss of life 
or human suffering or 
damage to, and destruction of, property, or damage to, or degradation of, environment, 
and is of such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond the coping capacity of the 
community of the affected area
. 
India’s geo
-
climatic conditions as 
well as its high 
degree of socio
-
economic vulnerability, makes it one of the most disaster prone 
countries in the world. Most disasters result from the action or inaction of people and 
their social and economic structures. This happens by people living in 
ways that 
degrade their environment, developing and over populating urban centres.  
Communities and population settled in areas susceptible to the impact of a raging river 
of the violent tremors of the earth are placed in situations of high vulnerability b
ecause 
of their socio
-
economic conditions.
 
Disasters
-
natural or human
-
made are common 
throughout the world.  Disasters continue to occur without warning and are perceived to 
be on an increase in their magnitude, complexity, frequency and economic impact.  
 
Losses due to natural disasters are 20 times higher (as a percentage of GDP) in the 
developing countries than in industrialized ones
.
 
The Disaster Management policy 
frame work of India is consistent with the approaches promoted globally by the United 
Nati
ons, in particular the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) 2015
-
2030. India is making all efforts to contribute to the realization of the global targets by 
improving disaster management by following the prescribed priorities for action under
 
the Sendai Framework: 
 
(i
)
 
Understanding disaster risk; 
 
(ii
) 
 
Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk; 
 
(iii
)
 
Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience; 
 

7
 
 
(iv
) 
 
Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to
 
“Build Back 
 
Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
 
 
By 2030, India aims to achieve substantial reduction of disaster risk and minimize 
losses in lives, livelihoods, and health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural, 
and 
environmental assets of persons, businesses, communities, and countries in line 
with Sendai Framework. The disaster management policy of India is aimed at promoting 
a culture of prevention, preparedness and resilience at all levels through knowledge, 
innov
ation and education. The National Disaster Management Plan
-
2016 has been 
aligned broadly with the goals and priorities set out in the Sendai Framework for DRR. 
In order to strengthen the existing disaster management system, the Disaster 
Management Act, 200
5 was enacted and notified on December 26, 2005. The Act 
provides for institutional mechanisms for drawing up and monitoring the implementation 
of the disaster management plans, ensuring measures by various wings of Government 
for prevention, mitigating an
d minimize effects of calamities and for undertaking a 
holistic, coordinated, and prompt response to any calamity situation in the country
 
B
 
Hazard profile of India and Institutional Mechanism
 
 
India is highly vulnerable to floods, droughts, cyclones, eart
hquakes, landslides, 
avalanches and forest fire. Out of 35 states and union territories in the country, 27 of 
them are disaster prone.  Almost 58.6% landmass is prone to earthquakes of moderate 
to very high intensity; 12% land is prone to flood and river e
rosion; out of 7516 kms, 
5700 kms of the coastline is prone to cyclones and tsunamis; 68% of cultivable land are 
vulnerable to drought and hilly area are at risk from landslides and avalanches. Fire 
incidents, industrial accidents and other manmade disaste
rs involving chemical, 
biological and radioactive materials are additional hazards, which have underscored the 
need for strengthening preparedness, mitigation and response measures.
 
The country 
is prone to disasters due to adverse geo climatic conditions, 
topographic features, 
environmental degradation, population growth, urbanization and industrialization.
 
India 
receives heavy rainfall from June to September every year during the South West (SW) 
Monsoon Season. The rainfall during this period accounts for 
about 70
-
90 % of the total 
annual rainfall over India. As a consequence of this rainfall, flooding of rivers is a natural 
weather phenomenon. Over 40 Million hectares’ land of the country is prone to floods 
and river erosion. The flood prone regions of Ind
ia are the Himalayan Rivers Basin (Kosi 

8
 
 
and Damodar Rivers in particular), the North Western River Basin (Jhelum, Ravi, Sutlej 
and Beas Rivers) and the central and Peninsular River Basin (Narmada, Chambal, 
Godavari, Krishna and Cauvery River).
 
Institutiona
l mechanisms have been put in place 
to build a safe and disaster resilient India by developing a holistic, proactive, multi
-
disaster oriented and technology driven strategy through a culture of prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness and response. The Disaste
r Management Act, 2005 (DM Act 
2005) lays down institutional and coordination mechanism for effective Disaster 
Management at the national, state, district and local levels. 
 
As mandated by the DM 
Act, Government of India (GoI) created a multi
-
tiered instit
utional system consisting of 
the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) headed by the Prime Minister, the 
State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) headed by the respective Chief 
Ministers and the District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs)
 
headed by the 
District Collectors and co
-
chaired by Chairpersons of the local bodies. These bodies 
have been set up to facilitate a paradigm shift from the hitherto relief
-
centric approach to 
a more proactive, holistic and integrated approach of strengthe
ning disaster 
preparedness, mitigation, and emergency response. For the purpose of specialized
 
response to a threatening disaster situation or disasters/ emergencies both natural and 
man
-
made such as those of CBRN origin, the Act has mandated the constitut
ion of a 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF).
 
There are institutional mechanisms at the 
National and State level for effective management of natural disasters. Though the 
primary responsibility for disaster management rests with the States Government, 
the 
Government of India extends all possible logistics and financial support to the States to 
supplement their efforts to meet the situation effectively. Financial assistance is 
provided to the affected States from State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and 
N
ational Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) as per laid down procedure. 
 
Keeping in view 
our federal polity, the concerned State Governments undertake necessary relief 
measures in the wake of notified natural disasters including flood and cyclone, from the 
SDRF 
already placed at their disposal in accordance with the approved items & norms 
of assistance and magnitude of the ground situation. When the available resources of 
States are inadequate, additional financial assistance is extended from the National 
Disaste
r Response Fund (NDRF) by following the laid down procedure, which includes 
an assessment based on the visit of an Inter
-
Ministerial Central Team.  Financial 
assistance under SDRF/ NDRF is towards relief and not for compensation of loss as 

9
 
 
suffered/ claime
d.  The State Governments can use this allocation for 12 notified natural 
calamities viz; avalanche, cyclone, cloudburst, drought, earthquake, tsunami, fire, flood, 
hailstorm, landslide, pest attack and cold wave/ frost. In addition, 10% of the annual 
fund
 
allocation of the SDRF may be used for localized State specific natural calamities.
 
The concerned State Governments, as the first responders, to the disaster situation(s) 
undertake immediate rescue and relief operations which inter alia include 
 
(i) 
 
Evacuation and shifting
 
of the people to safer places
 
(ii)
 
Setting up of relief camps
 
(iii)
 
providing gratuitous relief
 
(iv) 
 
distribution of
 
essential commodities
 
(v)
 
pr
ovision of safe drinking water
 
(vi)
 
health and hygiene measures to prevent outbreak of
 
any epidemic during post 
 
disaster situation, etc. 
 
 
The concerned State Governments have been taking necessary rescue & relief 
operations in the affected areas which include evacuation of people to safer places, 
operation of relief camps, cattle camps an
d providing essential commodities. States 
also take necessary steps to prevent outbreak of any epidemic during floods/ post flood 
period. Government of India supplements the efforts of States in providing response 
and immediate relief in the event of a sev
ere hazard that is beyond the coping capacity 
of the State.
 
C
 
Preparedness and Disaster Risk Reduction
 
 
Government of India assists States in formulating policies and standard operating 
procedures to enhance their preparedness for hazards. The formulation of plans and 
guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective response to 
disaster a
nd reduce risk is looked after by Ministry of Home Affairs. National Disaster 
Management Authority is primarily mandated to assist in laying down the policies. 
Towards enhancing preparedness, NDMA has undertaken several steps like issue of 
guidelines cover
ing various disasters and cross
-
cutting themes; implementation of pilot 
programs which can be scaled up by the States; training of volunteers & rescue 
personnel; conduct of mock exercises; implementation of major cyclone risk mitigation 

10
 
 
program; strengthen
ing of State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) and District 
Disaster Management Authority (DDMA); Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) activities; conduct of workshops/seminars/conferences on various issues related 
to disaster risk reduction a
nd management. 
NDMA has released 26 sets of guidelines 
on management of natural and man
-
made disasters. The Authority has also issued 
guidelines to assist States in preparation of State disaster management plans and 
provided financial support to States/UTs
 
for preparing their state disaster management 
plans. Guidelines on ‘Management of Floods,’ Management of Cyclones and 
Management of ‘Urban Flooding’ were issued ten years ago to assist State 
Governments in preparation of their Flood/Urban Flood and Cyclon
e Management Plan. 
The National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP) was released in May, 2016 to assist 
all stakeholders including State Governments in disaster risk management of various 
hazards including Floods and Urban Flooding and enables all the stakehol
ders to 
prepare their respective Disaster Management Plans with well
-
defined roles and 
responsibilities.
 
The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP), is being 
implemented in 08 Cyclone Prone Coastal States of the country to upgrade cyclone 
forecas
ting, tracking and warning systems and capacity building in multi
-
hazard risk 
management; and to construct major infrastructure including multipurpose cyclone 
shelters and embankments. A Flood Management Program has been launched by 
Ministry of Water Resou
rces, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, 
Government of India for flood management and river management. NDMA has also 
prepared roadmap for mitigation of urban floods.
 
 
National Emergency Communication Plan is aimed at providing V
-
SATS for 
voice, dat
a and video communication between National Operation Centre, NDRF and 
NDMA. The National School Safety Program(NSSP) has been successfully 
implemented by NDMA in partnership with NIDM and the States/UT Governments in 
8600 schools in 43 Districts spread ove
r 22 States/UTs of the Country
.
 
Workshops have 
been organized to discuss the issues related to Hydro
-
metrological disasters including 
Floods and Urban Flooding. A 10 Point advisory for immediate attention on Urban Flood 
Preparedness and mitigation were pre
pared and sent to all the Flood prone States .A 
roadmap for mitigation of urban floods was prepared and circulated to the States/UTs. A 
Pilot Project named “Aapda Mitra” for training of volunteers from local community for 

11
 
 
flood rescue for training of 200 v
olunteers in each of 30 identified flood prone districts is 
being implemented.
 
D
 
Role and 
Preparedness of National Disaster Management Authority
 
 
National Disaster Management Authority has been established under section 3 of 
Disaster Management Act, 2005, 
and its powers and functions have been set out in 
section 6 of the Act. NDMA is primarily mandated to lay down the policies, plans and 
guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely and effective response to 
disaster and allocation from NDRF and SD
RF is looked after by Ministry of Home 
Affairs. NDMA, inter alia, is mandated to lay down guidelines to be followed by the State 
Authorities in drawing up the State Plan. NDMA is also required to lay down guidelines 
to be followed by the different Ministri
es or Departments of the Government of India for 
the purpose of integrating the measures for prevention of disaster or the mitigation of its 
effects in their development plans and projects
. 
For implementing a holistic and 
integrated approach to Disaster Ma
nagement in India, NDMA has undertaken several 
steps like issue of guidelines covering various disasters and cross
-
cutting themes; 
Implementation of pilot programmes which can be scaled up by the States; training of 
volunteers & rescue personnel; conduct o
f mock exercises; implementation of major 
cyclone risk mitigation programme; strengthening of State Disaster Management 
Authority (SDMA) and District Disaster Management
 
Authority (DDMA); Information, 
Education and Communicati
on (IEC) activities; conduct o
f 
workshops/seminars/conferences on various issues related to disaster risk reduction 
and management. As required under this Act, NDMA has issued guidelines for 
preparation of state disaster management plans. NDMA has also provided financial 
support to Sta
tes/UTs for preparing their state disaster management plan including 
State of Kerala.
 
NDMA, in particular, has undertaken following steps to facilitate States 
in handling floods/urban floods and cyclones
:
 
(i)
 
Guidelines on ‘Management of Floods,’ Management of
 
Cyclones and 
Management of ‘Urban Flooding’ were issued in January, 2008, April 2008 
and September, 2010 respectively to, inter
-
alia, assist State Governments in 
preparation of their Flood/Urban Flood and Cyclone Management Plan. 
 
(ii)
 
National Disaster Manage
ment Plan (NDMP) was released in May, 2016 to 
assist all stakeholders including State Governments in disaster risk 

12
 
 
management of various hazards including Floods and Urban Flooding.  This 
Plan takes into account the action points emanating from National Gu
idelines 
issued by NDMA on disaster specific and cross
-
cutting issues.  This Plan 
enables all the stakeholders to prepare their respective Disaster 
Management Plans with well defined roles and responsibilities. 
 
(iii)
 
A workshop was organized by NDMA in February
 
2016 to discuss the issues 
related to Urban Flooding.
 
(iv)
 
10 Point advisories for immediate attention on Urban Flood Preparedness 
and mitigation were prepared and sent to all the Urban Flooding prone 
States in May, 2016 for necessary action.
 
(v)
 
A roadmap under t
hree timeframes short term, medium term and long term 
for mitigation of urban floods was prepared by an Expert Group constituted 
by NDMA.  The roadmap was circulated to the States/UTs to take necessary 
action to implement the Roadmap as per the three timef
rames for urban 
flood preparedness and mitigation. 
 
 
(vi)
 
NDMA is also implementing a Pilot Project named 
'
Aapda Mitra
'
 
for training 
of volunteers from local community for flood rescue.  The project envisages 
training of 200 volunteers in each of 30 identified flood prone districts in 
various States.  Kottayam District of Kerala is covered under the pilot phase.
 
(vii)
 
Various IE
C activities have been undertaken for flood/urban flood and 
cyclone preparedness through print, electronic and social media. These 
awareness campaigns are being regularly undertaken before SW and NE 
monsoons and cyclone seasons.
 
Campaign
 
Period (April 2018
 
till date)
 
Cyclone
 
 
 
May 
–
 
June (Pre South West Monsoon)
 
Oct 
–
 
Mid Dec (Pre North East Monsoon)
 
Flood
 
Jun 
–
 
Sep (South West Monsoon)
 
Oct 
–
 
Mid Dec (Pre North East Monsoon)
 
Urban flooding
 
(South West Monsoon) July 
–
 
Dec
 
(Pre North East Monsoon) 
July 
–
 
Dec
 

13
 
 
 
(viii)
 
NDMA has also implemented a scheme on strengthening of State Disaster 
Management Authority (SDMA) and District Disaster Management Authority 
(DDMA) under which human resource were provided.  Kerala, Karnataka 
and Andhra Pradesh have 
implemented this scheme
.
 
(ix)
 
NDMA under a project called National Disaster Management Services 
(NDMS) to provide failsafe communication during disast
ers, has decided to 
install a V
SAT based network for communication in 120 locations in all 
States/UTs.  Kerala 
has four such sites, namely, Thiruvananthapuram (State 
Capital), Ernakullam, Idukki and Wayanard.  4 Satellite Mobile (INMARSAT) 
under this project have also been provided during recent flood.
 
(x)
 
A Study on Soil piping in the highlands and foothills of Kerala
 
was also 
conducted to study the phenomenon of soil piping and its mitigation 
measures through Centre for Earth Science and Studies (CESS), 
Thiruvananthapuram and Department of Revenue, Kerala
.
 
(xi)
 
In order to build up the coping capacity to handle disasters, 
621 District Level 
Mock Exercises have been conducted by NDMA so far. Over a period of time 
the level of exercises have been scaled
-
up to State and Multi
-
State Level to 
enable entire administration machinery of the State to get training in handling 
disaste
rs. In the last two years 19 State Level and 04 Multi State Level Mock 
Exercises have been conducted. The response from the States has been 
encouraging. Further, NDMA has scaled
-
up the scope of Chemical and 
Industrial Mock Exercises also. A total of 88 Che
mical and Industrial Mock 
Exercises have been conducted. Since 2016
-
17, NDMA is undertaking a 
demand driven Scheme under which Rs.1 Lakh per district for Mock Drill was 
provisioned in all the States throughout the country. Under this scheme, an 
amount of R
s 13 lakhs and Rs 16 lakhs was sanctioned to Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh and Govt of Karnataka respectively during 2018
-
19. Govt of Kerala 
and Govt of Tami Nadu were sanctioned Rs 14 lakhs and Rs 04 lakhs during 
2016
-
17.
 

14
 
 
(xii)
 
NCRMP is under implementation in the St
ate of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka 
and Kerala. The Project closure date in respect of AP is 31.12.2018 and that 
in respect of Karnataka and Kerala is 31.03.2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E
 
Role 
and preparedness of Geological Survey of India
 
 
 
 
In 2004, Government of India declared Geological Survey of India (GSI) as Nodal 
Agency
 
for landslides in India. Accordingly, GSI was entrusted the responsibility to carry 
out the landslide studies throughout the country. It is worth mentioning that the flood 
and cyclone related studies do no
t come under the purview of GSI, therefore, 
GSI is
 
responsible for:
 
(i)
 
Coordinating and undertaking geological studies for landslide hazard mitigation.
 
(ii)
 
Carrying out landslide hazard zonation.
 
(iii)
 
Monitoring landslides.
 
State
 
Outlay
 
Rs. In Cr
 
Fund 
released
 
     
(GoI)
 
Rs. In Cr
 
Expenditure
 
      
(GoI)
 
Rs. In Cr
 
Prog
ress so far
 
GoI
 
States
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
1039.78
 
299.66
 
1038.8
 
851
 
Early Warning 
 
Dissemination System
 
(EWDS) nearing 
 
Completion. 219 Multi 
 
Purpose 
 
Cyclone Shelter (MPCS), 
698 Km of roads, 30 Nos 
Bridges and 29.90 Km of 
Saline Embankment 
completed. 
 
Karnataka
 
101.18
 
28.30
 
52.09
 
11.35
 
EWDS under tendering 
 
Stage, 7 MPCS under 
 
Construction, 45 Km of 
roads completed, 2 Nos 
bridges and 7 Km of 
Saline Embankment & 
balance 4 MPCS and 3 Km 
of roads under tendering.
 
Kerala
 
133.48
 
34.00
 
16.63
 
1.75
 
EWDS under tendering 
 
Stage, 1 MPCS under 
construction& balance 
 
20 MPCS under tendering 
stage. 
 

15
 
 
(iv)
 
Studying the factors responsible for sliding and suggesting precautionary as well 
as preventiv
e measure.
 
(a) 
 
The specific mandates are:
 
(i)
 
Finalization of uniform methodologies for Landslide Hazard Zonation (LHZ) on 
macro
 
scales (1:50,000/1:25,000) and meso scales (1:10,000)
 
(ii)
 
Carrying out Landslide Hazard Zonation of vulnerable areas on macro and meso
 
scales
 
(iii)
 
Carrying out mapping and monitoring of landslides
 
(iv)
 
To evolve an Early Warning System
 
(v)
 
To prepare Inventory/ Database on LHZ
 
(vi)
 
Awareness Generation
 
(vii)
 
Coordination
 
(b)
 
The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) adopted for landslide disaster 
management plan:
 
(i)
 
Human Resource: GSI has specialized Landslide Divisions, with about 100 
geoscientists engaged in landslide studies. The workforce takes up pre and post
-
disaster studies apart from regular projects of GSI on landslides. In case of 
catastrophic events, geosc
ientists from different Regions are mobilized for 
emergency response and studies are carried out. A befitting example can be 
cited during landslides in Karnataka and Kerala in 2018.
 
(ii)
 
Pre
-
Disaster Studies: Landslide Susceptibility Zonation (LSZ) on Macro Sca
le 
(1:25,000/50,000) & meso scale (1:10,000/5000), Monitoring of conspicuous 
landslides and Development of Early Warning System are the major activities 
taken up annually as a part of pre
-
disaster studies. GSI has taken up a National 
Flagship Program on La
ndslide Susceptibility Mapping (NLSM) to study about 
4.27 lakh sq. km hilly area of India, inhabited by around 5
-
6 crore of population. 
This flagship program is going to be completed by March 2020. The main 
objective is to report with LSZ Map depicting the
 
stability status of the existing 
thickly populated townships/ important civil engineering structures, proposed 
expansion schemes for urban development, new construction sites of townships 
in the landslide prone hilly terrain etc. through some much detaile
d stability 

16
 
 
investigations by including geotechnical parameters. Development of early 
warning systems on local and regional scales is also a major objective.
 
(iii)
 
Post Disaster Studies (Response to Disaster): It is done in three stages like, 
Level
-
1
 
: 
Immediate
 
response (Reconnoitory Studies); Level
-
2: Preliminary 
feasibility & multithematic (Response study) and Level
-
3: Detailed site
-
specific 
studies. The Level
-
1 and 2 are done within 15 to 60 days of the disaster whereas 
the Level
-
3 is done based on the result
s of level
-
1 & 2 and on request from the 
stakeholders. The main objective is to do rapid assessment of damages, 
preliminary identification of landslides, its broad typology, identification of 
stretches of affected roads/ accessibility corridors and if poss
ible, tentative 
identification of probable safer slopes for temporary rehabilitation. To identify 
activity, extent, causes and failure mechanisms of such landslides for effectively 
suggesting the slope protection measures; to suggest suitable and stable si
tes 
for housing buildings, suggesting realignment of roads and for preparing the 
foundation for constructing some critical infrastructures (e.g., bridges, rope ways, 
transmission tower etc.)
 
F
 
Response of NDMA in States of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and
 
Andhra 
 
Pradesh
 
 
Kerala state experienced an unusual natural calamity during the month of July 
and
 
Aug 2018, affecting almost whole of the state. During this period NDMA Control 
Room functioned 24 X 7. Control Room remained in constant touch with NERC(MHA), 
NDRF HQ and SEOC
-
Kerala. Control Room also shared details of all the distress calls 
received on 
Disaster Help Line no
-
1078, Whatsapp, Emails and Twitter handle of 
NDMA with NERC (MHA), NDRF HQ and SEOC
-
Kerala.
 
(i
)
 
Immediately after the occurrence of the calamity, NDMA deputed Joint Advisor 
(Operations), for about a week to SEOC Kerala, to establish e
ffective coordination. 
During such coordination, 5000 high density plastic bags for packaging of air dropped 
relief material were made available by NDMA to the State Govt of Kerala through a 
private organization. 
 
(ii
)
 
A Meeting was held on 21.08.2018 in N
DMA under the chairmanship of Shri R K 
Jain, Member, NDMA with representatives of Civil Society Organizations/ Non
-

17
 
 
Government Organizations and Resident Commissioner, of Govt. of Kerala to facilitate 
coordination on relief efforts for Kerala Floods. 
 
(iii
)
 
The response to Kerala Floods 2018 was highly coordinated effort between the 
State Government and Central Government. The response and relief was being 
monitored at the highest level by the NCMC. 
 
(iv
) 
 
A team comprising Shri R.K. Jain, Member, Shri Kamal
 
Kishore, Member and Dr. 
Thiruppugazh, Joint Secretary, NDMA conducted field visits in Kerala during 30
th
 
August 
to 01 September, 2018 and held meetings with Chief Secretary and other officers of 
State Government. The team also met Chief Minister, Kerala a
nd shared best practices 
for effective recovery and reconstruction. 
 
(v
) A team comprising experts from GSI, CBRI and NDMA visited 15 landslides sites in 
Idduki district of Kerala during September 12
-
14, 2018. The report of the team 
containing their recomm
endations has been sent to Chief Secretary, Government of 
Kerala.
 
 
Government of Kerala vide D.O. letter dated 18.09.2018 from Chief Secretary 
raised the following two issues for consideration of the Govt. of India:
 
(i)
 
The
 
State Government intends to facilitate soft loans through 
Kudumbashree, the Women Self Help Groups to affected MSMEs and 
families at the rate of 9% interest. The Government has ordered interest 
subvention for these loans from the Chief Minister’s Distress
 
Relief Fund. 
However, State Level Bankers are insisting on 12% interest.
 
(ii)
 
Many of the affected MSMEs and families have loans from RBI regulated 
banks and Non
-
Banking Financial Companies that requires to be 
restructured for a period of 5 years, with additio
nal top
-
up loans for coping 
up and recuperate from the floods. These loans need to be covered under 
the MUDRA scheme or CGTMSE scheme, as the case may be.
 
 
The issues 
was
 
taken up with Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises and 
Department of Banking
 
and Financial Services vide NDMA’ D.O. letters dated 
19.09.2018 and further vide D.O. letter dated 21.09.2018 to Department of Banking and 
Financial Services, In this regard, response received from . In this regard, response 

18
 
 
received from Department of Fi
nical Services and M/o MSME was communicated to the 
Chief Secretary of Kerala vide D.O. letter No. 48/3/2018
-
RR dated 27
th
 
September, 
2018 with the request to indicate the specific issue, if any, along with financial 
implications for processing further.
 
A 
meeting was called by National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA) with concerned stakeholders i.e. Department of 
Financial Services, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME), Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI), Government of Kerala and State Level
 
Bankers’ Committee of 
Kerala to discuss the issues raised by Govt. of Kerala. The following issues emerged 
during the meeting held on 15.10.2018:
 
(i)
 
Kerala Government devised a loan scheme in consultation with SLBC for 
providing Rs.1 lakh to flood / 
landslide affected individuals through 
Kudumbashree. The State offered subvention scheme of 9% and 
requested the banks to peg their rate of interest at 9% to make the facility 
interest free in effect and was taken in the SLBC and some banks have 
agreed. Wh
ile the banks have agreed to the same now to charge interest 
@9%, yet the disbursement is very slow.
 
(ii)
 
As regards MSME loans the restructuring / rescheduling have been 
approved by SLBC in accordance with RBI Guidelines. However, the 
banks have not expedited 
the process to provide relief to flood affected 
MSMEs.
 
(iii)
 
The restructuring of the existing loans, there is no problem, however, fresh 
trade loans below Rs. 10 lakhs  are not covered CGTMSE scheme.
 
 
After the detailed discussions with Chief Secretary, Governm
ent of Kerala the 
following emerged:
 
(i)
 
Issue regarding facilitating loan through Kudumbashree (Women Self Help 
Group) at
 
9% subvention stands resolved.
 
(ii)
 
Issue regarding loans below 10 lakh to retailers will stand resolved if 
Ministry of MSME approve the propo
sal to make retail trade loan below 10 
lakh eligible under CGTMSE. It was decided that NDMA will take up the 
matter with M/o MSME.
 

1
9
 
 
(iii)
 
For speedy disposal of loans to MSME and flood affected families it was 
decided that NDMA will take up with Department of Fin
ancial Services, 
Ministry of Finance.
 
 
In follow up of the decisions taken with regards to decisions, a D.O. letter dated 
16.10.2018 from NDMA was written to Secretary, Department of Financial Services to 
issue necessary instruction in this regard. In resp
onse Department of Financial Services 
vide letter dated 16.10.2018 issued necessary directions to Chairman, SBI and MD & 
CEO of all Public Sector Banks.
 
In follow up of decision at para 5(iii) above, a D.O. letter 
was sent to Secretary, Ministry of Micro S
mall and Medium Enterprises (MSME) from 
NDMA to take a decision in this regard. In response, the Ministry of MSME has issued 
necessary approval vide O. M. No. 17(16)2018
-
EA Dated 17.10.2018.
 
In the meeting of 
National Disaster Management Authority held on 
18.10.2018 and presided by the 
Hon’ble Chairman of the Authority, the Authority was apprised of the action taken by 
NDMA.
 
(i)
 
Titli : 
Tropical Cyclone 'Titli'
 
made landfall during 0530 hrs
-
0830 hrs on 11 Oct 
2018; 18.8º north / 84.4º east (Centre of Eye li
es over the land) near Palasa, 
Srikakulam, Andhra Pradesh. IMD continuously monitored the development and issued 
bulletins. INCOIS
-
 
IMD also continued to issue joint bulletins with regard to Ocean storm 
forecast associated with Cyclonic storm
-
 
VERY SEVERE 
CYCLONIC STORM TITLI to 
all the concerned States.
 
Regular advisories were issued to the State/UT by NERC 
(National Emergency Response Centre) DM Division MHA to keep a close watch, 
monitor the situation in their areas regularly and take appropriate precaut
ionary 
measures. closely monitored the development. Awareness creation was on through 
social media during which Do’s and Dont’s for Cyclone were also widely circulated. Alert 
window of NDMA Website which contained IMD alerts was continuously updated for us
e 
by all stakeholders and public at large. 
 
(ii)
 
Gaja : 
The Cyclonic Storm 'Gaja'
 
made landfall on 16.11.2018 at 0030 hrs to 
0330 hrs in Nagapattinam Distt as 
Severe Cyclone Storm
.
 
The States of Odisha, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andaman Nicobar, West Bengal, Puducherry were all 
informed about this development. National Emergency Response Centre (NERC), MHA 
also issued messages about all this development to all the concerned States 
from 
10.11.2018 onwards. Subsequently, IMD continuously monitored the development and 

20
 
 
issued bulletins. INCOIS
-
 
IMD also continued to issue joint bulletins with regard to 
Ocean storm forecast associated with Cyclonic storm
-
GAJA to all the concerned States.
 
NDMA closely monitored the development. Awareness creation was on through social 
media during which Do’s and Dont’s for Cyclone were also widely circulated. Alert 
window of NDMA Website which contained IMD alerts was continuously updated for use 
by all st
akeholders and public at large. 
 
(iii)
 
Phethai : 
The cycloni
c storm 'Phethai'
 
made Landfall on 1330 hrs 
–
 
1430 hrs on 
17 Dec 2018; 25 KM south of Yanam (Puducherry) and 40 KM south of Kakinada 
District East Godavari (Andhra Pradesh)
. 
A depression formed ov
er southeast Bay of 
Bengal (BoB) on 13.12.2018 intensifying into a deep depression (DD) in southeast & 
adjoining central BoB on 14.12.2018. It intensified into a cyclonic storm “Phethai” over 
southwest BoB on 15.12.2018 and further intensified into severe 
Cyclone on 
16.12.2018. On 17.12.2018 its weakened in to a cyclonic storm and crossed Andhra 
Pradesh coast 25 Km south of Yanam and 40 km south of Kakinada between 1330 to 
1430 hours.
 
The situation in Andhra Pradesh &
 
Puducherry during Cyclone ‘Phethai’ 
was
 
monitored by National Disaster Management Authority at the highest level 24x7 
basis. Awareness creation was on through social media during which Do’s and Dont’s 
for Cyclone were also widely circulated. Alert window of NDMA Website which 
contained IMD aler
ts was continuously updated for use by all stakeholders and public at 
large.
 
G.
 
Response of GSI in Karnataka and Kerala
 
(i)
 
Karnataka
:
 
This year due to “abnormally high’’ rainfall, number of landslides 
were reported
 
in
 
districts covered by Western Ghats of
 
Karnataka. Kodagu district in 
particular was severely
 
affected
.
 
(a)
 
During the intervening night of 9th and 10th June, 2018 many landslides were 
reported from Virajpet
-
 
Makutta (Kerala boundary). In pursuance of the request 
by Principal Secretary to Revenue D
epartment, Government of Karnataka, a 
team of geologist visited the sites of landslide occurrences. After the detailed 
study a report was submitted to Principal Secretary to Government Revenue 
Department (Disaster Management, Bhoomi
 
& UPOR)
.
 

21
 
 
(b)
 
On 22.08.2018 
a team was sent to Landslide hit areas of Kodagu bordering 
Dakshina kannada district and done preliminary assessment. The team visited 
the landslide affected areas near Jodpal. Preliminary studies were taken at 
Jodpal, a severely affected area by landslide
. Preliminary investigation was also 
carried out at Kattalkadu Village and was declared safe, for villagers to come 
back, by the team. Investigations were also carried
 
out along the road leading to 
Arekallu village wherein two landslides were studied
.
 
(c)
 
Subsequently, a team visited the area from 27th August 2018 to 1st September 
2018. The investigation aimed at the assessment of the nature, causes, the 
future risk and vulnerability at the landslide sites as well as suggesting remedial 
measures, both
 
immed
iate and long term
.
 
(d)
 
GSI team carried out post disaster studies in Kodagu and about 105 landslides 
and subsidence were studied. Out of these 105 landslides and subsidence, 42
-
point geo parametric data were collected for 85 landslides and subsidence while 
re
st 20 nos. landslides were inaccessible during the field visit. The 42
-
point geo 
parametric datasheet, recommendations and remedial measures of each 
landslide were given in detail. Long term strategies and General 
recommendations to be adopted for mitigati
ons of the landslides in Kodagu 
District were also suggested. Considering the magnitude of destruction, 
size/volume of landslides and risk involved, 10 major landslides were
 
identified 
for detailed site specific study
.
 
(e)
 
The detailed note on the preliminary 
studies were prepared and the same was 
submitted to Chief Secretary Government of Karnataka, Deputy Commissioner 
Kodagu, Director
 
KSNDMC on 14.09.2018
.
 
(f)
 
A separate team from GSI simultaneously visited a proposed rehabilitation sites 
for affected people by l
andslide occurrences in Kodagu district for preliminary 
geotechnical investigation on 26th & 27th August, 2018. They visited Nine 
rehabilitation sites and found that out of nine sites, eight were geo
-
technically 
stable. There were no signs of slope failure
s, ground movement, no surface 
cracks found at those sites during preliminary investigation. Certain 
precautionary measures were also suggested for those sites. Note on 
Preliminary Geotechnical Investigation of the Rehabilitation Sites Proposed by 

22
 
 
District
 
Administration was prepared and submitted to Deputy commissioner 
Kodagu on
 
04.10.2018.
 
(ii)
 
Kerala
:
 
In Kerala, ‘exceptionally high’ rainfall evoked a number of landslide 
incidences in central
 
and northern part of Kerala. A total of 59 landslide incidences
 
were 
reported in Kozhikode,
 
Wayanad, Kannur, Malappuram, Palakkad and Idukki Districts of 
Kerala during the month of June
 
2018 itself. The government of Kerala requested GSI 
to study the landslide incidences in the
 
state
.
 
(a)
 
GSI responded immediately in coor
dination with state revenue authorities and 
carried out post disaster landslide studies in July 2018 to assess these slides and 
to evaluate the causative factors and suggest possible remedial measures. The 
details of the study and the 42
-
point geo
-
parametr
ic datasheet for landslide 
inventory were prepared and submitted to respective revenue authorities and 
Kerala State Disaster Management
 
Authority (KSDMA)
.
 
(b)
 
10 teams, consisting of two geologists in each team, were formed and deployed 
to
 
diffe
rent 
districts 
to carry out the landslide inventory mapping
 
of Kerala which 
is expected to 
be
 
completed by March 2019
.
 
(c)
 
In addition to the above, the officers are also engaged with studies of many 
critical landslide affected sites based on the request from various 
agencies such 
as PWD (Roads & Bridge), NH, Power Grid Corporation, Forest, Irrigation 
department, KSEB, District
 
authorities, etc
.
 
(d)
 
A total of 1220 nos. landslides have been identified a
nd studied by GSI till date 
and 
details
 
of the landslides which affecte
d infrastructure were submitted to the 
state government.
 
(e)
 
Due to landslides, there were total 756 houses affected in 12 districts of Kerala. 
Based on the studies done, GSI has recommended the local authorities to 
relocate about 478 houses, out of 756, to a 
safer place identified by GSI. The 
District wise details of landslides
 
studied by GSI and houses affected and to be 
relocated are given in a tabular form below:
 

23
 
 
 
 
 
This is to mention that the works related to landslide studies, in Kerala and 
Karnataka,
 
is
 
going
 
on war footing scale and targeted to be completed by March 2019.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


24
 
 
Chapter 
-
 
I
I
 
Overview of Natural Disaster / Calamities in States of Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu & Andhra Pradesh
 
A
 
Background
 
 
National Disaster Management Authority 
has been established under section 3 of 
Disaster Management Act, 2005, and its powers and functions have been set out in 
section 6 of the Act. NDMA is primarily mandated to lay down the policies, plans and 
guidelines for disaster management for ensuring ti
mely and effective response to 
disaster and allocation from NDRF and SDRF is looked after by Ministry of Home 
Affairs.
 
During the year 2018, South West Monsoon was excess in Kerala and South 
Interior Karnataka.  Due to this there was floods in almost all d
istricts of Kerala; in 
Kodagu, Chickmagalur, Shivamogga and Hassan districts of Karnataka and in 
Dharmapuri, Salem, Erode, Karur, Tiruchirapalli districts in Tamil Nadu during mid of 
August 2018.  Similarly, Very Severe Cyclonic Storm “Titli” crossed Andhr
a Pradesh 
coast near Palasa in Srikakulam District leading to flooding in Nagavali and 
Vamshadhara rivers in Srikakulam and Vijayanagaram Districts during mid of October 
2018.  Severe Cyclonic Storm “Gaja” affected the Southern States namely, Tamil Nadu, 
K
erala and Union Territory of Puducherry in the mid of November 2018. While the 
damages due to storm “Gaja” was mainly due to winds associated with cyclone, the 
heavy rains associated with ”Gaja” created flooding in small river catchments in the 
States of T
amil Nadu and Kerala in the districts of Theni and Kottayam respectively. 
During the mid of December 2018, Severe Cyclone “Phethai” crossed the coast near 
Kakinada/Yanam in the State of Andhra Pradesh/Union Territory of Puducherry. Since 
the rainfall was f
or short duration, no major flooding occurred due to storm “Phethai”.
 
B
 
Rainfall and Flood situation in Kerala
 
 
Central Water Commission studied the hydrological aspects of the rainfall in 
Kerala and published a Report on Kerala Floods. From the report, it
 
was inferred that 
Kerala experienced an abnormally high rainfall from 1
st
 
June 2018 to 19
th
 
August 2018. 
This resulted in severe flooding in 13 out of 14 districts in the State. As per IMD data, 
Kerala received 2346.6 mm of rainfall from 1
st
 
June 2018 to 
19
th
 
August 2018 in contrast 
to normal rainfall of 1649.5 mm.  This rainfall was about 42% above the normal. Further, 

25
 
 
the rainfall over Kerala during June, July and 1
st
 
to 19
th
 
of August was 15%, 18% and 
164% above normal respectively. Further, out of 758.
6 mm rainfall from 1
st
 
August 2018 
to 19
th
 
August 2018, about 414 mm rainfall occurred in just three days viz 15
-
17, August 
2018, which created severe flooding in the State. Due to severe rainfall from 15
-
17, 
August 2018, the gates of about 35 dams were al
so opened due to extremely large 
inf
low of water in the reservoirs.
 
Flood Situation
 
 
Kerala is situated along the Western Ghats with most of the towns and cities 
located on the foothills. The State has several small intra
-
state rivers, almost all of them 
flowing west toward Arabian Sea. These rivers have very small catchment areas. Also, 
the steep slopes of rivers involved, leave a very small response time to issue a 
conventional statistical
-
correlation based (level) forecast for any station with respect t
o 
any base station upstream.  Thus, rivers are flashy in nature and swell up pretty quickly, 
and hence, effective level based forecast is very difficult to make.  Further, for 
developing a correlation for flood estimation with respect to dam releases, the 
non
-
availability of historical outflows from dam as well as real time dam releases is also a 
limitation. However, the flood forecasting by rainfall
-
runoff mathematical modelling for 
Kerala may be possible. Sufficiently representative areal and temporal dis
tribution of 
real time rainfall would be required for sufficient number of stations from IMD in order to 
make flood forecasting by modelling. Additionally, it is essential to know the real time 
data available with State Government in respect of out flow / 
reservoir levels/ area 
capacity curve from the various dams in Kerala and their schedule of operation to be 
executed in responding to flood situations. The mathematical models to forecast floods 
in advance with a purposeful lead time also require its calib
ration with these inputs for 
historical events of floods to be furnished by the Kerala Government.
 
Thus, while 
constraints of terrain and short time of concentration are a limitation for a worthwhile 
forecast by conventional system at any Flood Forecasting
 
station, and in case of 
mathematical model based flood forecasting, the non
-
availability of real time rainfall 
data for sufficient number of locations, data of releases from dams and historical data of 
floods have been major limitations for an effective f
orecast of floods in Kerala. The State 
Government authorities have been requested to provide detailed information about the 
Reservoir Salient Features, Area Elevation Capacity Curves, Rule Curves, Hourly 

26
 
 
Reservoir Levels, Rainfall, Inflows and Hourly Outfl
ows from dams to CWC for 
developing mathematical models for simulating runoff at different locations of the rivers. 
These mathematical models with appropriate information in advance of quantity of 
rainfall occurrences when provided by IMD would be develope
d into Flood Forecasting 
models for various rivers in Kerala.
 
However, CWC has 22 Flood Monitoring Stations 
setup in various Districts of Kerala. Out of these 22 stations, 12 stations witnessed 
Extreme Flood Situation during the period 15
th
 
to 18
th
 
August 
2018. The near real
-
time 
data is being entered in eSWIS (CWC website) and the hydrographs have been shared 
regularly on near real time basis with General Public for their information through the 
website. Based on the water level trend and rainfall situatio
n, CWC has issued Daily 
Flood Situation Report cum Advisories through social media platform. During the Annual 
Relief Commissioner’s Conference held in May 2018, it was informed that CWC will be 
disseminating the flood information through Face book Page @c
wccfcr (new name: 
CWCOfficial.FF) and Twitter handle @FFM_CWC (new name @CWCOfficial_FF) also 
and requested all the State Government to follow these social media platforms for 
immediate dissemination of information. These flood related information have bee
n 
shared regularly through various social media platforms which are being followed by 
various authorities and general public during 2018 floods.
 
Reservoirs are operated by 
State Govt./ Project Authorities as per the operational manual finalised for respect
ive 
reservoir.  The operation can be modified  based on Inflow forecasting. However, inflow 
forecast may be possible only based on quantitative rainfall forecast and in as much 
advance as possible which however so far is not available in case of Kerala.  I
n order to 
study these aspects in respect of Kerala in detail, a Committee was constituted in CWC 
with main tasks as under:
 
(i)
 
The Atlas of frequency based inundation plans.
 
(ii)
 
Study of feasibility of establishing Flood Forecasting Network 
 
(iii)
 
Setting up of model t
o provide Flood Forecasts. 
 
(iv)
 
Study of Feasibility of integrated Reservoir Operations 
 
 
The Committee visited Kerala during 25
-
27
th
 
September 2018 and had meeting 
with all stakeholders including Kerala Water Resources Department (KWRD), Kerala 
State Electricity Board (KSEB) and other stakeholders impressing upon them the 
importance of real
-
time flood forecasting and what CWC/MoWR,RD&G
R can do to help 

27
 
 
the State in this regard. After the meeting, it was agreed by all stakeholders that there 
should be a comprehensive flood forecasting network and three basins namely, Periyar, 
Bharathapuzha and Pamba may be taken up on pilot basis and feas
ibility be studied. 
The Committee also addressed letters to IMD to provide Quantitative Precipitation 
Forecast for various river basins and to provide Gridded Real
-
time Rainfall Data for use 
in the mathematical model to be developed for Kerala. Letters hav
e also been written to 
Kerala Government to provide data on salient features of all reservoirs, rule curves, 
area
-
elevation
-
capacity curves, historic 10
-
daily inflows and outflows, rainfall for the last 
30 to 40 years to update or develop new rule curves f
or reservoirs as well as to provide 
real
-
time information on reservoir levels, inflows and hourly outflows on operational 
basis during the flood season to CWC.
 
The present status of the work of the Committee 
is as under:
 
 
There are two river systems in Ker
ala which are inter
-
state namely, Periyar and 
Bharathapuzha which have sufficiently large catchment and have warning time of 12 to 
24 hours. Further, river Pamba also was affected severely by the August 2018 flood and 
hence, it was decided that three of th
e existing Hydrological Observation (HO) Stations 
in Kerala namely, Neeleswaram on river Periyar in Ernakulam District, Kumbidi on river 
Bharathapuzha in Palakkad District and Malakkara on river Pambain Pattanamthitta 
District shall be studied in detail fo
r providing conventional flood forecasting with 
warning time of 12 hours.
 
 
Further, the mathematical models for all the basins in Kerala including inflow 
forecasts to major dams are being developed while information sought from Kerala 
Government for model 
calibrations are awaited. Feasibility of opening flood forecasting 
(through conventional statistical and mathematical models) will be included in the final 
report. CWC is trying to commence the flood forecasting activity at the earliest, possibly 
from the 
flood season of 2019 after getting financial and administrative approvals.
 
C
 
Rainfall and Flood situation in Karnataka and Tamil Nadu
 
Karnataka
 
(i) Rainfall Situation
 
: 
The Government of Karnataka has submitted a Memorandum to 
the Government of India, in September, 2018 vide which, it was informed that due to 
above normal rainfall since May, 2018 till 21st August, 2018, flood and rainfall induced 

28
 
 
landslides occurred in Ma
lnad (Kodagu, Chikkamangaluru, Hassan, Shivamogga) and 
Costal Districts (Dakshin Kannada, Udupi and Uttar Kannada) of Karnataka during 
2018. The Kodagu and other Malnad and Costal districts received heavy rainfall in the 
range of 700 mm to 1712 mm with % d
eparture from normal ranging from 100 to 722% 
during 8th to 19th August, 2018, caused loss of human lives, livestock and 
loss/damages to the crops and infrastructure and the economy of the State. 
 
(ii) Flood Situation
 
: 
Due to this extremely heavy rainfall
 
during the period 15
th
 
to 18
th
 
August, most of the dams in Upper Cauvery Basin and Upper Tungabhadra basin in the 
affected districts started surplussing leading to Extreme Flood Situation in River 
Cauvery & its tributaries Harangi & Kabini and in Rivers T
unga & Bhadra. These 
created Extreme Flood Situation (Water Level exceeding the Highest Flood Level on 
record) in the downstream areas of Harangi Dam in Kodagu and Mysuru District; in the 
downstream areas of Kabini Dam in Mysuru District and in downstream 
reaches of 
Gajanur and Bhadra dams in Shivamogga and Chickmagalur District during the above 
period. 
 
Tamil Nadu
 
 
Due to very heavy rainfall in Coimbatore, Nilgiris District along the Western 
Ghats; heavy releases from Bhavanisagar Dam and Moyar Dam; and 
the releases from 
main Cauvery in Karnataka lead to Extreme Flood Situation along river Bhavani in 
Coimbatore, Nilgiris and Erode District of Tamil Nadu and river Cauvery in Dharmapuri, 
Salem, Erode, Karur and Tiruchirapalli Districts during 16
th
 
to 20
th
 
A
ugust 2018.
 
D
 
Cyclonic storm 'Thitli', 'Gaja' and 'Pithai'
 
(i)
 
Tithli
 
(a)
 
Meteorological Situation
 
Very Severe Cyclone “Titli” crossed North Andhra Pradesh Coast near Palasa in 
Srikakulam District on 11
th
 
October 2018. Due to this cyclone heavy to very 
heavy rainfall occurred in Srikakulam, Vijayanagaram Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh and in Gajapathi, Rayagada District of Odisha during the period 11
th
 
to 
13
th
 
October 2018.
 
 

29
 
 
(b)
 
Flood Situation
 
River Nagavali and
 
Vamshadhara who have their catchment areas in Odisha 
received extremely heavy rainfall and affected Andhra Pradesh in Srikakulam 
and Vijayanagaram Districts leading to Above Normal (Water Level between 
Warning and Danger Levels) and heavy inflows into Got
ta Barrage in Srikakulam 
District of Andhra Pradesh on river Vamshadhara during the above period.
 
(ii)
 
'Gaja'
 
(a)
 
Meteorological Situation
 
Severe Cyclonic Storm 'Gaja'
 
affected the States of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and 
Union Territory of Puducherry and crossed the 
Tamil Nadu coast near 
Vedaranyam in Tiruvarur District of Tamil Nadu. This Cyclone affected the areas 
with strong winds and rainfall which was confined to the areas near the cyclone 
centre. The major damages reported are due to the very strong winds which 
uprooted and damaged various infrastructures. 
 
(b)
 
Flood Situation
 
Since the rainfall was confined to the track of the cyclone, the rainfall affected 
small rivers such as Sholayar a tributary of Vaigai River in Theni District of Tamil 
Nadu as well as Meenachil
 
in Kerala in Kottayam District of Kerala with rapid rise 
in water levels. Otherwise no major flood situation was reported from this 
cyclone.
 
(iii)
 
Phethai
 
 
The Severe Cyclone “Phethai” crossed Andhra Pradesh/Puducherry areas close 
to Kakinada/Yanam on 19
th
 
December 2018. Since the rainfall associated with the 
system were on the recession period of river no major flood was witnessed in any of the 
basins in Andhra Pradesh.
 
 
 
 
 
 

30
 
 
E
 
Suggestions / Assessment on Central Assistance for Disaster Management 
by Gove
rnment of Odisha and Tamil Nadu.
 
(i)
 
Odisha
 
(a)
 
Assistances from NDRF to Odisha for relief and restoration measures on account 
of Cyclone Titli especially towards Gratuitous Relief and Repair & Restoration of 
damaged infrastructure may be reconsidered by the 
GoI.
 
(b)
 
In view of the methodology of estimation of  requirement of funds for Disaster 
Relief going by actual expenditure incurred in the past, low income States like 
Odisha, despite high vulnerability to natural disasters and significant losses 
suffered by d
isasters, are not able to get higher allocations from SDRF than 
some of the less disaster
-
prone and economically better off States. Estimation of 
the requirement of funds for Disaster Relief should, therefore, be independent of 
actual expenditures and be r
ather based on vulnerability of the State to Disasters 
through scientifically validated hazard vulnerability risk profiles of States.
 
(c)
 
Releases out of NDRF should be taken into account while calculating the size of 
SDRF.
 
(d)
 
Additional allocation of 50 percent 
of the aggregate size of the SDRF may be 
considered in favour of the low income States and States which are more prone 
to disasters.
 
(e)
 
Taking into consideration the combined effect of increasing incidence of natural 
disasters, revision in the SDRF norms and 
price rise, 15 percent annual increase 
(instead of 5% at present) in the corpus of SDRF should be allowed for the 
period of 2020
-
2025.
 
(f)
 
Restoration works of all public infrastructure damages by any approved disaster 
may be considered for funding under SDRF/
 
NDRF.
 
(g)
 
Provision may be made for immediate release of an advance amount on adhoc 
basis from NDRF in case of Natural Disasters of rare severity so as to enable 
States to take up immediate relief, pending the visit of the central team, 
submission of its repo
rt and the examination of the report by the HLC. Besides, 

31
 
 
funding of relief and rehabilitation during Natural Calamities of rare severity out of 
NDRF should be flexible, adequate and objective.
 
(h)
 
The ceiling limit of 10% of SDRF  for expenditure towards ‘Sta
te Specific 
Disasters’ should be done away with and all expenditure in connection with 
notified ‘State Specific Disasters’ should be charged to SDRF. There should be 
additional 10% increase in the corpus of SDRF to accommodate expenditure in 
connection wit
h notified ‘State Specific Disasters’.
 
(i)
 
Management of man
-
made disasters as per provisions of Disaster Management 
Act, 2005 may be considered to be financed from NDRF (100 %) or from any 
other specific fund to be created by GoI. 
 
(j)
 
Keeping in view the wide di
versity in geographical, social and economic factors 
across different regions in the country which requires a flexible approach to relief 
and rehabilitation, the following items should be included in the list of items and 
norms of expenditure for SDRF & ND
RF.
 
(k)
 
Provision should be made in the guidelines for expenditure out of SDRF for 
maintenance of Multipurpose Cyclone Shelters.
 
(l)
 
Provision should be made in the guidelines for expenditure to be incurred out of 
SDRF for repair/maintenance emergency equipment. 
 
(m)
Exemption of examination and tuition fees for the children of calamity affected 
small and marginal farmers should be included in the norms of expenditure out of 
SDRF for reimbursement to the concerned authority. 
 
(n)
 
Expenditure for repair / restoration (of im
mediate nature) of the damaged 
infrastructure relating to all type of damaged infrastructure including all 
educational institutions & non residential government buildings should be met out 
of SDRF/ NDRF instead of present provision for funding the repair a
nd 
restoration of only specified type of damaged  infrastructure.
 
(o)
 
Restoration work of public infrastructure damaged due to different natural 
disasters should be allowed from SDRF/ NDRF on actual cost basis on the 
principle of Build
-
Back
-
Better as per sched
ule of rates of the State Governments 

32
 
 
instead of present provision for funding the repair and restoration of immediate 
nature. 
 
(p)
 
There should be provision for giving subsidy to farmers, out of SDRF, whose land 
is inundated by saline water for more than 15 d
ays due to Cyclone, Storm Surge 
and Tsunami. 
 
(q)
 
In severe drought conditions, norms may be relaxed for expenditure on capital 
works like digging of bore
-
wells, installation of pump sets etc. as these works are 
life
-
saving in nature.
 
(r)
 
The corpus of NDRF may be
 
considered for enhancement to an adequate level 
so as to ensure immediate release of funds from NDRF to the State in case of 
severe disaster in future.
 
(s)
 
In addition to the disaster response, disaster mitigation activities may be 
considered for Central 
support
.
 
(t)
 
Electronic Fund Management System in line with MGNREGs needs to be 
developed for ensuring DBT from State/ Centre
 
(u)
 
Representation of the State in the Central Team/ Sub
-
Committee of the NEC 
while deciding the assistance to the state.
 
(ii)
 
Tamil Nadu
 
(a)
 
Multi
-
hazard Resistant Housing : 
 
Gaja Cyclone has inflicted extensive damages to houses of the poor people living 
in kutcha houses and huts, expecially in the districts of Nagapattinam, Tiruvarur, 
Thanjavur and Padukottai. The destruction of houses will a
dversely affect the 
living conditions of poor who will have to reconstruct their houses with a meagre 
assistance of Rs. 5,200/
-
 
being sanctioned under SDRF. Even if they reconstruct 
their huts they will have to live under the threat of natural disasters ye
ars after 
year.
 
One of the key observations made by the Hon'ble Prime Minister is to learn 
lessons from each disaster to strengthen our resilience and build the 
infrastructure better. As a permanent solution, support has to be extended to the 
poor landless
 
labourers working in different sectors both in rural and urban areas 

33
 
 
to build multi
-
hazard resistant concrete houses. It is requested that taking in to 
account that coastal districts of Tamil Nadu are always subject to natural 
disasters at recurring inter
vals, Government of India may sanction an additional 
allocation for Tamil Nadu to build multi
-
hazard resistant houses at a cost of Rs. 
3,00,000/
-
 
per house for about approximately 2 lakh people both in rural and 
urban areas. A special sanction of Rs. 6,000
 
crores may be made for 
reconstruction of the houses for the poor in the coastal districts of Tamil Nadu.
 
(b)
 
Muilti
-
hazard Resistant Powerlines : 
 
Several districts plunging into darkness during the disasters causes by cyclones 
is a recurring feature in Tamil
 
Nadu. This is due to the crippling 
of the power 
infrastructure especially the transmission lines, high tension and low tension 
poles, transformers and damages to substations due to the high winds gusting 
upto 100 kmph to 160 kmph during cyclones. Cripplin
g of infrastructure, besides 
upsetting the normalcy of the people affected, we also have a telling impact on 
the economy of the State as well as the various sectors dependent on power 
supply. Year after year during North East Monsoon the power sector comes
 
under tremendous stress due to the cyclones which are common during this 
period. The TANGEDCO is forced to spend thousands of crores on a regular 
basis. In order to overcome the recurring damages to the power sector it is 
essential to convert high tension
 
and low tension overhead lines into 
underground cables at least in the town areas of the coastal districts of Tamil 
Nadu, which requires funding by the extent of Rs. 7,077 crores (Rupees 3710 
crores for conversion of High Tension overhead lines and Rs. 33
67 crores for 
conversion of low tension overhead lines into underground cable lines)
. 
It is 
requested that a special package of Rs. 7077 crores may be sanctioned by 
Government of India for conversion of High Tension and Low tension overhead 
lines in the co
astal districts of Tamil Nadu
.
 
(c)
 
Enhanced allocation under NADP/RKVU (Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana) :
 
Due to extensive damage that "Gaja Cyclone" has wrecked in the Coastal 
Districts of Tamil Nadu, there was extensive damages to the Coconut / Cashew / 
Mango
 
trees and Banana Plantations. There is a minimum need to extend 

34
 
 
assistance to the farmers to re
-
grow the Coconut / Cashew / Mango trees which 
plays significant roles in generating income and providing employment in the 
rural economy. In addition, 
there is
 
also a need to increase areas under Banana 
plantation to restore the area of coverage that has been lost due to the Gaja 
cyclone. Taking into account the extensive damages, it is requested that an 
additional allocation may be made under NADP / RKVY scheme
 
to provide 
assistance to the farmers who have lost their crops. It is requested that Rs. 625 
crores may be sanctioned under NADP / RKVY scheme as a special case to 
farmers who have lost the trees / crops during the Gaja cyclone. 
 
(d)
 
Permanent Restoration of 
Damaged Roads :
 
The roads in the cyclone affected districts have been very badly damaged. Since 
smooth restoration and rehabilitation efforts in various sectors require proper 
road connectivity to all areas including interior areas.  Therefore Rs. 378 
crores is 
required for permanent restoration of very badly damaged roads.
 
(e)
 
Rural Infrastructure :
 
The rural infrastructure in Rural Development Department is severely hit by 
cyclone "Gaja". Therefore an amount of Rs. 425 crores is needed towards 
permanent r
estoration of damaged infrastructure in Rural Development 
Department 
-
 
roads, drinking water, electric poles, etc.,
 
(f)
 
Livelihood support : 
 
 
(i)
 
Support for landless labourers  : Rural farmers are largely depended on 
their livestock to offset the negative im
pact of the vagaries of monsoon. 
Unfortunately the cyclone Gaja, has devastated the livestock wealth in several 
districts of Tamil Nadu shaking the very axis of their hope and livelihood. As per 
the preliminary estimates approximately 1002 cattle, 4441 she
ep and goat and 
74,908 poultry have died due to the Gaja cyclone. The Department of Animal 
Husbandry proposes to provide succor to the affected farmers by means of 
assistance through special package of "Free distribution of Milch cattle and 
Sheep / Goats" 
and "Scheme for Poultry Development" which will provide 
sustainable livelihood opportunities to the Gaja affected people and ensure 

35
 
 
continuous income generating opportunities. 10,000 affected farmers will be 
provided with recently calved crossbred Milch Co
ws capable of producing 7 to 10 
litres milk per day 
to one cow to each farmer. Cost of each milch cow shall be 
approximately Rs. 35,000 to Rs. 40,000 and the total cost will be Rs. 40 crore. 
50,000 affected farmers will be provided with 4 goats / sheep of 
6
-
8 months age 
at an unit cost of Rs. 15,000 at a total cost of Rs. 75 crore, 50000 affected 
farmers will be provided with 50 numbers of 4 week old backyard or native chicks 
at a unit cost of Rs. 7,000 at a total outlay of Rs. 35 crore. The total cost of t
he 
livelihood programme shall be Rs. 150 crore. Each farmer shall be provided with 
any one of the above mentioned activities in line with the guidelines of the above 
schemes depending on their abilities. 
 
(ii)
 
Support for fisherman :
 
Gaja cyclone caused wi
de spread damages to 
fishermen properties and affected their livelihood. In order to mitigate the 
livelihood loss to the fishermen in Nagapattinam, Thriruvarur, Thanjavur and 
Pudukottai districts, alternative and allied livelihood support activities such a
s sea 
weed farming, Marine cage culture of fin fishes, Capacity building programmes to 
fisherwomen in value added fish products, Fish Marketing, capacity building 
for 
fisher youth in modern fish marketing, Marine water sports, Marketing 
infrastructure supp
ort to fisheries  cooperatives and Fish Landing Centres 
through insulated fish transport vehicles and retail fish marketing support to 
fisherwomen and retailers through small transport vehicles with accessories may 
be taken up at a cost of Rs. 60 crores. T
he smilar alternative livelihood support 
may be extended to calamity prone other coastal districts at a cost of Rs. 40 
crores. This livelihood support will ensure the calamity prone coastal fisher 
population to have sustainable and increased income and upl
iftment  of their 
socio economic status. A total project to the tune of Rs. 100 crore may be 
considered as a special project. 
 
Revision of SDRF Norm
s
  
 
 
It is once again reiterated that there is a need to enhance existing the scale of 
assistance from the 
existing level of all the components. It is also suggested that the 
existing schemes for assistance for damage of Huts, damages to tree crops and 
assistance for damaged boats, nets and engines of fishermen as noted below:
 

36
 
 
(i)
 
Damages to Huts (Fully and Par
tly) : The norms of assistance to fully damaged / 
destroyed huts is Rs. 5000/
-
 
and for partly damaged huts is Rs. 4100/
-
, various 
representatives are being received both in the districts and State level that the 
assistance given is too low. Therefore it is
 
suggested that amount for fully damaged 
huts be revised to Rs. 25,000/
-
.
 
(ii)
 
Damage / Destruction to Coconut / Mango / Cashew : Currently input subsidy for 
damages to Coconut / Mango /Cashew trees is Rs. 18,000/
-
 
per hectare, as a perennial 
crop, which i
s very meagre when compared with the efforts taken by farmers to raise 
such tree crops. It takes compared with the efforts taken by farmers to raise such tree 
crops. It takes minimum five to seven years for these crops to come up to bearing and 
the farmers
 
have to face distress on multiple accounts economically, socially as well as 
emotionally and psychologically. Farmers need to spend substantial amount to cut and 
remove such fallen trees. Instead of categorizing them under perennial crops, 
assistance shou
ld be granted on per tree basis by taking into account the huge cost 
involved in raising it over years due to its long gestation period for fresh plantations to 
yield. Therefore, it is requested that the scale of assistance be enhanced from Rs. 
18,000/
-
 
pe
r hectare to Rs. 2000/
-
 
per tree (cost of cutting and removal included).
 
(iii)
 
Fisheries Sector : 
 
(a)
 
Proposal to compensate fully damaged vessesl : As per the SDRF norms fully 
damaged mechanised, FRP vallams and catamaran boats are eligi
b
le for Rs. 5 lak
h, 
Rs. 75,000 and Rs. 32,000 respectively which is very insufficient to compensat
e the 
affected of cyclone as prevailing cost involved in boat building process is 2 to 4 times 
higher than that of the SDRF norms fixed. Therefore, minimum of Rs. 10 lakh for 
each 
mechanised boats, Rs. 1.5 lakh for each FRP Vallam and Rs. 65,000 per each 
catamaranan should be provided in all the fully damaged cases and accordingly SDRF 
norms to be revised or gap over and above the SDRF norms may be met under the 
other schemes /
 
sources.
 
(b)
 
Proposal to compensate partly damaged vessels and Nets and Engines :
 
i)
 
Norms under the SDRF as a compensation for damage of nets is only Rs. 
10,000/
-
 
& for OBM / IBE engines its Rs. 5,000/
-
 
each which is insufficient. As 

37
 
 
per the prevailing cost
 
it has to be Rs. 25,000/
-
 
& may be considered under 
SDRF norms or gap may be met from other funds as deemed fit.
 
ii)
 
Similarly maximum limits fixed under SDRF norms for partial damages of 
mechanised boats, FRP vallams, catamaran may be increased from existing
 
Rs. 
3 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs, Rs. 20000/
-
 
to Rs. 30,000, Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 15,000/
-
 
respectively.
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu has been repeatedly giving representations for 
revision of norms for assistance under NDRF / SDRF. We are thankful that Ministry of 
H
ome Affairs in Government of India had constituted a Committee to examine the issue 
and it is learnt that the Committee has submitted its recommendations. It is requested 
that orders notifying new norms may be issued early enhancing the assistance for 
vari
ous sectors, especially the power sector as represented repeatedly by Government 
of Tamil Nadu. 
 
F
 
Assesment of Damages / losses to the States of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha
.
 
KERALA
 
(i)
 
The Government of Kerala commissioned a 
Post Disaster Need Assessment 
(PDNA) to be lead by the United Nations Organizations.  Accordingly, the PDNA 
concluded with a damage and loss estimate of Rs.26,720 crores and a build
-
back
-
better 
need of Rs.31,000 crores.  Sector wise assessment as in the PD
NA is given below.  It 
was for the first time that the entire PDNA exercise was being conducted in any State in 
such a comprehensive manner.
 
Sector
 
Damage
 
Loss
 
Total Effect
 
Total Recovery
 
 
INR 
Crores
 
INR Crores
 
INR 
Crores
 
USD 
Million
 
INR 
Crores
 
USD 
Million
 
Social Sectors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Housing, Land and 
Settlements
 
5,027
 
1,383
 
6,410
 
916
 
5,443
 
778
 
Health and Nutrition
 
499
 
28
 
527
 
75
 
600
 
86
 
Education and Child 
Protection
 
175
 
4
 
179
 
26
 
214
 
31
 
Cultural Heritage
 
38
 
37
 
75
 
11
 
80
 
11
 
SUB
-
TOTAL
 
5,739
 
1,452
 
7,191
 
1,028
 
6,337
 
906
 
Productive sectors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, Fisheries and 
Livestock
 
2,975
 
4,180
 
7,155
 
1,022
 
4,498
 
643
 
SUB
-
TOTAL
 
2,975
 
4,180
 
7,155
 
1,022
 
4,498
 
643
 

38
 
 
Infrastructure sectors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Water, Sanitation and 
Hygiene
 
890
 
471
 
1,361
 
195
 
1,331
 
190
 
Transportation
a,b,c
 
 
 
 
 
10,046
 
1,435
 
Power
b,c
 
 
 
 
 
353
 
50
 
Irrigation
b,c
 
 
 
 
 
1,483
 
212
 
Other infrastructure
b,c
 
 
 
 
 
2,446
 
349
 
SUB
-
TOTAL
 
890
 
471
 
1,361
 
195
 
15,659
 
2,236
 
Cross
-
cutting sectors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment
 
26
 
0.04
 
26
 
4
 
148
 
21
 
Employment and Livelihood
 
881
 
9,477
 
10,358
 
1,480
 
3,896
 
557
 
Disaster Risk Reduction
 
17
 
583
 
599
 
86
 
110
 
16
 
Gender and Social Inclusion
 
0.9
 
0
 
0.9
 
0.13
 
35
 
5
 
Local Governance
 
28
 
0
 
28
 
4
 
32
 
5
 
SUB
-
TOTAL
 
953
 
10,060
 
11,013
 
1,574
 
4,221
 
604
 
TOTAL (A)
 
10,557
 
16,163
 
26,720
 
3,819
 
30,715
 
4,389
 
Integrated Water Resources 
Management (B)
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
24
 
3
 
GRAND TOTAL (A + B)
 
 
 
 
 
30,739
 
4,392
 
GRAND TOTAL 
(ROUNDED OFF)
 
 
 
 
 
31,000
 
4,400
 
 
a
 
Recovery costs for roads from urban and rural infrastructure sections are included
 
b  
In Rapid Damage and 
Needs Assessment, the cost of damage and loss has not been quantified.
 
c  
Estimates taken from the World Bank
-
Asian Development Bank Joint Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (IRDNA).
 
Note: Figures are rounded and so column totals may not add up precisely.
 
(
ii
)
 
Estimate of Damage and Needs
 
(a)
 
Estimated total loss due to Kerala Floods 2018 
-
 
Rs.26,720 crores (PDNA 
Kerala, 2018)
 
(b)
 
Estimated amount required for rebuilding better 
-
 
Rs.31,000 crores.
 
(iii
)
 
Availability of Funds
 
(a)
 
Chief Minister's Distress Relief Fund 
-
 
Rs.2,683.18 crores
 
(b)
 
State Disaster Response Fund 2018
-
19 
-
 
Rs.214 crores
 
(c)
 
Additional advance allocation from NDRF 2018
-
19 (Floods) 
-
 
Rs.600 
crores
 
(d)
 
Expenditure from SDRF as on 5
-
12
-
2018 
-
 
Rs.601.85 crores
 
Pending bills (ready of immediate disbursement) 
-
 
Rs.7
00 crores (more bills 
expected).
 
 
 
 

39
 
 
KARNATAKA
 
(i)
 
Extent of Damage due to Natural Calamities
 
Nature and period of natural calamity: Flood during August 2018
 
Sl. No.
 
Item
 
Details
 
1.
 
Total number of Districts in the state
 
30
 
2.
 
Number and names of 
districts affected
 
8
 
3.
 
Number of villages affected
 
963
 
4.
 
Population affected (in lakh)
 
3.85
 
5.
 
Total land area affected (in lakh ha)
 
 
6.
 
Cropped area affected (in lakh ha)
 
 
 
(i) Total cropped area affected (in lakh ha)
 
3.21
 
 
(ii) Estimated loss to 
crops (Rs. in lakhs)
 
167084.00
 
 
(iii) Area where cropped damage was more than 33% (in lakh ha) 
 
3.15
 
7.
 
Percentage of area held by SMF
 
 
 
(i) in the State as a whole
 
40%
 
 
(ii) in the affected districts
 
53%
 
8.
 
Houses damaged:
-
 
 
 
(a) No. of houses 
damaged :
-
 
7865
 
 
(i) fully damaged pucca houses
 
842
 
 
(ii) fully damaged kutcha houses 
 
686
 
 
(iii) Severely damaged pucca houses
 
3580
 
 
(iv) Severely damaged kutcha houses
 
2757
 
 
(v) Partially damaged houses pucca houses
 
0
 
 
(vi) Partly damaged houses 
katcha houses
 
0
 
 
(vii) No. of huts damaged
 
0
 
 
(viii) No. of Cattle Sheds damaged
 
0
 
 
(b) Estimated value of damage to houses (Rs. in lakh)
 
16751.00
 
9.
 
No. of Human lives lost
 
67
 
10.
 
No. of persons with grievous injuries
 
98
 
11.
 
No. of persons with 
minor injuries
 
196
 
12.
 
Animals lost:
-
 
 
 
(a) No. of big animals lost
 
189
 
 
(b) No. of small animals lost
 
51
 
 
(c) No. of poultry (birds) lost
 
0
 
13.
 
Damage to public properties:
-
 
 
 
(a
) Estimated value of the damage to public properties (Rs. in 
lakhs)
 
178113.00
 
14.
 
Estimated total damage to houses, crops and public properties 
(Rs in lakhs)
 
361948.00
 
 
 
 
 

40
 
 
(ii)
 
Status of expenditure from State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) Account 
during 2018
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(Rs. in Crore)
 
Sl. No.
 
Item
 
Amount
 
 
(i) Receipts
 
 
1.
 
Opening Balance in CRF account as on 1.4.2018 (of 
Financial year):
 
 
 
(a) SDRF
 
 
 
(b) NDRF
 
41.98
 
 
(c) Total
 
41.98
 
2.
 
SDRF Release made during instant financial year 
(Central and State Share) (upto 30.8.2018)
 
 
 
(a) First installment (Rs.120 cr 
central + Rs.40 cr 
state)
 
120.00
 
 
(b) Second installment
 
 
 
(c) Total
 
120.00
 
3.
 
NDRF Release during the instant financial year if any
 
Nil
 
4.
 
Interest received on investments made as per the 
CRF Scheme
 
Nil
 
5.
 
Total funds available in the SDRF Account
 
201.98
 
 
(1 + 2 + 3 + 4)
 
 
 
(i) Expenditure
 
 
6.
 
Expenditure incurred as per norms on approved 
natural calamities as per the Scheme of SDRF/NDRF 
(indicate calamity 
-
 
wise expenditure)
 
 
 
(a) Flood
 
69.00
 
 
(b) Drought
 
 
7.
 
Expenditure incurred on training 
to specialized teams 
of the State personnel
 
 
8.
 
Expenditure incurred on procurement of search and 
rescue equipment etc. (as per extant approved 
items).
 
 
9.
 
Total Expenditure incurred (6 + 7 + 8)
 
69.00
 
10.
 
Balance available in the SDRF account of the 
instant 
financial year:
-
 
 
 
(a) SDRF
 
91.00
 
 
(b) NDRF
 
41.98
 
 
(c) Total
 
132.98
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41
 
 
TAMIL NADU
 
(i)
 
ASSISTANCE FROM GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
 
(a)
 
The State Executive Committee headed by the Chief Secretary of the 
State which administers State Disaster Response 
Fund in Tamil Nadu ensures 
that the funds drawn from the State Disaster Response Fund are utilized only for 
the items of expenditure contained in the guideline issued by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Government of India following prescribed norms.
 
 
The con
tribution to be provided by the Government of India and the Government 
of Tamil Nadu to the State Disaster Response Fund for Tamil Nadu State, as 
recommended by the Fourteen Finance Commission, for the period from 2015
-
16 
to 2019
-
20 is as follows:
 
 
(Rupees
 
in Crores)
 
Year
 
Share of G.O.I from 
2015
-
16 to 2017
-
18 
(75%)
 
2018
-
19 & 2019
-
20 
(90%)
 
Share of G.O.T.N. 
from 2015
-
16 to
 
2017
-
18 (25%)
 
2018
-
19 & 2019
-
20 
(10%)
 
Total
 
2015
-
2016
 
509.25
 
169.75
 
679.00
 
2016
-
2017
 
534.75
 
178.25
 
713.00
 
2017
-
2018
 
561.00
 
187.00
 
748.00
 
2018
-
2019
 
707.40
 
78.60
 
786.00
 
2019
-
2020
 
742.50
 
82.50
 
825.00
 
Total
 
3054.90
 
696.10
 
3751.00
 
 
(b)
 
The details of fund available in the State Disaster Response Funds are 
given below:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rs. in Crores)
 
1.
 
Opening balance as on 01.04.2017
 
491.62
 
2.
 
1st installment of SDRF for the year 2017
-
18
 
393.00
 
3.
 
2nd installment of SDRF for the year 2017
-
18
 
0.00
 
Will be released in December 
2018
 
 
Total
 
884.62
 
4.
 
(a) Expenditure incurred for various relief works under 
SDRF
 
155.64
 
 
(b) Expenditure 
incurred on procurement of search 
and rescue equipment
 
21.10
 
 
(c) Expenditure incurred on Capacity Building
 
0.02
 
 
Total
 
176.76
 
5
 
Amount available as on date
 
707.86
 

42
 
 
 
As on date, the State Government has released Rs.707.86 Crores under SDRF 
for immediate
 
relief and restoration activities in view of the extensive damages caused 
by the Severe Cyclonic storm GAJA.
 
For the additional requirement of funds as per the 
memorandum, additional release of Rs.723.14 Crore from the National Disaster 
Response Fund is n
ecessary, which may kindly be sanctioned at the earliest.
 
The state 
government will need a sum of Rs.723.14 Crores for immediate relief and temporary 
restoration from NDRF and Rs.14910 Crores for subsequent permanent restoration as 
special assistance from 
Government of India.  The total requirement sought from 
Central Government is Rs.15633.14 Crores.
 
 
ANDHRA PRADESH
 
(i)
 
Sector Wise Estimated Damages / Losses
:
 
Sector Wise Damages/Losses & the Amount Required For Restoration
 
Sl. No.
 
Sector
 
Estimated Losses
 
 
 
(Rupees in Crores)
 
1.
 
Roads & Buildings
 
100.46
 
2.
 
Panchayat Raj
 
1.7
 
3.
 
Power
 
4.3727
 
4.
 
Rural Water Supply
 
0.9664
 
5.
 
Endowments
 
0.09
 
6.
 
Forest Department 
 
0.2
 
7.
 
Health Department
 
0.134
 
8.
 
Fisheries Dept
 
0.81
 
9.
 
Agriculture
 
292.75
 
10.
 
Horticulture (Input subsidy as per NDRF norms)
 
164.27
 
11.
 
House Damages/Inundated
 
0.919
 
12.
 
Ex
-
gratia (Injured Person)
 
0.001
 
13.
 
Essential Commodities & Relief Camps etc.,
 
33.7896
 
 
Total Damages in Cost
 
600.464
 
 
 
 
 
 

43
 
 
(ii)
 
Sector wise Damages/ Losses 
(As per NDRF Norms)
 
SECTOR WISE DAMAGES/LOSSES AND THE AMOUNT REQUIRED FOR RESTORATION
 
Sl. 
No.
 
SECTOR
 
Number of 
affected Districts
 
Amount required
 
 
 
 
(Rupees in Crores)
 
 
 
 
Temporary 
Restoration
 
Permanent 
Restoration
 
Total
 
1.
 
Roads & Buildings
 
7
 
16.06
 
84.4
 
100.46
 
2.
 
Panchayat Raj
 
1
 
0
 
1.7
 
1.7
 
3.
 
Power
 
5
 
4.3727
 
0
 
4.3727
 
4.
 
Rural Water Supply
 
1
 
0.9664
 
0
 
0.9664
 
5.
 
Endowments
 
1
 
0.09
 
0
 
0.09
 
6.
 
Forest Department
 
1
 
0.2
 
0
 
0.2
 
7.
 
Health Department
 
2
 
0.134
 
0
 
0.134
 
8.
 
Fisheries Dept
 
1
 
0.451
 
0
 
0.451
 
9.
 
Agriculture (Input subsidy as 
per NDRF norms)
 
6
 
74.887
 
0
 
74.887
 
10.
 
Horticulture (Input subsidy as 
per NDRF norms) 
 
6
 
11.083
 
0
 
11.083
 
11.
 
House Damages/Inundated
 
5
 
0.919
 
0
 
0.919
 
12
 
Ex
-
gratia (Injured Person)
 
1
 
0.001
 
0
 
0.001
 
13.
 
Essential Commodities & 
Relief Camps etc.,
 
5
 
33.7896
 
0
 
33.7896
 
 
Total Damages in Crores
 
 
142.9537
 
86.1
 
229.0537
 
 
ODISHA
 
(i)
 
The details of damages caused to public infrastructure of Departments are given 
 
below:
 
Amount required towards relief and restoration
 
Sl. No.
 
Departments
 
(Rs. in lakh)
 
1.
 
Water Resource Department
 
 
 
Loss to rivers & canal embankment
 
30033.68
 
 
Loss to drainage channels
 
364.20
 
 
Loss Repair to Minor Irrigation Project
 
2827.65
 
 
Loss to buildings of MI Sector
 
120.00
 
 
Loss to Lift Irrigation Projects
 
1657.38
 
 
Loss to river & canal embankment roads
 
629.25
 
 
Loss to damaged buildings of WR sector
 
667.90
 
2.
 
Works Department
 
 
 
Loss to Roads, Culverts
 
11695.99
 
 
Loss to NHs maintained by State
 
1421.00
 
3.
 
Rural Development Department
 
 
 
Loss to Roads, 
Culverts
 
28641.53
 
 
Loss to Buildings (PHC/CHC etc.)
 
1776.20
 
4.
 
Housing & Urban Development Department
 
 
 
Damages to urban roads, drains and culvers
 
5633.37
 
 
Repair of water supply system tube wells
 
1712.00
 

44
 
 
5.
 
Panchayati Raj and DW Department
 
 
 
Repair 
of GP/PS Roads
 
44236.33
 
 
Repair of Drinking water supply system
 
5039.65
 
 
Loss to Panchayat Ghars
 
8229.02
 
 
Repair of School Buildings
 
3482.63
 
6.
 
Agriculture Department
 
 
 
Prepair/restoration of damaged Water Harvesting 
Sructures
 
893.99
 
 
Loss to Seed 
storage Godown
 
46.50
 
 
Damage to lift irrigation
 
7.65
 
 
Damage to infrastructure
 
204.00
 
7.
 
Energy Department
 
 
 
Repair/restoration of Electrical lines
 
13303.18
 
8.
 
Fisheries & Animal Resource Department
 
 
 
Provision of cattle feed148.98
 
148.98
 
 
Medicines
 
& Animal  Care
 
143.84
 
 
Loss of net and boats
 
28.70
 
 
Animal/livestock Loss (Replacement of animal)
 
314.47
 
 
Disposal of Carcasses
 
16.29
 
 
Damage to Veterinary Institutions like VD,LAC etc.
 
253.00
 
 
Repair of damaged fish pond
 
55.69
 
 
Repair of fish seed 
farm
 
4.593
 
 
Loss to Govt. Fish farms & fish fed ice plant
 
58.25
 
9.
 
ST & SC Dev., Minorities & Backward Classes 
Department
 
 
 
Repair of School Buildings
 
684.09
 
10.
 
Women & Child Dev. Dept.
 
 
 
Repair of Anganwadi Centres & other buildings
 
1728.50
 
11.
 
Textile & Handloom Dept.
 
 
 
Loss to Rural Artisans (Handicraft Sector)
 
0.86
 
 
Loss to Handloom Sector (Weavers)
 
7.24
 
 
Loss to Sericulture Sector
 
341.80
 
12.
 
Cooperation Department
 
 
 
Damage to Buildings of cooperative society
 
1348.23
 
 
Damage to Buildings
 
of MARKFED
 
62.65
 
 
Damage to Aska Co
-
operative Sugar Industries
 
1510.84
 
 
Damage to ARCS office, Gunupur, Rayagada
 
1.00
 
 
Damage to assets of RMCs of Gajapati, Ganjam, 
Rayagada, Kandhamal
 
85.00
 
13.
 
Special Relief Commissioner
 
 
 
HB Assistance
 
20944.17
 
 
Ex
-
gratia for loss of lives
 
284.00
 
 
Emergent Relief (Gratuitous Relief)
 
37581.00
 
 
Search & Rescue
 
1000.00
 
 
De
-
silting of Agriculture land (Sand cast)
 
161.662
 
 
Provision of input subsidy to farmers
 
30766.58
 
 
Provision of Temporary accommodation, food, 
clothing & medical care
 
15500.00
 

45
 
 
 
Emergency Supply of Drinking Water
 
1000.00
 
 
Clearing of Debris
 
500.00
 
 
Clothing & Utensils
 
777.21
 
 
Grand Total
 
277931.75
 
 
(ii)
 
Submission of Memorandum to GoI:
 
The Government of Odisha submitted its 
Preliminary and 
Final Memorandum to Government of India on 20.10.2018 and 
31.10.2018 respectively seeking Central Assistance from NDRF.
 
(iii)
 
Visit of Inter
-
Ministerial Central Team:
 
In response to Memorandum, an Inter
-
Ministerial Central Team led by Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government 
of India visited the State from 31.10.2018 to 2.11.2018 for an on the spot assessment of 
the damages in the wake
 
of Very Severe Cyclonic Storm '
TITLI
'
 
and associate 
disasters.
 
(iv)
 
Assistance Received from NDRF:
 
The Hig
h Level Committee in its meeting held 
on 17 Dec 2018 have approved an expenditure of Rs. 1023.59 crore and taking into 
account the funds available in SDRF of the State, an amount of Rs.341.72 crore has 
been released by the Government of India from NDMA on 
1 Jan 2019.
 
(v)
 
The State Government has since released an amount of Rs.1696.09 crore to the 
Collectors of the affected districts and the concerned departments towards different 
relief measures and repair/restoration of damaged infrastructure.  Thus, the e
xpenditure 
approved by HLC as well as the funds released from NDRF is grossly inadequate 
especially towards Gratuitous Relief and repair & restoration of damaged infrastructure 
and the same needs reconsideration.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46
 
 
CHAPTER 
-
 
III
 
Overview of Central 
Assistance and Relief for Disaster Management and Natural 
Calamities
 
A
 
Financial Mechanism and role of Central & State Governments
 
 
The primary responsibility of undertaking rescue, relief and rehabilitation 
measures in the event of a natural disaster rest
s with the concerned State Government. 
The Central Government, wherever required, supplements the efforts of the State 
Governments by providing logistics and financial support in cases of natural disasters of 
severe nature and beyond coping capacity of the
 
State resources.
 
Early Warning 
Systems are in place to provide early warning of an impending disaster by the 
forecasting agencies of Government of India on real time basis to all the concerned 
stakeholders for taking appropriate precautionary measures. Th
is helps in timely 
evacuation of the vulnerable population and improves preparedness.
 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs remains in constant touch with the States for assisting them to ensure effective 
relief & response. The logistic support provided by the Governme
nt of India includes 
mobilizing and deployment of aircrafts, helicopters, boats/ BAUTS and equipment 
including rescue and medical aid.
 
Government of India provides immediate response 
and rescue by dispatching specialist teams of National Disaster Response 
Force and 
personnel of Armed Forces 
–
 
Army, Navy, Coastguards and Airforce and Central Para 
Military Forces are also mobilized in the rescue effort. Twelve battalions of National 
Disaster Response Force (NDRF) have been deployed throughout the country 
spec
ifically for rescue, relief and response during disaster. Based on vulnerability profile 
of different regions of the country, these specialist battalions have been presently 
stationed at the various strategic locations all over the country. The States have
 
also 
been encouraged to develop State Disaster Response Force (SDRF). Regular mock 
drills are being organized by the NDRF. NDRF teams are constantly engaged in 
familiarization exercises (FAMAX) as also in community awareness/ preparedness 
programmes in fa
r flung and inaccessible areas.
 
Besides provision of immediate relief 
materials & essential commodities including medical aid and stores, Government also 
assists in restoration of critical infrastructure and facilities including communication 
network and s
uch other assistance as may be required by the affected States to meet 
the situation effectively.
 
Besides assisting States in preparedness, risk mitigation and 

47
 
 
response in the event of a disaster, Government of India has made financial 
arrangements in the 
form of State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and National 
Disaster Response Fund (NDRF)for the p
urpose of immediate relief
 
during severe 
natural Calamity. The funds are for the purpose of assisting States in providing 
immediate relief to the affected community in the event of any of the twelve notified 
natural calamities viz; avalanche, cyclone, cloudburst, drought, earthquak
e, tsunami, 
fire, flood, hailstorm, landslide, pest attack and cold wave/ frost. In addition, 10% of the 
annual fund allocation of the SDRF may be used for localized State specific natural 
calamities.
 
Government of India (GoI) had enhanced the allocation u
nder SDRF from 
Rs 33,580 crore for the period 2010
-
11 to 2014
-
15 to Rs 61,220 crore for the period 
2015
-
16 to 2019
-
20. The norms for relief assistance were also enhanced in the year 
2015. From the year 2018
-
19, Central share in SDRF for all states has been
 
enhanced 
from 75% to 90% by which there will be an additional SDRF contribution by Central 
Government of Rs. 1690.35 crore in 2018
-
19 and Rs. 1774.67 crore in 2019
-
20. During 
Financial Year 2018
-
19, an amount of Rs. 11542.50 crore has been allocated as 
Ce
ntral Share to all the States in their SDRF accounts. The SDRF is released in two 
installments as per Guidelines. Government has already released Rs. 7353.265 crores 
Central Share to26 States.  In addition, financial assistance from NDRF amounting to 
Rs. 5
507.72 crore has also been released from NDRF to 09 States during the current 
financial year which were affected by calamities of a severe nature.
 
 
State Governments are primarily responsible for execution of relief operations in 
the wake of natural calami
ties. Government of India supplements the efforts of the State 
Governments by extending financial assistance, if necessary, from NDRF as provided in 
the recommendations of the Finance Commission. Some of the salient features of 
Central assistance for disas
ter Management are as follows:
 
(i)
 
The Central assistance for disaster response has evolved over the awards of 
successive Finance Commissions. 
 
(ii)
 
State Disaster Response Funds (SDRFs) and National Disaster Response Funds 
(NDRF) are set up at the State and the Un
ion levels under sections 48(1) (a) and 
46(1) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 respectively.
 
(iii)
 
As recommended by the 14
th
 
Finance Commission (FFC), at present the NDRF 
scheme covers the following 12 natural calamities: Cyclone, Drought, 

48
 
 
Earthquake, Fire,
 
Flood, Tsunami, Hailstorm, Landslide, Avalanche, Cloud Burst, 
Pest Attack and Cold wave & Frost.
 
(iv)
 
 
Guidelines for operation of NDRF and SDRF are framed by Ministry of Home 
Affairs, which is the nodal Ministry concerned with disaster management. 
 
(v)
 
The fundin
g of assistance is towards providing immediate relief. It is not for 
compensation or loss.
 
 
Mitigation and long term reconstruction of assets is not financed through NDRF, 
but through overall development plans of the Centre and the States. Ministry of 
Finance 
has introduced flexi
-
fund component within CSS wherein at least 25% of plan budget of 
each CSS is earmarked for meeting, inter
-
alia, the objectives of undertaking mitigation / 
restoration activities in the case of natural calamities in sectors cove
red by CSS.
 
B
 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF)
 
 
In the event of a calamity of severe nature when SDRF is insufficient to meet the 
relief  requirement, additional
 
assistance from NDRF in excess of the balances available 
in its SDRF
 
account 
is released after following the laid down procedure 
viz, 
assessment 
by the Inter
-
 
Ministerial Central Team (IMCT), recommendation of 
Sub Committee
-
 
of 
National Executive Committee 
and approval by High Level Committee (HLC) thereof.   
NDRF is therefore, rel
eased to supplement the efforts of state government in providing 
immediate relief/assistance in case of severe calamities. The quantum of assistance 
from NDRF is subject to adjustment of 50% of the balance in SDRF as on 1
st
 
April of the 
current financial  
year.  Mitigation, and long term reconstruction of assets is not financed 
through NDRF, but through overall development plans of the Centre and the States. 
14
th
 
Finance Commission in its report (para10.26) has stated that if the cesses are 
discontinued or 
when they are subsumed under GST in future, the union Government 
would ensure an assured source of funding for the NDRF.
 
NDRF is a cess based fund 
and the provision for the Fund is made on the basis of collections in the form of National 
Calamity Contingen
cy Duty (NCCD) imposed on specified goods under Central Excise 
and Customs. NCCD was levied through Finance Act, 2001 on tobacco products, 
vehicles, petroleum crude oil and cellular mobile phones being goods manufactured or 
produced as per rates specified 
in Seventh Schedule of the Finance Act, 2001. With the 
introduction of GST, NCCD on vehicles and cellular mobile phones was abolished by 
amending the Seventh Schedule to Finance Act, 2001 through the Taxation and 

49
 
 
Amendment Laws, 2017 Act notified on 5
th
 
Ma
y, 2017. However, NCCD continues to be 
levied on tobacco products as an additional duty of excise as central government has 
power to levy additional duties on tobacco products in addition to the GST and 
Compensation Cess leviable on tobacco products. Furth
er, NCCD is also being levied 
on Crude petroleum as petroleum has been kept out of the purview of levy of GST and 
Central Excise Duty and NCCD is leviable on it.
 
With the introduction of GST, the scope 
of coverage of NCCD is shrinking thereby reducing the 
tax receipts on this account. It 
may be stated that tax revenue collection in the form of NCCD has been substantially 
reduced from Rs. 5690 crore in 2015
-
16 to Rs. 2500 crore in 2018
-
19 (BE). Any 
expenditure from NDRF beyond the funds available under NCCD 
has an adverse 
impact on the finances of Government of India.
 
Comparison of NCCD Receipts and NDRF releases (Rs. in Crore)
 
 
Year
 
National Calamity 
Contingency 
Duty
 
NDRF 
Released
 
Difference between 
NCCD received and 
NDRF released
 
2010
-
11
 
3900
 
4,179
 
-
279
 
2011
-
12
 
3998
 
2,459
 
1539
 
2012
-
13
 
2810
 
2,810
 
0
 
2013
-
14
 
4650
 
4,650
 
0
 
2014
-
15
 
3461
 
3,461
 
0
 
2015
-
16
 
5690
 
12,452
 
-
6762
 
2016
-
17
 
6450
 
11,441
 
-
4991
 
2017
-
18
 
3660
 
4,723
 
-
1063
 
2018
-
19*
 
2500
 
5,508*
 
 
* Releases for FY 2018
-
19 is up to 21.12.2018.
 
 
NDRF is maintained by Government of India in the Public Account. 
 
(i)
 
Ministries
 
responsible for operation of Scheme of NDRF:
 
Ministry of Agriculture:     Drought, hailstorm, 
P
est
 
a
ttack, Cold Wave & Frost 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs:   All other calamities.
 
(ii)
 
Assessment of Relief Assistance from the NDRF
 
: 
Upon a request made by a 
State not having adequate balance in its State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF), 
Ministry of Home Affairs or the Ministry of Agriculture, as the case may
 
be
, assess need 
for additi
onal assistance from NDRF under the existing guidelines and the approved 
items and norms of expenditure notified by MHA
.
 
Details of releases from NDRF during 
2010
-
11 to 2017
-
18 ( till date) are as under:
 

50
 
 
                                                                
( Rs. in crore)
 
Year
 
Budget 
Estimate
 
Released
 
2010
-
11
 
3560.00
 
4179.25
 
2011
-
12
 
4525.00
 
2458.92
 
2012
-
13
 
4620.00
 
2810.29
 
2013
-
14
 
4800.00
 
4649.94
 
2014
-
15
 
5050.00
 
3460.88
 
2015
-
16
 
5690.00
 
12451.96
 
2016
-
17
 
6450.00
 
11441.30
 
2017
-
18
 
7167.00
 
4722.53
 
2018
-
19 
(till 
date)
 
10000.00
 
5507.72
 
 
 
The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) oversees the utilisation of releases from 
NDRF for the purposes for which funds have been released and monitor 
compliance 
with the guidelines of NDRF.  States will need to provide the required information to 
MHA.
 
C
 
State Disaster Response Force (SDRF)
 
 
Fourteenth Finance Commission (14
th
 
FC) has adopted the practice of previous 
Commissions and used past expenditure on disaster relief for the period 2006
-
07 to 
2012
-
13 to determine the SDRF corpus for each State and accordingly, recommended 
an amount of Rs. 61,219 crore as aggregated corpus
 
of State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF) for all States for award period 2015
-
20 with States contributing 10% (6122 
crore) and the remaining 90% (Rs. 55097 crore ) coming from Central Government. 
State
-
 
wise allocation to the SDRF alongwith Central and Stat
es’ shares for the award 
period 2015
-
20
.
 
The 14
th
 
FC has also recommended that upto 10% of fund available 
under the SDRF can be used by a State for occurrences which State considers to be 
disasters within its local context and which are not in the list of 
disasters notified by 
MHA. 
The Government has accepted the above recommendation with the modification 
that the percentage share of the States will continue to be as before, and that the flows 
will also be of the same order (linked to the extent of cess), a
s in the existing system; 
and that , once GST is in place, the recommendation of FFC on disaster relief would be 
fully implemented. Accordingly, Central share of SDRF has been released to States up 
to 2017
-
18 as per the earlier pattern of sharing (recommen
ded by the 13
th
 
FC) i.e. 75:25 

51
 
 
between Centre and States in case of general category States and 90:10 in case of 
special category States.
 
Subsequently, with the implementation of GST it has been 
decided to implement the recommendation of 14
th
 
FC in full w.e.f. 01.04.2018. 
Accordingly, all States will contribute 10% to the SDRF and 
the remaining 90% 
would 
be contributed by the Union Government during 2018
-
19 and 2019
-
20 as per the 
recommended allocation by 14
th
 
FC.
 
Ministry of Finance, Departme
nt of Expenditure 
releases the Centre’s share of SDRF to the State Governments in two instalments 
-
 
in 
June and in November every year, upon recommendation of Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Year
-
 
wise releases of Central contribution to SDRF are as under:
      
                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
( Rs. in crore)
 
 
Year
 
Budget 
Estimate
 
Amount 
Released
 
 
 
 
2010
-
11
 
4677.82
 
4337.63
 
2011
-
12
 
4911.70
 
4279.45
 
2012
-
13
 
5157.29
 
5208.29
 
2013
-
14
 
5415.17
 
6034.09
 
2014
-
15
 
5685.95
 
5629.45
 
2015
-
16
 
8512.50
 
8756.01
 
2016
-
17
 
8938.20
 
8374.95
 
2017
-
18(RE)
 
9382.80
 
9382.80
 
2018
-
19 (till date)
 
9852.13
 
7353.27
 
 
D.
 
Response of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) in States
 
of Kerala, 
 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh
 
(i)
 
General preparedness: 
 
 
a)
 
Familiarization Exercise (FAMEx) conducted in 2018:
 
 
Sl.N.
 
State
 
Districts/Places
 
No of FAMEx
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
Kasargod, Kannur, Thrissur, Palakad
 
4
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
Hassu, Tumkuru
 
2
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
Ramnath, Pudukkotti, Nityapuram, Tiruvallur, 
Nagapattinam, 
Cuddalore, Salem,Dharmapuri
 
8
 
4.
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
Anantapur, Kadappa, Nellore, East Godavari, 
West Godavari
 
5
 
 
 

52
 
 
 
During the Famex, NDRF teams stayed in these districts for a period of two 
weeks and conducted various community awareness programmes and 
training for the 
preparedness of stake holders as well as community.
 
b)
 
Community Awareness Programme (CAP) conducted in 2018:
 
 
Sl.No.
 
State
 
No of Programmes
 
No of Beneficiaries 
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
14
 
1935
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
12
 
2672
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
25
 
11665
 
4.
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
42
 
8328
 
 
c)
 
School Safety Programme (SSP) conducted in 2018:
 
 
Sl.No.
 
State
 
No of Programmes
 
No of Beneficiaries 
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
2
 
573
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
5
 
1845
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
11
 
4603
 
4.
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
2
 
511
 
 
d)
 
Mock exercise conducted in 2018:
 
 
Sl.No.
 
State
 
No
 
of Mock Exercise
 
No of Beneficiaries 
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
5
 
801
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
4
 
1191
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
12
 
3794
 
4.
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
21
 
25015
 
 
e)
 
DM division MHA organized a conference of relief commissioners/secretaries 
(DM), department of Disaster Management on 18
th
 
May 2018 in which relief 
commissioners/ representative of the states participated in the conference to 
review the status of preparation for the south west monsoon 2018.
 
 

53
 
 
f)
 
In addition, NDRF also conducted annual conference on capacity building of 
SDRF on 25
th
 
June 2018 in which the dignitaries and delegates of various 
states/UTs participated in the conference to streamline the efforts and 
achieve standardization in protocols, preparedness process, training and 
response. 
 
(ii)
 
Deployment/Achievement of NDRF in 
2018:
 
 
KERALA : 
 
 
 
Teams 
deployed
 
No. of Persons 
rescued
 
No. of Persons 
Evacuated
 
Dead Bodies 
Retrieved
 
Live Stock
 
77
 
537
 
24940
 
22
 
131
 
 
Brief of some Major operations in 2018:
 
Floods:
 
 
(a) First phase : ( 14.06.2018 to 19.06.2018 ) 
 
During this period, 
in view of heavy rainfalls, 05   teams were deployed   Kerala. 
During the deployment, NDRF teams rescued 02 persons, evacuated 355 
persons, retrieved 12 dead bodies and rescued 12 livestock. In addition to rescue 
and response operations, NDRF also organize
d medical camps and provided 
medical assistance to needy persons.
 
(
b
) Second phase: ( 08.08.2018 to 20.08.2018 ) 
 
NDRF deployed 58 teams to provide the immediate response in flood affected 
areas of Kerala i.e 
Thrissur,  Ernakulum , Alappuzha , Wayanad,  
Kozhikode,  
Idukki , Pathanamthitta,  Mallapuram,  Kottayam, Trivandrum
 
. Out of 58 teams, 
52 teams were airlifted from other NDRF locations to Kerala. During the 
deployment, NDRF teams rescued 535 persons, evacuated 24690 persons, 
retrieved 10 dead bodies
 
and rescued 119 livestock. In addition to rescue and 
response operations, NDRF also organized medical camps and provided medical 
assistance to 6821 needy persons.
 
 
(c) Landslide:
 
NDRF carried out search operations at Kattipare Karinchalamala 
near Thamaras
sary in Calicut district of Kerala where many persons got missing 
in the landslide triggered by torrential rains. NDRF team retrieved 10 dead 
bodies. 
 
(d) 
Cyclone 
'
Gaja
'
:
 
 
02 teams deployed at Sabarimala were put 
on high alert for 
Cyclone 'Gaja'
 
w.e.f. 11.11.2018 to 29.11.2018. 
 

54
 
 
(e) Cyclone “OCKHI”:
 
04 NDRF teams deployed at Thrissur and Sabrimala for 
emergency response 
were put on high alert for Cyclone “Ockhi” w.e.f. 
01.12.2017 to 04.12.2017. 
 
KARNATAKA :
 
 
Teams 
deployed
 
No. of Persons 
rescued
 
No. of Persons 
Evacuated
 
Dead Bodies 
Retrieved
 
37
 
45
 
465
 
12
 
 
Brief of some Major operations in 2018:
 
(a) 
Landslide:
 
03 NDRF teams carried out rescue operations at village 
Joduopala, Tehsil
-
Medikeri, Kodugu in connection with landslide due to heavy 
rainfall, rescued 40 persons & evacuated 465 persons and retrieved 05 dead 
bodies. NDRF teams also provided medical assistan
ce to 419 persons. 
 
TAMIL NADU :
 
 
Teams 
deployed
 
No. of 
Persons 
rescued
 
No. of 
Persons 
Evacuated
 
Dead Bodies 
Retrieved
 
19
 
0
 
0
 
6
 
 
Brief of some Major operations in 2018:
 
(a) Cyclone '
G
AJA'
:
 
09 teams were deployed at Chennai, Nagappattinam, 
Ramanathapuram, Cuddalore & Chidambaram w.e.f. 11.11.2018 to 29.11.2018. 
During the deployment teams conducted operation  and removed 1850 trees, 
172 Electric Poles and cleared 215.5 Km of road.
 
(b) 
Cyclone 
'
OCKHI
'
:
 
04 NDRF teams deployed at Kannyakumari, Cuddlore and 
Chennai for emergency response and removed 751 Nos fallen trees and cleared 
97 KM road.
 
 
ANDHRA PRADESH : 
 
Teams 
deployed
 
No. of Persons 
rescued
 
No. of Persons 
Evacuated
 
Dead Bodies 
Retrieved
 
22
 
610
 
336
 
51
 
 
 
 

55
 
 
Brief of some Major operations in 2018:
 
(a) Flood
 
:
NDRF teams conducted search and rescue operations at West Godavari & 
East Godavari and rescued over 610 persons including children & elderly and 
evacuated 306 persons to safer 
place.
 
(b) 
Cyclone “TITLI”:
 
07
 
teams were prepositioned on 10.10.2018 in Srikakulam, 
Vishakhapatnam and Vijayanagaram Districts. During the deployment teams 
conducted operation and
 
rescued 02 persons alive, evacuated 130 persons, 
removed 1043 Trees, 145 El
ectric Poles, Transformer
-
03, BSNL Tower
-
01, 
cleared 277 Kms of road.
 
 
(c) Cyclone “PHETHAI”:
 
11 teams of NDRF deployed in Distt.
-
East 
Godavari,West Godavari and Vishakhapatnam w.e.f. 15.12.2018 to 18.12.2018. 
 
(d) Boat Capsize:
 
02
 
NDRF teams conducted rescue operation at Vill
-
 
Manturu, 
Mandal
-
Devipatnam, Distt
-
 
East Godavari (Andhra Pradesh) in connection with a 
boat capsized in Godavari river and retrieved 19 dead bodies.
 
(iii)
 
Relief distribution
 
 
(a)
 
During the Kerala floods 2018 NDRF sen
t NER stores a comprises 309 
Inflatable lighting Systems, 450 Lifebuoys, 3971 Life Jackets and 1580 Gum 
Boots to assist the Kerala Govt. 
 
(b)
 
In addition NDRF teams also assisted State Governments of Kerala, 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh in distribu
tion of relief materials 
(food packets, water bottles etc.) during the floods.
 
(c)
 
NDRF Activities/operations in the state of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and 
Andhra Pradesh since 2006 to till date:
 
 
i.
 
Familiarization Exercise (Famex) since 2006 to till date:
 
 
Sl No.
 
State
 
Total No of Famex
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
79
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
66
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
91
 
4.
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
52
 
 
 
 
 

56
 
 
ii.
 
Community Awareness Programme (CAP) since 2006 to till date:
 
 
Sl No.
 
State
 
Total No of 
Programmes
 
Total No of 
Beneficiaries
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
132
 
155281
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
73
 
144940
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
219
 
192495
 
4.
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
226
 
199821
 
 
iii.
 
School Safety Programme (SSP) since 2006 to till date:
 
 
Sl No.
 
State
 
Total No of 
Programmes
 
Total No of 
Beneficiaries
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
38
 
13667
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
19
 
7310
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
110
 
46377
 
4.
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
24
 
7697
 
 
vi.
 
Mock exercise conducted since 2006 to till date:
 
Sl.No.
 
State
 
No of Mock Exercise
 
No of Beneficiaries 
 
1.
 
Kerala
 
43
 
18805
 
2.
 
Karnataka
 
42
 
15288
 
3.
 
Tamil Nadu
 
94
 
31484
 
4.
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
54
 
42526
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57
 
 
v.
 
Operational details of NDRF in Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra 
Pradesh since 2006 to till date: 
 
 
State
 
No. of Persons 
rescue/Evacuation
 
Dead Bodies 
retrieved
 
Kerala
 
26794
 
38
 
Karnataka
 
809
 
60
 
Tamil Nadu
 
39386
 
115
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
66053
 
132
 
 
(d)
 
Summary
 
of over all activities/achievements of  NDRF since 2006 to till date 
(Covering all States/UTs and International operations): 
 
Human lives rescued 
 
1,15,735
 
Human lives evacuated 
 
5,81,885
 
Dead Bodies retrieved 
 
3,589
 
Live
-
Stock evacuated 
 
2,360
 
Total No. of Operations conducted 
 
2,404
 
Total No. of FAMEx conducted 
 
1,765
 
Total No. of Community Awareness Programmes 
(CAPs) conducted 
 
5,791
 
Total number of beneficiaries by  CAPs
 
53,09,433
 
Total No. School Safety Programmes (SSPs) 
conducted 
 
1,809
 
Total number of beneficiaries by  SSPs
 
7,60,980
 
Total number of Mock Exercise 
conducted/participated 
 
2,035
 

58
 
 
Total number of beneficiaries by Mock Exercises
 
9,12,438
 
 
 
E.
 
Assistance provided by National Disaster Response Force &
 
State Disaster 
 
Response Force
 
Sl. No.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Items 
 
NORMS OF ASSISTANCE 
 
 
1.
 
 
 
Gratuitous Relief
 
 
 
a)  Ex
-
Gratia payment to families of 
deceased persons.
 
Rs.4.00 lakh per 
deceased person including 
those involved in relief operations or 
associated in preparedness activities, 
subject to certification regarding cause of 
death from appropriate authority. 
 
 
b)  Ex
-
Gratia payment for loss of a 
limb or eye(s).
 
 
 
Rs. 59100/
-
 
per person, 
when the disability 
is between 40% and 60%.
 
 
Rs. 2.00 lakh per person, 
when the disability 
is more than 60%.
 
 
Subject to certification by a doctor from a 
hospital or dispensary of Government, 
regarding extent and 
cause of disability.
 
 
c)  
Grievous injury requiring 
hospitalization
 
Rs. 12,700/
-
 
per person requiring 
hospitalization for more than a week. 
 
 
Rs. 4,300/
-
 
per person 
requiring 
hospitalization for less than a week.
 
 
d)  Clothing and utensils/ house
-
hold 
goods for families whose 
houses 
have been washed away/ fully 
damaged/severely inundated for 
more than two days due to a natural 
calamity.
 
Rs.1,800/
-
 
per family, for loss of clothing.
 
 
Rs.2,000/
-
 
per family, for loss of utensils/ 
household goods.
 
 
 
e) Gratuitous relief for families 
whose 
livelihood is seriously affected.
 
Rs. 60/
-
 
per adult and Rs. 45/
-
 
per child, not 
housed in relief camps.  State Govt. will 
certify that identified beneficiaries are not 
housed in relief camps. Further State 
Governmen
t will provide the basis and 
process for arriving at such beneficiaries 
district
-
wise.
 
Period for providing gratuitous relief will be 
as per assessment of the State Executive 
Committee (SEC) and the Central Team (in 
case of NDRF). The default period of 
assistance will upto to 30 days, which may 
be extended upto 60 days in the first 

59
 
 
instance,
 
if required, and subsequently upto 
90 days in case of drought/ pest attack
. 
Depending on the ground situation, the 
State Executive Committee can extend the 
time period beyond the prescribed limit 
subject to that expenditure on this account 
should not exce
ed 25% of SDRF allocation 
for the year.
 
2.
 
SEARCH & RESCUE OPERATIONS 
 
 
 
 
(a) Cost of search and rescue 
measures/ evacuation of people 
affected/ likely to be affected 
 
As per actual cost incurred, assessed 
by 
SEC and recommended by the Central 
Team (in 
case of NDRF)
.
 
-
 
By the time the Central Team visits 
the affected area, these activities are 
already over. Therefore, the State Level 
Committee and the Central Team can 
recommend actual/ near
-
actual costs.
 
 
(b) Hiring of boats for carrying 
immediate relief 
and saving lives.
 
As per actual cost incurred, assessed 
by 
SEC and recommended by the Central 
Team (in case of NDRF)
.
 
 
The quantum of assistance will be limited to 
the actual expenditure incurred on hiring 
boats and essential equipment required for 
rescuin
g stranded people and thereby 
saving human lives during a notified natural 
calamity. 
 
3
 
RELIEF MEASURES
 
 
 
a)  Provision for temporary 
accommodation, food, clothing, 
medical care, etc. for people 
affected/ evacuated and sheltered in 
relief camps.
 
 
As per 
assessment of need by SEC and 
recommendation of the Central Team (in 
case of NDRF),
 
for a period up to 30 days. 
The SEC would need to specify the number 
of camps, their duration and the number of 
persons in camps. In case of continuation of 
a calamity like
 
drought, or widespread 
devastation caused by earthquake or flood 
etc., this period may be extended to 60 
days, and upto 90 days in cases of severe 
drought.
  
Depending on the ground 
situation, the State Executive Committee 
can extend the time period beyond
 
the 
prescribed limit subject to that expenditure 
on this account should not exceed 25% of 
SDRF allocation for the year.
 
Medical care may be provided from National 
Rural Health Mission (NRHM). 
 

60
 
 
 
b)   Air dropping of essential supplies
 
 
As per actual, based on 
assessment of 
need by SEC and recommendation of the 
Central Team (in case of NDRF)
.
 
-
 
The quantum of assistance will be 
limited to actual amount raised in the 
bills by the Ministry of Defence for 
airdropping of essential supplies and 
rescue operations only.
 
 
c)   Provision of emergency supply of  
drinking water in rural areas and 
urban areas
 
 
As per actual cost, based on 
assessment of 
need by SEC and recommended by the 
Central Team (in case of NDRF), 
up to 30
 
days 
and may be extended upto 90 days in 
case of drought. 
Depending on the ground 
situation, the State Executive Committee 
can extend the time period beyond the 
prescribed limit subject to that expenditure 
on this account should not exceed 25% of 
SDRF allocatio
n for the year.
 
4.
 
CLEARANCE OF AFFECTED 
AREAS 
 
 
 
a)  Clearance of debris in public 
areas.   
 
 
As per actual cost within 30 days from the 
date of start of the work based on 
assessment of need by SEC for the 
assistance to be provided under SDRF and 
as per assessment of the Central team for 
assistance to be provided under NDRF. 
 
 
b)  Draining off 
flood water in 
affected areas
 
As per actual cost within 30 days from the 
date of start of the work based on 
assessment of need by SEC for the 
assistance to be provided under SDRF and 
as per assessment of the Central team
(in 
case of NDRF)
. 
 
 
c)  Disposal of dead bodies/ 
Carcases
 
As per actuals, based on 
assessment of 
need by SEC and recommendation of the 
Central Team
 
(in case of NDRF).
 
5
 
AGRICULTURE 
 
 
(i)
 
Assistance  farmers having 
landholding upto 2 ha
 
 
A.   
 
Assistance for land and other loss 
 
 
 
a). De
-
silting of agricultural land 
(
where thickness of sand/ silt deposit 
is more than 3”, to be certified by the 
competent authority of the State 
Government
.)
 
Rs. 12,200/
-
 
per hectare for each item.
 
 
(Subject to the
 
condition that no other 
assistance/ subsidy has been availed of by/ 
is eligible to the beneficiary under any other 
Government Scheme)
 
 
b)   Removal of debris on agricultural 
land in hilly  areas
 
 
c) De
-
silting/ Restoration/ Repair of 
fish farms
 

61
 
 
 
d)  
Loss of substantial portion of land 
caused by landslide, avalanche, 
change of course of rivers.
 
Rs. 37,500/
-
 
per hectare to only those small 
and marginal farmers whose ownership of 
the land is legitimate as per the revenue 
records. 
 
 
B.
 
 
Input subsidy (where crop loss is 
33% and above)
 
 
 
a)  For agriculture crops, horticulture 
crops and annual plantation crops
 
 
 
 
Rs. 6,800/
-
 
per ha. in rainfed areas and 
restricted to sown areas.  
 
 
Rs. 13,500/
-
 
per ha. in assured irrigated 
areas, subject
 
to minimum assistance not 
less than Rs.1000 and restricted to sown 
areas.
 
 
b)  Perennial crops
 
 
 
Rs. 18,000/
-
 
ha. for all types of perennial 
crops subject to  minimum assistance not 
less than Rs. 2000/
-
 
and restricted to sown 
areas.
 
 
 
c)  Sericulture
 
 
Rs. 4,800/
-
 
per ha. for 
Eri, Mulberry, Tussar 
 
Rs. 6,000/
-
 
per ha. for Muga.   
 
(ii)
 
Input subsidy to farmers 
having more 
than 2 Ha of landholding 
 
Rs. 6,800/
-
 
per hectare 
in rainfed areas and 
restricted to sown areas.
 
Rs.13,500/
-
 
per hectare 
for areas 
under 
assured irrigation and restricted to sown 
areas.
 
Rs. 18,000/
-
 
per hectare 
for all types of 
perennial crops and restricted to sown 
areas.
 
 
Assistance may be provided where crop loss 
is 33% and above, subject to a ceiling of 2 
ha. per farmer.
 
6.
 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
-
 
ASSISTANCE TO SMALL AND 
MARGINAL FARMERS 
 
 
 
i)  Replacement of milch animals, 
draught animals or animals used for 
haulage.
 
 
Milch animals 
-
 
 
 
Rs. 30,000/
-
 
Buffalo/ cow/ camel/ yak/ 
Mithun
 
etc.
 
Rs. 3,000/
-
 
Sheep/ Goat/ Pig
 
 
Draught 
animals 
-
 
 
Rs. 25000/
-
 
Camel/ horse/ bullock, etc.
 
Rs. 16,000/
-
 
Calf/ Donkey/ Pony/ Mule
 
 
-
  
The assistance may be restricted for 
the actual loss of economically 

62
 
 
productive animals and will be subject to 
a ceiling of 3 large milch animals or 30 
small milch
 
animals or 3 large draught 
animals or 6 small draught animals per 
household irrespective of whether a 
household has lost a larger number of 
animals. (The loss is to be certified by 
the Competent Authority designated by 
the State Government).
 
Poultry:
-
 
Pou
ltry 
@ 50/
-
 
per bird 
subject to a ceiling 
of assistance of Rs 5000/
-
 
per beneficiary 
household. The death of the poultry birds 
should be on account of a natural calamity.
 
Note: 
-
 
Relief 
under these norms is not 
eligible if the assistance is available from 
any other Government Scheme, e.g. loss of 
birds due to Avian Influenza or any other 
diseases for which the Department of 
Animal Husbandry has a separate scheme 
for compensating the poultry owners.
 
 
ii)   Provision of fodder / feed 
concentrate 
including 
water supply 
and medicines
 
in cattle camps.
 
 
  
 
Large animals
-
 
Rs. 70/
-
 
per day.
 
Small animals
-
 
Rs. 35/
-
 
per day. 
 
Period for providing relief will be as per 
assessment of the State Executive 
Committee (SEC) and the Central Team (in 
case of NDRF). The default period for 
assistance will be upto 30 days, which may 
be extended upto 60 days in the first 
instance and in cas
e of severe drought up to 
90 days.  
Depending on the ground 
situation, the State Executive Committee 
can extend the time period beyond the 
prescribed limit, subject to the stipulation 
that expenditure on this account should not 
exceed 25% of SDRF allocatio
n for the year.
 
Based on 
assessment of need by SEC and 
recommendation of the Central Team, (in 
case of NDRF) consistent with estimates of 
cattle as per Livestock Census and subject 
to the certificate by the competent authority 
about the requirement of medicine and 
vaccine being ca
lamity related. 
 
 
 
iii)   Transport of fodder to cattle 
outside cattle camps
 
 
As per actual cost of transport, based on 
assessment of need by SEC and 
recommendation of the Central Team 
(in 
case of NDRF) 
consistent with estimates of 
cattle as per Livestock Census.  
 

63
 
 
7
 
FISHERY 
 
 
 
i)  Assistance to Fisherman 
for repair 
/ replacement of boats, nets 
–
 
damaged or lost 
 
 
--
  
Boat 
 
--
  
Dugout
-
Canoe
 
--
  
Catamaran
 
--
  
net
 
 
(This assistance will not be provided 
if the beneficiary is eligible or has 
availed of any subsidy/ assistance, 
for the instant calamity, under any 
other Government Scheme.)
 
Rs. 4,100/
-
  
for repair of partially damaged 
boats only 
 
 
 
Rs. 2,100/
-
  
for repai
r of partially damaged 
net 
 
 
Rs. 9,600/
-
  
for replacement of fully 
damaged boats 
  
 
 
Rs. 2,600/
-
  
for replacement of fully 
damaged net 
 
 
ii)  
Input subsidy for fish seed farm
  
 
 
 
Rs. 8,200 per hectare.
 
 
(This assistance will not be provided if the 
beneficiary is eligible or has availed of any 
subsidy/ assistance, for the instant 
calamity, under any other Government 
Scheme, except the one time subsidy 
provided under the Scheme of Department 
of Animal; Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries, Ministry of Ag
riculture.)
 
8
 
HANDICRAFTS/HANDLOOM 
–
 
ASSISTANCE TO ARTISANS 
 
 
 
 
i) For replacement of damaged tools/  
equipment 
 
 
Rs.  4,100 per artisan for equipments.
 
-
 
Subject to certification by the 
competent authority designated by the 
Government about damage and its
 
replacement.
 
 
ii) For loss of raw material/ goods in 
process/ finished goods
 
Rs. 4,100 per artisan for 
raw material.
 
-
 
Subject to certification by Competent 
Authority designated by the State 
Government about loss and its 
replacement.
 
9
 
HOUSING
 
 
 
a)  
Fully damaged/ destroyed houses
 
 
 
i)
 
Pucca house
 
Rs. 95,100/
-
 
per house,
 
in plain areas.
 
 
Rs. 1,01,900/
-
 
per house,
 
in hilly areas 
including Integrated Action Plan (IAP) 
districts.
 
 
  
ii) Kutcha House
 
 
b)  
Severely damaged houses
 
 
i) Pucca House
 
 
ii) 
Kutcha House
 
 
(c) 
Partially Damaged Houses 
–
 
 
 
 
(i)
 
Pucca (other than huts) where 
the damage is at least 15 %
 
Rs. 5,200/
-
   
per house
 

64
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
Kutcha (other than 
huts) where the damage is at 
least 15 %
 
Rs. 3,200/
-
   
per house
 
 
d)  
Damaged / destroyed huts:
 
 
Rs. 
4,100/
-
 
per hut,
 
 
 
(Hut means temporary, make shift unit, 
inferior to Kutcha house, made of thatch, 
mud, plastic sheets etc. traditionally 
recognized as hut by the State/ District 
authorities.)
 
 
Note: 
-
The damaged house should be an 
authorized construction
 
duly certified by the 
Competent Authority of the State 
Government.
  
 
 
e)  Cattle shed attached with house
 
Rs. 2,100/
-
 
per shed.
 
10
 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
 
Repair/restoration (of immediate 
nature) of damaged infrastructure
:
 
 
(1) Roads & bridges (2)Drinking 
Water Supply Works, (3) Irrigation, 
(4) Power (only limited to immediate 
restoration of electricity supply in the 
affected areas), (5)Schools, 
(6)Primary Health Centres, (7) 
Community assets owned by 
Panchayat.
 
  
 
Sectors such as Telecommunication 
and Powe
r (except immediate 
restoration of power supply), which 
generate their own revenues, and 
also undertake immediate repair/ 
restoration works from their own 
funds/ resources, are excluded.
 
 
 
Activities of immediate nature :
 
 
Illustrative lists of activities which may be 
considered as works of an immediate nature 
are given in the enclosed Appendix. 
 
 
Assessment of requirements : 
 
 
Based on 
assessment of need, as per 
States’ costs/ rates/ schedules for repair, by 
SEC and 
recommendation of the Central 
Team (in case of NDRF).
 
-
 
As regards repair of roads, due 
consideration shall be given to Norms 
for 
Maintenance of Roads in India, 2001, as 
amended from time to time, 
for repairs of  
roads affected by heavy rains/floods, 
cyclone
, landslide, sand dunes, etc. to 
restore traffic. For 
reference these norms 
are
 
 

 
Normal and Urban areas: upto 
15% of the total of Ordinary Repair 
(OR) and Periodical Repair (PR).
 
 

 
  
Hills: upto 20% of total of OR 
and PR.
 
-
 
In case of repair of roads, assistance 
will be given based on the notified 
Ordinary Repair (OR) and Periodical 
Renewal (PR) of the State. In case OR 
& PR rate is not available, then 

65
 
 
assistance will be provided @ Rs 1 
lakh/km for State Highway and Major 
Dis
trict Road and @ Rs. 0.60 lakh/km 
for rural roads. The condition of “State 
shall first use its provision under the 
budget for regular maintenance and 
repair” will no longer be required, in view 
of the difficulties in monitoring such 
stipulation, though it 
is a desirable goal 
for all the States.
 
-
 
In case of repairs of Bridges and 
Irrigation works, assistance will be given 
as per the schedule of rates notified by 
the concerned States. Assistance for 
micro irrigation scheme will be provided 
@ Rs. 1.5 lakh per d
amaged scheme. 
Assistance for restoration of damaged 
medium and large irrigation projects will 
also be given for the embankment 
portions, on par with the case of similar 
rural roads, subject to the stipulation 
that no duplication would be done with
 
any ong
oing schemes.
 
-
 
Regarding repairs of damaged 
drinking water schemes, the eligible 
damaged drinking water structures will 
be eligible for assistance @ Rs. 1.5 
lakh/ damaged structure.
 
-
 
Regarding repair of damaged primary 
and secondary schools, primary health 
c
entres, Anganwadi and community 
assets owned by the Panchayats, 
assistance will be given @ Rs 2 
lakh/damaged structure.
 
-
 
Regarding repair of damaged power 
sector, assistance will be given to 
damaged conductors, poles and 
transformers upto the level of 11 kV
. 
The rate of assistance will be @ Rs. 
4000/poles, Rs 0.50 lakh per km of 
damaged conductor and Rs. 1.00 lakh 
per damaged distribution transformer.
 
11
 
Procurement of essential search, 
rescue and evacuation equipments 
including communication 
equipments, etc. for response to 
disaster. 
 
-
 
Expenditure is to be incurred from 
SDRF only (and not from NDRF), as 
assessed by the State Executive 
Committee (SEC).
 
-
   
The total expenditure on this item 
should not exceed 10 % of the annual 
allocation of the SDRF.
 

66
 
 
12
 
Capacity Building 
 
-
 
Expenditure is to be incurred from 
SDRF only (and not from NDRF), as 
assessed by the State Executive 
Committee (SEC).
 
 
-
 
 
The total expenditure on this item 
should not exceed 5% of the annual 
allocation of the SDRF.
 
13.
 
State specific disasters within the 
local context in the State, which are 
not included in the notified list of 
disasters eligible for assistance from 
SDRF/ 
NDRF, can be met from 
SDRF within the limit of 10% of the 
annual funds allocation of the SDRF.
 
-
 
Expenditure is to be incurred from 
SDRF only (and not from NDRF), as 
assessed by the State Executive 
Committee (SEC).
 
-
 
The norm for various items will be the 
same
 
as applicable to other notified 
natural disasters, as listed above.  or
 
-
 
In these cases, the scale of relief 
assistance against each item for ‘local 
disaster’ should not exceed the norms of 
SDRF.
 
-
 
The flexibility is to be applicable only 
after the State has
 
formally listed the 
disasters for inclusion and notified 
transparent norms and guidelines with a 
clear procedure for identification of the 
beneficiaries for disaster relief for such 
local disasters’, with the approval of SEC.
 
\
 
 
Note:
-
  
(i) The State Governments are to take utmost care and ensure that all individual beneficiary
-
oriented assistance is 
necessary/ mandatory disbursed through the bank account (viz; Jan Dhan Yojana etc.) of the beneficiary. 
 
 
 
(ii)   The scale of relie
f assistance against each items for all disasters including ‘local disaster’ should not exceed the 
norms of SDRF/ NDRF. Any amount spent by the State for such disasters over and above the ceiling would be borne out 
of the resources of the State Government 
and not from SDRF.
 
 
 
F
 
Financial assistance to Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala & Tamil Nadu
 
 
(i) 
Andhra Pradesh: 
In order to support the affected people of the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh, 
the Government of India has released both the 
installments
 
of Central Share of SDRF amounting to Rs.458.10 crore and Rs. 539.52 
crore from NDRF to Government of Andhra Pradesh for management of relief as 
approved by the High Level Committee (HLC), in its meeting held on 17.12.2018 subject 
to adjustment of 50% of 
balance available in the SDRF account of the State for the 
instant calamities and Air bills, on actual basis, based on the bills received from IAF. An 
amount of Rs. 1048.52 crore is available in SDRF account for management of relief 
necessitated by natural
 
disasters during 2018
-
19 by taking into account the opening 
balance and releases of both the installments of Central & State share of Rs.509 crore.
 

67
 
 
 
(ii) 
Karnataka: 
In order to support the affected people of the State Government of 
Karnataka, 
the Governme
nt of India has released 1
st
 
installment of Central Share of 
SDRF amounting to Rs. 144.00 crore and Rs. 525.22 crore from NDRF to Government 
of Karnataka for management of relief as approved by the High Level Committee (HLC) 
in its meeting held on 19.11.20
18 subject to adjustment of 50% of balance available in 
the SDRF account of the State for the instant calamities and Air bills, on actual basis, 
based on the bills received from IAF.  An amount of Rs. 727.20 crore is available in 
SDRF account for managemen
t of relief necessitated by natural disasters during 2018
-
19 by taking into account the opening balance and releases of 1
st
 
installment of Central 
& State share of Rs. 160.00 crore.
 
 
(iii) 
Kerala: 
In order to support the affected people of the State Govern
ment of 
Kerala, 
the Government of India has released both the installments of Central Share of 
SDRF amounting to Rs. 192.60 crore and Rs. 2904.85 crore from NDRF to Government 
of Kerala for management of relief in respect of floods/ landslides of 2018 as a
pproved 
by the High Level Committee (HLC), in its meeting held on 6.12.2018subject to 
adjustment of 50% of balance available in the SDRF account of the State for the instant 
calamities and Air bills, on actual basis, based on the bills received from IAF. A
n 
amount of Rs. 3405.93 crore is available in SDRF account for management of relief 
necessitated by natural disasters during 2018
-
19 by taking into account the opening 
balance and releases of both the installments of Central & State share of Rs.214.00 
cror
e.
 
 
(iv) 
Tamil Nadu: I
n order to support the affected people of the State, the Central 
Government had released assistance of Rs. 353.70 crore from SDRF as an interim 
relief on 03
-
12
-
2018. 
 
By taking into account the opening balance of Rs. 491.62crore 
and r
eleases of both the installments of central and State share of Rs.786 crore, an 
amount of Rs.1277.62 crore is available in SDRF account for management of relief.  
After the event of cyclone Gaja, an Inter
-
Ministerial Central Team (IMCT) was deputed 
to Tami
l Nadu and Puducherry, which conducted a visit from 24
th
–
27
th 
November, 
2018. IMCT has sought certain clarifications, which were furnished by the State on 
13.12.18 and 15.12.18. The report of the IMCT, on finalization will be placed before the 
Sub
-
Committe
e of the National Executive Committee (NEC) and High Level Committee 
(HLC) for consideration in its meeting to be held shortly.
 

68
 
 
As per the recommendation of 
Ministry of Home Affairs (
MHA
)
, first and second 
installments of Center’s share of SDRF for the cur
rent year ( 2018
-
19) has been 
released to the states of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Tamilnadu. In case of Karnataka 
only first installment has been released so far. Details are as under:
 
(Rs. In Crore)
 
State
 
Allocation of 
Center’s share for 
2018
-
19
 
Amount 
of 1
st
 
installment 
released
 
Amount of 2
nd
 
installment 
released
 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
458.10
 
229.05
 
229.05
 
Karnataka
 
288.00
 
144.00
 
-
 
Kerala
 
192.60
 
96.30
 
96.30
 
Tamilnadu
 
707.40
 
353.70
 
353.70
 
 
 
Central assistance from NDRF has been released to these States
 
in the wake of 
recent floods/ cyclone based on the approval of High Level Committee (HLC) and 
recommendation of MHA as under:                                                                                              
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rs. In crore)
 
 
States 
 
Cen
tral assistance released 
from NDRF
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
539.52
 
Karnataka
 
525.22
 
Kerala
 
2904.85
 
Tamilnadu
 
-
 
 
 
In the wake of Gaza cyclone in Tamilnadu, the Inter
-
Ministerial Central Team 
(IMCT) has submitted its report to MHA, Which is scheduled to be 
considered by Sub
-
Committee of National Executive Committee (SC
-
NEC) on 26
th
 
Dec 2018. Release of 
Central assistance to the State would be processed after recommendation of SC
-
NEC 
and approval by HLC.
 
 
 
 
 
 

69
 
 
Chapter 
-
 
IV
 
Role of 
Indian Space Research 
Organisation (ISRO)
 
in disaster forecasting / 
management
 
(i)
 
Background
 
 
The Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programme of ISRO has been 
providing space based information support under major disasters, affecting our nation. 
While communication satellites 
help in providing connectivity, the earth observation 
satellites provide images on disaster events to help the respective State Govt and the 
Center in decision
-
making. During 2018, the disasters faced by the country were floods 
(in 10 States), landslides (
in Karnataka & Kerala States), forest fires (in Uttarakhand, 
J&K and Tamilnadu) and 3 cyclones over Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Tamilnadu 
States. During 2018, ISRO mapped floods in about 109 districts of 10 states and 90 
maps were disseminated to the concer
ned departments.
 
 
 
 


70
 
 
 
Indian Remote Sensing satellites were extensively used all the major disasters in 
the country. Satellites, such as, RESOURCESAT 2 / 2A, CARTOSAT, OCEANSAT, 
INSAT 3D/ 3DR etc. India is actively represented in UN International Charter f
or Major 
Disasters. ISRO is the Board member and actively participates on behalf of Government 
of India. On the occasion of major disasters, India is able to freely obtain satellite data 
from the charter. During past year, we could also use data from other
 
satellites under 
the UN International Charter Framework, particularly the Kerala floods, that helped in 
providing vital information to the Govt. of Kerala during floods. ISRO kept a constant 
watch on the flood situation in the country during the monsoon s
eason 2018. Floods 
occurred in Kerala during July & August 2018 due to heavy rainfall and in Andhra 
Pradesh due to cyclones in October & December 2018. The inputs generated using 
satellite data were disseminated to the following Central Ministries / Depart
ments 
depending on the type of disaster.
 
 
(ii)
 
Kerala Floods
 
 
Kerala received first spell of heavy rainfall during second and third week of July 
2018 causing floods in many parts of Kerala during July. The second spell of heavy 
rains occurred in August (1st Aug to 19th Aug Kerala had received 758 mm rainfall; 
source:
 
IMD) led to devastating floods due to initial conditions and causing huge 
damage. Decision Support Centre at NRSC, ISRO monitored the situation continuously 
from July using satellite data inputs obtained from Indian and foreign satellite data and 
provided
 
spatial flood maps and information in near realtime.Table
-
1 shows the list of 
satellite data Ten districts were flood affected namely Alappuzha, Kottayam, Trishur, 
Ernakulam, Pattanamtitta, Kollam, Malappuram, Palakkad, Thiruvananthapuram and 
Kozhikode. T
he worst affected districts are Alappuzha, Kottayam and Trishshur. 21 


71
 
 
flood maps showing the spatial flood extent along with the flood reports were 
disseminated to the Kerala disaster management authority and Kerala State Remote 
Sensing Centre besides noda
l ministries.
 
ISRO acquired satellite data over flood 
affected areas and prepared flood maps in near real time mode and disseminated to the 
concerned departments. Also, all the processed data were published on Bhuvan 
Geoportal for the State Government to u
se in near real
-
time basis
.
 
 
 


72
 
 
 
The inputs generated using satellite data were disseminated to the following State 
Ministries / Departments.
 
 
Government of Kerala was able to effectively utilise these maps in handling the relief 
and rehabilitation 
activities, through the Kerala State Disaster Management Authority.
 
 
(
a
)
 
NavIC
 
Devices
: 
In the aftermath of Ockhi cyclone, Kerala showed keen interest 
in using NavIC (Navigation using Indian Satellite Constellation) based location 
information, similar to 
using GPS. Recently ISRO has realised a constellation of 8 
IRNSS satellites (Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System) that can be used by a 
device on the ground to get location coordinates. ISRO quickly realised NavIC devices, 
with the help of Indian I
ndustry, and demonstrated the efficacy of using such devices by 
the fishermen community. The Device, with the battery bank, can work through a simple 
hand
-
held Mobile to provide vital information for the fishermen while they are in deep 
sea. The Mobile App
 
that works with the NavIC device, can provide information on 
potential fishing zones, alert messages on impending disasters like cyclone or Tsunami, 
voice alert on the maritime zone crossing etc. The NavIC based services can function 
up to about 1500 km f
rom the Indian Region, hence the fishermen who are in the deep 
see get the benefit of receiving various important information to help them to take 
decision, while in the deep sea. Using such devices, a few field trials were done with 
active participation o
f fishermen community and the State Government, which proved to 
be successful. Based on the success, it was decided to develop more such devices to 
provide to the fishermen community. During December 2018, CM, Kerala distributed 
about 250 such devices
 
to t
he fishermen community. ISRO continues to improve upon 
the devices and its functionality to enable better solutions for the fishermen in sea. A 
focussed one
-
day workshop was held with active participation of State and the 


73
 
 
fishermen community. The workshop 
focussed on how to use the devices at the State 
level with the participation of various Fishermen from different parts of the State. The 
workshop not only provided details on the use of the devices and the mobile App, but 
also held practical demonstrations
 
for the fishermen to use the devices in the sea.
 
(iii)
 
Andhra Pradesh
 
Andhra Pradesh was hit by two cyclones namely Titli and Phethaii 
in October and December 2018 respectively. 
 
 
Cyclone 'Titli
'
 
made landfall near Palasa, Andhra Pradesh on October 11, 20
18 
between 0430 to 0530 hrs IST. Incessant rains lashed Andhra Pradesh under the 
influence of Cyclone and northern part of Andhra Pradesh was severely affected. For 
cyclone 'Titli', ISRO analysed three satellite data sets and three flood maps showing the 
s
patial flood extent along with the flood reports were disseminated to the AP Relief 
Commissioner besides nodal ministries in near real time. It was observed that 
Srikakulam and Vizianagaram districts were affected by flood. Table
-
 
1 shows the list of 
satel
lite data. 
 
 
Cyclone 'Phethaii'
 
made landfall near Katrenikona, in East Godavari district, 
Andhra Pradesh on December 17, 2018 afternoon. Incessant rains lashed Andhra 
Pradesh under the influence of Cyclone and East Godavari and West Godavari districts 
wer
e reported to be flooded. For cyclone ' Phethai ', DSC analysed the Resourcesat 
-
2A, AWiFS satellite image of December 1 9, 2018 and disseminated flood inundation 
information in near real time to the AP Relief Commissioner besides nodal ministries. It 
was 
observed that East Godavari and West Godavari districts were affected by flood.
 
List of maps sent
:
 
 
 
 


74
 
 
The inputs generated using satellite data were disseminated to the following State 
Ministries / Departments.
 
 
 
NavIC Devices :
 
Similar to the NavIC 
based solutions provided to Kerala 
fishermen, a field trial was taken up with a few AP fishermen also. About 10 fishermen 
of AP State were provided with the device after a brief training on how to use the 
device. Based on the feedback from the fishermen we
 
could take further course of 
action of providing more such device, based on the directions of Fisheries Depart of the 
State Government.
 
(iv) 
 
Karnataka
 
 
Heavy rains & Landslides were reported in Karnataka during August, 2018. 
Accordingly, ISRO acquired sa
tellite data over landslide affected areas and prepared 
landslide maps in a near real time mode and disseminated maps and information to the 
concerned departments. A total of about 900 landslides were mapped as part of the 
exercise.
 
List of maps sent
 
 
The
 
inputs generated using satellite data were disseminated to the following State 
Ministries / Departments.
 
 
NavIC Devices
 
:
 
The State Fisheries department of Government of Karnataka has 
shown keen interest in using the NavIC based solutions for fishermen community. At the 


75
 
 
same time, ISRO took the help of local college students and faculty to reach out to the 
fishermen in Malpe 
and Gangulli area, close to Udupi. Similar to the NavIC based 
solutions provided to Kerala fishermen, two field trials were conducted with active 
participation of both Malpe and Gangulli fishermen. A dedicated workshop was held with 
the fishermen to unders
tand the issues faced at both the locations. About 12 devices 
were provided to the fishermen, after a brief training on how to use the device. 
Interesting feedbacks were obtained, which further resulted in improvements in the 
mobile App. With the improveme
nts incorporated, the devices are being redeployed 
through these fishermen to further evaluate and provide inputs so that we can 
customise the tools for their advantages. The State Government has shown keen 
interest in providing these devices to the fisher
men. Secretary and senior officials, Dept 
of fisheries, Govt. of Karnataka had detailed technical discussions on the subject and all 
necessary details are being provided to the Karnataka State for needful action.
 
 
(v)
. Tamilnadu
 
 
 
ISRO has been supporting 
Tamilnadu State Govt with regard to disaster support, 
particularly the floods that occurred during 2015 due to heavy rains and in 2016 due to 
cyclone Vardah. ISRO prepared EO based products on both the occasion and provided 
vital information for decision m
akers in Tamilnadu Govt.
 
Table
-
1: List of maps sent
 
 
 
 
 


76
 
 
The inputs generated using satellite data were disseminated to the following State 
Ministries / Departments.
 
 
 
During 2016, Vardah cyclone, about 3,600 damage locations were identified 
using high 
resolution satellite data and 1200 locations using mobile app. These were 
highly useful to the Government. The products were not only sent to the Tamilnadu, but 
was also published on near real
-
time basis on Bhuvan Geoportal for online use by 
Government and
 
many other voluntary organisations who were helping the people and 
the Government in managing the disaster due to floods.
 
 
NavIC Devices
 
: Similar to the other Governments, Tamilnadu has evinced keen interest 
to use NavIC based solutions for the fishermen
 
community in Tamilnadu.
 
Based on a 
series of interactions with the Tamilnadu authorities and Department of Fisheries, it was 
decided to provide NavIC devices to the Government. Tamilnadu Government 
requested for about 200 devices so that the same could di
stributed to a set of discrete 
cluster of fishermen community. Accordingly, 200 NavIC devices were delivered to 
Tamilnadu Government. Hon’ble Chief Minister, Govt of Tamilnadu distributed these 
units to fisherman on 17
-
Dec
-
2018. Soon, a one
-
day training wa
s organised for the 
users, on the usage of these devices and the Mobile App. ISRO is closely monitoring for 
further feedbacks from these devices to ensure any hand
-
holding and further 
improvements that may be required, based on local requirements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


77
 
 
O
BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATION
 
1.
 
The Committee have taken this subject for detailed examination particularly 
in the context of the recent devastating cyclone/floods/landslides in Odisha, 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala and the financial const
raints 
faced by the affected States in meeting their relief, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction expenditure. The Committee note that the country has become all 
the more vulnerable in recent years to floods, droughts, cyclones, earthquakes, 
landslides, avala
nches etc. due to factors such as climate change, deforestation, 
encroachments etc. our country's geo
-
climatic conditions as well as its high 
degree of socio
-
economic vulnerability makes it one of the most disaster
-
prone 
countries in the world. Out of 36 S
tates and Union Territories in the country, 27 of 
them are disaster
-
prone.
 
2.
 
The chief legal framework for disaster management is provided by the 
Disaster Management Act 2005 and the institutional mechanism comprises of the 
National Disaster Management Au
thority, headed by the Prime Minister, State 
Disaster Management Authorities headed by the respective Chief Minister, the 
National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and the District Disaster Management 
Authority headed by the District Collector.
 
3.
 
The financ
ial mechanism for immediate disaster relief is provided to the 
affected States from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and also the 
National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) by way of additional financial 
assistance when in the event of a calamity of sev
ere nature SDRF is insufficient 
to meet the relief requirement. The quantum of assistance from NDRF is subject 
to adjustment of 50% of the balance in SDRF as on 1st April of the current 
financial year. With the implementation of the GST regime, the Ministr
y of Finance 
has decided to implement the recommendation of the 14th Finance Commission 
in full, with effect from 1st April 2018, wherein all States will contribute 10% of the 
SDRF and the remaining 90% would be contributed by the Union Government 
during 2
018
-
19 and 2019
-
20. In this regard, the 14th Finance Commission has 
adopted the practice of previous Commissions and used past experience on 
disaster relief for the period 2006
-
07 to 2012
-
13 to determine the SDRF corpus for 
each state and accordingly, reco
mmended an amount of Rs 61,220 crore as 

78
 
 
aggregated corpus of SDRF for all States for the award period 2015
-
20. The 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure releases the Centre's share of 
SDRF to the state governments in two installments
-
 
in June and 
in November 
every year, upon recommendation of Ministry of Home Affairs. On the other hand, 
NDRF is a cess
-
based fund and the provision for this fund is made on the basis of 
collections in the form of National Calamity Contingency Duty (NCCD) imposed 
on sp
ecified goods under central excise and customs. The Committee, however, 
find that with the introduction of GST, the scope of coverage of NCCD is 
shrinking, thereby reducing the tax receipts on this account. The revenue 
collection in the form of NCCD has th
us substantially reduced from Rs 5690 cr in 
2015
-
16 to Rs 2500 cr in 2018
-
19, which has contrained the funding scope from 
NDRF. The Committee would expect the GST Council and the Ministry of Finance 
to take a view on augmenting this fund.
 
4.
 
However, the Committee note that the Government of India has enhanced 
the allocation under SDRF from Rs 33,580 cr for the period 2010
-
15 to Rs 61,220 
cr for the period 2015 to 2020. According to the submission made by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs, during F
Y 2018
-
19 an amount of Rs 11,542.50 cr. has been 
allocated as central share to all the states in their SDRF accounts. In addition, 
financial assistance from NDRF amounting to Rs 6921.49 cr. has also been 
released to 13 States affected by calamities of a se
vere nature during the current 
financial year. The Committee have also been informed that the Terms of 
Reference of the 15th Finance Commission 
inter
-
alia 
include reviewing the 
present arrangements regarding financing of disaster management initiatives 
wit
h reference to the funds constituted under the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
 
5.
 
With particular reference to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Odisha, severely affected by the recent cyclone/floods, it 
has been submitted to the Committee that central assistance has been released 
amounting to Rs 458.10 cr 
(SDRF) and Rs 539.52 cr (NDRF) for Andhra Pradesh; 
Rs 288 cr (SDRF) and Rs 525.22 cr (NDRF) for Karnataka; Rs 192.60 cr (SDRF) and 
Rs 2904.85 cr (NDRF) for Kerala; Rs 707.40 cr (SDRF) and Rs 900.31 cr (NDRF) for 
Tamil Nadu; Rs778.50 cr (SDRF) and Rs 341.72
 
cr (NDRF) for Odisha. However, 
the Committee note that these States have demanded more funds from the 

79
 
 
central government due to a mis
-
match between their estimates and the 
availability of funds under SDRF, particularly for reconstruction/restoration 
works
, which could suffer due to limited resources with the states.
 
6.
 
Some chronically disaster
-
prone states such as Odisha have submitted to 
the Committee that major items of relief/reconstruction expenditure are not 
covered in the existing SDRF/NDRF assistan
ce norms followed by the central 
government. According to them, due to inadequate assistance, systems quality, 
capacity and strength gets reduced, increasing their vulnerability to further 
damages. Keeping in view the considered submissions made by the aff
ected 
states, the Committee would recommend that the rates and scale of assistance 
under SDRF/NDRF last fixed in the year 2015 should be suitably enhanced so that 
major heads of relief/restoration expenditure are covered like restoration of all 
government 
educational institutions, non
-
residential government buildings, all 
transmission power sub
-
stations/infrastructure, maintenance of multipurpose 
cyclone shelters repair/maintenance of emergency equipment, distribution of 
cattle fodder and other such expendi
ture. The Committee would also suggest that 
restoration work of damaged public infrastructure should be allowed from 
SDRF/NDRF on "actual cost basis" on the "principle of build
-
back
-
better" as per 
schedule of rates of state governments instead of the prese
nt approach of 
funding only the repair/restoration of immediate nature. Accordingly, norms may 
be relaxed for re
-
construction of permanent nature and in severe drought 
conditions, for expenditure on capital works like borewells, pump sets and in the 
case o
f cyclones, multi
-
hazard resistant housing etc.
 
7.
 
In this context, the Committee would also recommend that the estimation 
of the requirement of funds for disaster relief and reconstruction should be 
normatively based on particular vulnerability of the sta
te to disasters through 
scientifically validated hazard vulnerability risk profile of a state instead of past 
expenditure.
 
8.
 
Keeping in view the suggestions made by the affected states , their fiscal 
constraints and the rigidity of the existing funds, the
 
Committee are also inclined 
to recommend the operationalisation of the Separate Disaster Mitigation Fund for 
undertaking permanent mitigation measures in disaster
-
prone states in addition 

80
 
 
to the existing financial assistance for immediate relief through S
DRF/NDRF.  The 
existing provision for this fund should therefore be notified and this should also 
be made State specific keeping in view the specific vulnerability of a State to a 
disaster. This will mark a paradigm shift from a relief centric approach to 
risk 
reduction through prevention and mitigation.  The Committee believe that any 
investment on mitigation and prevention of disaster risk will go a long way in 
building the capacity for significantly reducing expenditure on relief and disaster 
response. T
owards this end, the Committee desire that comprehensive insurance 
coverage should be provided to all the properties (including public properties) 
located in the disaster prone area / zone and all insurance claims including crop 
insurance should be settled
 
in a fast
-
track mode.
 
9.
 
Further, with a view to bringing greater flexibility to the funding 
mechanism, the Committee would recommend that an additional 10% of the 
allocation of the centrally sponsored schemes may be "specially earmarked" to 
undertake per
manent restoration of damaged structures, which can be 
sanctioned by the concerned Ministry based on the recommendation of the State 
Executive Committee of the SDMA.  The Committee would thus expect greater 
availability of resources for disaster management
 
at the hands of the affected 
States through these measures.  
 
10.
 
In this regard, the Committee also desire that the borrowing powers of the 
affected States may also be enhanced in the event of a calamity/disaster, while 
also permitting them to raise reso
urces, both domestically and externally subject 
to usual clearances.  The Committee believe that in view of the diversity in 
geographical, social and economic factors across different regions in the 
country, a flexible and pragmatic approach should be adop
ted towards relief, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction.
 
11.
 
Accordingly, the ceiling limit of 10% of SDRF for expenditure towards 'state 
specific disasters' like drought should be done away with and all expenditure 
towards notified 'state specific disasters
' should be straightaway charged to 
SDRF.  For this purpose, the corpus of SDRF may be increased by an additional 
10% to accommodate this expenditure.
 

81
 
 
12.
 
On the whole, considering the wide gap between the funds sought by the 
affected States and those rele
ased by the central government, the Committee are 
constrained to recommend annual increase of 15% (instead of the present 5%) in 
the total corpus of SDRF for the period 2020
-
25, particularly in view of the 
increasing incidence/frequency of natural disaster
s in the country.  Further, 
provision should be made for immediate/automatic release of advance amount on 
adhoc basis from NDRF in cases of natural disasters of "rare severity" so as to 
enable the affected states to take up immediate relief work, pending t
he visit of 
the central team and completion of other procedures.  Safeguards may however 
be provided to ensure that the funds made available are well utilised.
 
13.
 
Taking into account the afore
-
mentioned recommendations of the 
Committee for revision in the
 
existing norms and modifications in the present 
financial arrangement, the Committee would urge the Ministry of Home Affairs 
and the Ministry of Finance to submit revised memorandum to the 15th Finance 
Commission for their due consideration.  If necessary
, appropriate modifications 
may also be brought in the Disaster Management Act, 2005 to give effect to the 
suggested changes.
 
14.
 
The Committee acknowledge the efforts of the concerned state 
governments (specially the district administration), the NDMA and
 
the National 
Disaster Response Force and personnel of the Armed Forces in undertaking 
immediate rescue and relief operations in the disaster
-
affected areas.  The central 
government agencies have been supplementing the efforts of States in providing 
immedi
ate response and relief in the event of a severe disaster that is beyond the 
coping capacity of the State.  The Committee are happy to note that IMD and ISRO 
have been coordinating and synergising their capacities for disaster
-
forecasting 
and preparedness.
  
Further, ISRO has also been providing technical support for 
restoration of telecommunication networks.  The Committee would expect ISRO 
to utilize their capacities to enhance their participation and support in this regard 
including drought and water
-
leve
l mapping in coordination with the NDMA and 
the state authorities.
 
15.
 
The Committee has attempted to bring together all the concerned agencies 
including the representatives of the State governments for deliberations in a 

82
 
 
single forum during the course of 
examination of this subject.  The Committee 
would now expect that the Ministry of Home Affairs and the NDMA would take this 
process forward and provide an institutionalised mechanism to bring together all 
the central agencies involved in the management of 
national disasters like the 
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), Indian Meteorological Department 
(IMD), Geological Survey of India (GSI), Central Water Commission (CWC), 
Department of Financial Services and other designated agencies with a view to 
c
oordinating and harmonising their role and capacities for disaster preparedness, 
response, relief and reconstruction. The disaster preparedness, relief and 
reconstruction experience and models evolved in countries like Philippines 
should also be studied an
d their best practices appropriately incorporated in our 
disaster management approach .  Details of follow
-
up action initiated in this 
regard may be submitted to the Committee within one month of presentation of 
this Report.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
DR.
 
M. VEERAPPA MOILY,
 
11 February, 2019
 
 
 
 
                                
Chairperson,
 
22 Magha, 1941 (Saka)      
 
                        
     
Standing Committee on Finance.
 
 
 
 
 
 

8
3
 
 
Minutes 
 
of
 
 
the 
 
Seventh 
sitting 
 
of 
 
the 
 
Standing
 
 
Committee on Finance 
(2018
-
19)
The Committee sat on 
Tuesday
, the 
18 December, 2018 f
rom 1
500
hrs. to 
1700
hrs. 
in Committee Room '
D
', Parliament House Annexe
 
Ext. Block A
, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
2
 
Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel
 
3.
 
Shri Bandaru Dattatreya
 
4.
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
5.
 
Shri Gopalakrishnan Chinnaraj
 
6.
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 
7.
 
Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao
 
8.
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
9.
 
Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty
 
10.
 
Shri Prathap Simha
 
11.
 
Dr. Kiritbhai Premjibhai 
Solanki
 
12.
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi
 
13.
 
Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
14.
 
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
 
15.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
16.
 
Dr. Narendra Jadhav
 
17.
 
Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan
 
 
18.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
19.
 
Dr. Mahendra Prasad
 
20.
 
Shri T.K. Rangarajan
 
 
 
SPECIAL INVITEES
 
 
21.
 
Shri M.B. Rajesh, Lok Sabha
 
22.
 
Shri K.K. Rajesh, Rajya Sabha
 
23.
 
Shri K. Somaprasad, Rajya Sabha
 
24.
 
Shri Joice George, Lok Sabha
 
25.
 
Shri Anirudhan Sampath, Lok Sabha
 
26.
 
Shri K.V. Thomas, Lok Sabha
 
27.
 
Shri P. K. Sreemathy, Lok Sabha
 
28.
 
Shri P. Karunakaran, Lok Sabha
 
29.
 
Shri N.K. Premachandran, Lok Sabha
 
30
 
Kodikunnil Suresh, Lok Sabah
 
 
 
 
 

84
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri 
Ramkumar Suryanarayanan
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
 
 
WITNESSES
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
 
1.
 
Dr. Sekhar L. Kuriakose, Member Secretary, Kerala State Disaster Management 
 
 
Authority
 
2.
 
Mr. K Mohammed Y Safirulla, D
istrict Collector, Ernakulam
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and special invitee M.P's 
from the State of Kerala alongwith the witnesses of State Government of Kerala. After 
the customary introduction the witness of State Government 
of Kerala made a power 
point presentation before the Committee. The major issue discussed included various 
challenges faced by the Government of Kerala, mammoth nature of relief, rehabilitation 
and rebuilding responsibilities, quantum of central assistance
 
requested and provided, 
measures taken towards reconstruction process, need for a forthcoming role of centre in 
event of such Disasters / Natural calamities, requirement of more funds with regard to 
the recommendations made by the Finance Commission, sugg
estion and need to 
rebuild roads under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY). The Committee 
further deliberated upon the need to revise the criteria for various aspects related to 
compensation, worst affected areas, districts, communities etc, effec
t of floods on the 
State of tourism, assessment of reasons for such a devastating scale of floods, steps 
put in place to anticipate such disasters / natural calamities at the State level, 
involvement of private sector  and utilising Corporate Social Respon
sibility (CSR) funds 
in the rehabilitation process, issues related to insurance of life, agriculture, general 
sector and indemnification thereof and helpful and indispensable role played by 
traditional fisherman community in rescue related work. The Commit
tee directed the 
witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which could not be readily replied by 
them during the sitting.
 
 

85
 
 
2.
 
The Committee, thereafter selected the subject 'Strengthening of the Credit 
Rating Framework in the Country' for 
examination and report thereto. The Committee 
also decided to take evidence of the stakeholders and the representatives of concerned 
Ministries / Department / Organisation on the subject.
 
The witnesses then withdrew
.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings ha
s been kept
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 

86
 
 
 
Minutes 
 
of
 
 
the 
 
Eighth 
sitting 
 
of 
 
the 
 
Standing
 
 
Committee on Finance 
           
(2018
-
19)
The Committee sat on 
Wednesday
, the 
19 December, 2018 f
rom 1
500
hrs. 
to 
1730
hrs. in Committee Room '
D
', Parliament 
House Annexe
 
Ext. Block A
, New 
Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
2
 
Shri T.G. Venkatesh Babu
 
3.
 
Shri Bandaru Dattatreya
 
4.
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
5.
 
Shri Gopalakrishnan Chinnaraj
 
6.
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
7.
 
Shri Gopal 
Chinayya Shetty
 
8.
 
Shri Prem Das Rai
 
9.
 
Shri Prathap Simha
 
10.
 
Dr. Kiritbhai Premjibhai Solanki
 
11.
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 
12.
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi
 
13.
 
Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
14.
 
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
 
15.
 
Shri A. 
Navaneethakrishnan
 
 
16.
 
Shri C.M. Ramesh
 
17.
 
Shri T.K. Rangarajan
 
18.
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh
 
19.
 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
 
 
 
SPECIAL INVITEES
 
 
20.
 
R. Vaithilingum, Rajya Sabha
 
21.
 
T. Rathinavel, Rajya Sabha
 
 
22.
 
Shri A.K. Selvaraj, Rajya Sabha
 
23.
 
Shri K.R.
 
Arjunan, Rajya Sabha
 
24.
 
Shri K.Parasuraman, Lok Sabha
 
25.
 
Shri R. K. Bharathi Mohan, Lok Sabha 
 
26.
 
Shri P. R. Senthilnathan, Lok Sabha
 
27.
 
Shri M. Udhayakumar, Lok Sabha
 
28.
 
Shri Tiruchi Siva, Rajya Sabha
 
29.
 
Shri R.S. Bharathi, Rajya Sabha
 
30.
 
Shri Gokulakrishnan, Rajya  Sabha
 
31.
 
Shri T.K.S. Elangovan, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 

87
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Kulmohan Singh 
Arora
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
 
 
WITNESSES
 
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU 
 
1.
 
Dr. Girija Vaidyanathan, Chief Secretary
 
2.
 
Thiru K. Shanmugam, Additional Chief Secretary, Finance Department
 
3.
 
Dr. K. Satyagopal, Additional Chief Secretary / Commissioner, Revenue 
 
 
Administration, DM & M
 
4.
 
Dr. Atulya Misra, Principal Secretary, Revenue Department & DM Department
 
5.
 
Thiru Vikram Kapur, Principal Secretary / Chairman and MD TNEB / TANGEDCO
 
6.
 
Thiru N Muruganandam, Principal Resident Commissioner, Tamil Nadu House
 
7.
 
T
hiru A Annadurai, Collector, Thanjavur District
 
8.
 
Dr. S Suresh Kumar, Collector, Nagapattinam District
 
GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA 
 
1.
 
Dr. Srinivas Reddy, Director, Disaster Management, Govt. of Karnataka
 
2.
 
Shri Kadare Gowda, Joint Director, Horticulture Dep
artment
 
3.
 
Shri H.M. Nagaraj, Joint Director, Horticulture Department
 
4.
 
Smt. Srividya, Deputy Commissioner, Madikeri District
 
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and special invitee M.P's 
from the State of Tamil Nadu alongwith the wit
nesses of State Government of Tamil 
Nadu and Karnataka. After the customary introduction, the witnesses of State 
Government of Tamilnadu made a power point presentation before the Committee. The 
major issues discussed were overall socio economic impact of 
cyclone Gaja and 
calamitous
 
floods in the State of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka respectively, extent of 
damage to the coastal areas and adverse effect on fishing communities, widespread 

88
 
 
destruction of paddy and coconut plantation, damage to electric poles and 
power 
substation, quantum of assistance requested and provided by Central Government, 
requirement of additional financial assistance, issues related to proper utilisation and 
disbursement of funds, need for a long term mitigation plan, need for assessment 
of 
psychological impact of such calamities, issues related to the compensation for 
damages / reconstruction, need for a comprehensive flood mitigation programme both 
at State and Central level, and amount of relief assistance estimated by respective 
State 
Governments. 
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on 
the subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within a week.
 
 
 
 
The 
witnesses then withdrew
.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 

89
 
 
 
Minutes 
 
of
 
 
the 
 
Tenth 
sitting 
 
of 
 
the 
 
Standing
 
 
Committee on Finance 
(2018
-
19)
The Committee sat on 
Thursday
, the 
3 January, 2019 f
rom 1
500
hrs. to 
1700
hrs. 
in Committee Room '
D
', Parliament House Annexe
 
Ext. Block A
, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
2
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
3.
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 
4.
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
5.
 
Shri Gopal Chinayya 
Shetty
 
6.
 
Dr. Kiritbhai Premjibhai Solanki
 
7.
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 
8.
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi
 
9.
 
Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
10.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
11.
 
Shri Narendra Jadhav
 
 
12.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
13.
 
Shri C.M. Ramesh
 
 
 
SPECIAL 
INVITEES
 
 
14.
 
Shri Ram Mohan Naidu, Lok Sabha
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
5.
 
Shri Ten
zin Gyaltsen
 
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

90
 
 
WITNESSES
 
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
1.
 
Sri D. Varaprasad, Secretary to Government, Revenue (DM)
 
2.
 
Sri Praveen Prakash, Resident Commissioner, Andhra Pradesh Government
 
3.
 
Dr. A Mallikharjuna, Joint Collector, 
East Godavari District
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and special invitee Shri 
Ram Mohan Naidu, Member of Parliament from the State of Andhra Pradesh alongwith 
the witnesses of State Government of Andhra Pradesh. After the customar
y 
introduction, the witnesses of State Government of Andhra Pradesh made a power point 
presentation before the Committee. The major issues discussed included the extent of 
damage caused in various districts, regions and coastal areas, large scale destructi
on 
of houses / settlements and consequent shifting of people to relief camps, severe 
impact on small and marginal farmers, issues related to mobilisation of requisite funds 
for relief and reconstruction and progress made with regard to cyclone / flood reli
ef and 
reconstruction work. The Committee further deliberated upon issues related to the 
quantum of assistance requested by the State and provided by Central government, 
creating awareness and requirement of long term planning by State Government with 
rega
rd to these natural calamities / disasters, need for supplementary mechanism for 
funding of disaster relief and mitigation, issue of road connectivity and construction of 
Pucca Houses in coastal areas. 
The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the 
M
embers on the subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written 
replies to the queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within 
a week.
 
 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew
.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been
 
kept
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 

91
 
 
 
Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2018
-
19). 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 30 January, 2019 from 1100hrs. to 1145hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe Ext. Block 
A, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
2
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
3.
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
4.
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 
5.
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
6.
 
Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty
 
7.
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi
 
8.
 
Shri Shivkumar 
Chanabasappa Udasi
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
9.
 
Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
 
10.
 
Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan
 
 
11.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
12.
 
Dr. Mahendra Prasad
 
13.
 
Shri T.K. Rangarajan
 
14.
 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
 
 
-
 
Joint 
Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
5.
 
Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen
 
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

92
 
 
PART
-
I
 
(1100
-
1145 hrs)
 
WITNESSES
 
GOVERNMENT OF ODHISA
 
1.
 
Shri Aditya Prasad Padhi, Chief Secretary
 
2.
 
Dr. Rajendra Prasad, Director General of Police
 
3.
 
Shri Bijaya Kumar Sharma, Director General of Police, Fire Service, 
 
Commandant General of 
 
Home Guards & Director
 
4.
 
Shri Tuhin Kanta Pandey, Principal Resi
dent Commissioner
 
5.
 
Shri Bishnupada Sethi, Special Relief Commissioner and Secretary to 
 
Government(Disaster 
 
Management)
 
6.
 
Shri Hemant Sharma, Commissioner
-
cum
-
Secretary to Government, Energy 
 
Department
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the 
Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Central Assistance for Disaster 
Management and Relief’. The major issues discussed includ
e
d
 
maintaining 
a 
foolproof 
communication system during 
natural 
disasters
 
/ calamities
, revising norms for central 
assistance under National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), 
need for additional funds 
for permanent reduction and restoration of disaster related
 
risk, 
notifying the Disaster 
Mitigation fund under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, providing disaster specific 
Impact
-
based forecast,
 
extensive damage to electricity network, poles and substations,
 
monitoring of water levels in flood prone rivers, incl
uding lightning and thunderstorm in 
the list of notified calamities and creating a dedicated centre for research on the 
phenomenon of thunderstorm and lightning. The witnesses responded to the queries 
raised by the Members on the subject. The Committee dir
ected the witnesses to furnish 
written replies to the queries which could not be readily replied by them during the 
sitting within a week.
 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew
.
 
The Committee then adjourned for Tea.
 
 

93
 
 
 
PART
-
II
 
(1200
-
1415 hrs)
 
WITNESSES
 
MINISTRY OF 
HOME AFFAIRS
 
1.
 
Shri B.R. Sharma, Special Secretary
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
 
1.
 
Shri Girish Chandra Murmu, OSD
 
2.
 
Shri Rajeev Ranjan, Additional Secretary
 
MINSITRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)
 
1.
 
Shri Debasish Panda, Addition
al Secretary
 
NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY (NDMA)
 
1.
 
Shri Pradeep Kumar, , Additional Secretary
 
INDIAN SPACE RESEARCH ORGANISATION (ISRO)
 
1.
 
Dr. P.G Diwakar, Scientist & Director
 
NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE (NDRF)
 
1.
 
Shri S.N. Pradhan, Director 
General
 
CENTRAL WATER COMMISSION (CWC)
 
1.
 
Shri S. Masood Hussain, Chairman
 
INDIAN METEOROLIGICAL DEPARTMENT
 
1.
 
Shri K.J. Ramesh, DG
 
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
 
1.
 
Dr. Dinesh Gupta, DG
 
AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE COMPANY OF INDIA LTD
 
1.
 
Ms. T.L. Alamelu, Chairman & Managing 
Director
 
ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY OF INDIA LTD
 
1.
 
Mr. A V Girijakumar, Chairman & Managing Director
 
2.
 
Shri Balwant Singh, General Manager & Director
 
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LTD
 
1.
 
Shri Renjit Gangadharan, General Manager
 
 

94
 
 
2. 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson 
welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Central Assistance for Disaster 
Management and Relief’. The major issues dis
cussed include
d
 
revising norms for 
central assistance under National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), notifying the 
Disaster Mitigation fund under the Disaster Management Act, 2005,
 
need for
 
providing 
disaster specific Impact
-
based forecast
 
and
 
monitoring of
 
water levels in flood prone 
rivers, insurance of public property on lines of Kerala, creating a ‘Risk Reduction fund’ 
as prevalent in other countries
 
and including lightning and thunderstorm in the list of 
notified calamities. The witnesses responded to t
he queries raised by the Members on 
the subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within a week.
 
 
 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew.
 
(A verbatim record
 
of the proceedings has been kept)
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 
 

95
 
 
Minutes 
 
of
 
 
the 
 
Thirteenth 
sitting 
 
of 
 
the 
 
Standing
 
 
Committee on Finance 
(2018
-
19)
The Committee sat on 
Monday
, the 
11th February, 2019 f
rom 1
500
hrs. to 
1600 
hrs
 
in Committee Room '
D
',
 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
 
Dr. M. Veerappa Moily 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
2
 
Shri Nishikant Dubey
 
3.
 
Shri Rattan Lal Kataria
 
4.
 
Shri Chandrakant Bhaurao Khaire
 
5.
 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 
6.
 
Prof. Saugata Roy
 
7.
 
Shri Gopal 
Chinnaya Shetty
 
8.
 
Dr. Kirit Somaiya
 
9.
 
Shri Dinesh Trivedi
 
10.
 
Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
11.
 
Dr. Narendra Jadhav
 
12.
 
Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan
 
 
13.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
14.
 
Dr. Mahendra Prasad
 
15.
 
Shri C.M. Ramesh
 
16.
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh
 
17.
 
Dr. Manmohan Singh
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri N.C. Gupta
 
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan
 
 
-
 
Director
 
 
3.
 
Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
4.
 
Shri TenzIn Gyaltsen
 
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
5.
 
Kh. 
Ginlal Chung
 
 
 
 
-
 
Under Secretary
 
 
 
 
 

96
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.
 
The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption :
 
(i)
 
Draft Report on the subject 
'Central assistance for Disaster Management and 
Relief
'.
 
(ii)
 
Draft Report on the subject 
'Strengthening of the Credit Rating Framework in the 
country'
.
 
 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Report
s
 
with 
minor modifications and auth
orised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Report
s
 
to Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 