 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Third 
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2019-20)] 
 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020 /      Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
15 


 FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Third 
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2019-20)] 
  
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 9 September 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on _________, 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
September, 2020 /      Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 


CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………  
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......   
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………   
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted   
 by the Government ............................……………     
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
 desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of  
 the Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  
 reply of the Government is still awaited .....................................…  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 8 September, 2020 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the  Third Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2019-20)’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
   
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.      Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -          Additional Director  
 4.       Ms. Melody Vungthiansiam             -          Assistant Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Fifteenth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  Third Report of 
the Committee ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (201 9-20) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 10 December, 2019.   The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were 
received from the Government vide their communication dated 06 March, 2020.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
08 September, 2020. 
4. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference , the observations / recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                       SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
08 September, 2020                       Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
  

REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 3rd Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 December, 2019. 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 8recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 &8      
           
         
 (Total8) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
NIL 
       (Total NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
 NIL           
                     (Total NIL) 
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
NIL       
(Total - NIL) 
(Chapter- V) 
 

3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with  and comment upon  the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
5. The Committee note that the Ministry implemented an e -Governance project 
named 'MCA21' in 2006 aimed at providing stakeholders a convenient, easy to use and 
secure access and delivery point for all their services. Towards this end, the Ministry 
have informed that version 2 of MCA21 i.e. MCA21v2 was implemented in 2015 -16 and 
that the Ministry has embarked upon version 3 of the MCA -21 system by introducing 
artificial intelligence to further facilitate ‘ease of doing business’ for corporates. The 
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also submitted that the MCA -21 version 3 is 
an ambitious project and would require more funding. The Committee further note that 
India has jumped 14 places from 77th rank to 63rd rank in World Bank’s ‘Doing 
Business Report’ (DBR, 2020). While the improvement in World Bank DBR rankings is 
laudable, the Committee are of the opinion that still more distance has to be traversed 
before the final goal is achieved. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should equip themselves with adequate resources and expertise for smooth 
implementation of MCA -21 version 3 for bringing about greater simplification and ease 
in filing/processing of documents.  
6. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have subm itted as 
follows:- 
 “The new version of MCA21 i.e. MCA 21 V3 which is having advanced 
technology like AI/ML is assisting MCA for its smooth implementation and easy to 

use and access by all the stake holders. Further, it will follow the principle of “Single 
Source of Truth”, which means once an information is sought and provided, the 
same piece of information will not be sought again from the company and the 
information already provided by it will be used to prefill the form where such 
information is required. Moreover, an independent team of the Programme 
Monitoring Unit (PMU) is monitoring the Service Level Agreements (SLA) and 
assisting officers of Ministry of Corporat e Affairs in supervising the implementation 
and execution of the project. Further, the Ministry has proposed for cadre review to 
increase the strength of ICLS Officers who will have domain knowledge and 
expertise in MCA 21 project. The proposal is currently with DoPT.” 
7. The Committee note that the e -governance MCA 21 project which was 
aimed at providing stakeholders a convenient, easy to use and secure access and 
delivery point for all their services  has embarked upon version 3 with advanced 
technology like AI/ML, following the principle of “Single Source of Truth” etc. and 
that an independent team of the Programme Monitoring Unit (PMU) is monitoring 
and assisting the Ministry in supervising the implementation and execution of the 
project. The Committee ho pe that with the ongoing Covid19 crisis and lockdown 
enforced, the project may emerge as an indispensable platform for companies 
and stakeholders to survive these difficult times by making certain adjustments 
like simplifying the filing processes, easier a uthentication, easing of timelines 
earlier laid down etc. Further, the World Bank Report on Doing Business, 
2020states that economies that score the highest have the common feature of 
widespread use of electronic systems  and online platforms to comply with  
regulatory requirements. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for an 
extensive and widespread use of online platforms like MCA21 in order to achieve 
our ‘Ease of Doing Business’ goals.  

Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
8. The Committee note  that the multi -year pattern of high vacancies and lack of 
human resources should be addressed at a structural level so that these gaps are 
closed as soon as possible. MCA's various regulatory entities are critically important for 
a smooth functioning econ omy. They should be suitably equipped in terms of human 
capital and systems so that they can provide necessary support to the economy.  
9. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as follows:-  
 "The concerns of the Comm ittee have been noted. The Ministry is making all -out 
efforts to strengthen all the regulatory bodies besides its headquarters by 
augmenting human resources and their capacity building through various skill 
training, software and other infrastructure devel opment for smooth functioning of the 
system. As far as SFIO is concerned, working strength has been increased from 66 
to 76 as against the sanctioned strength of 133 and the process of filling up of 
vacant posts in the SFIO is going. All the posts of members in the NCLAT have been 
filled.   Government has appointed 28 more members in NCLT recently bringing the 
total number of members in position to 52 against the sanctioned strength of 63.  
Since some of the members in the NCLT demitted the office, the pres ent strength of 
Members is 47 and filling up of the vacant posts of Members in NCLT is under 
process.  Govt. has sanctioned 54 posts of Officers and Staff in NCLAT and 320 
posts in NCLT for which Recruitment Rules have been framed.  NCLT & NCLAT are 
taking necessary action to fill  these posts on regular basis. The officials/staff of the 
Ministry and its regulatory bodies are provided with various skill training as a 
capacity building measures besides online operation of many of functions of the 
Ministry for easy compliance of stakeholders and efficient monitoring." 
10. The Committee find that the Ministry’s reply regarding strengthening 
human resources in all their regulatory bodies is repetitive. The Committee has 
year after year reiterated the urgency with  regard to filling human resource 

requirements in its key bodies like SFIO, CCI, NCLT, NCLAT etc.  The Committee 
cannot overemphasize the crucial role these bodies play in keeping the wheels of 
our economy moving. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge th e Ministry to fill 
the critical human capital gaps in these regulatory bodies within the present 
financial year. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress made 
in this regard.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs under Demand No. 16 for the year 2019 -20 is Rs 586.34 crore, out of which  Rs. 
545.34 is under Revenue Head and Rs. 41 crore is under Capital Head. The Committee 
observe that the Budget Estimates are gradually increasing year after year from Rs. 
344.43 crore in 2016-17, Rs. 508.04 crore in 2017 -18, Rs. 564.15 crore in 2018 -19 and 
Rs.586.34 crore in 2019 -20. Although funds surrendered have been showing a 
decreasing trend, still as high as Rs. 19.22 crore had to be surrendered in the Financial 
Year 2018-19 and only Rs. 274 crore has been utilised so far out of B.E (2019 -20) of 
Rs. 586.34 crore which is less than 50% of the total funds allocated. The Committee 
have pointed out the issue of the Ministry's inability to absorb funds in their earlier 
Reports and had recommended that the Ministry should exercise due diligence in the 
budget formulation, However, the Committee observe that the perpetual cycle of under -
utilization and surrender of funds continues. The Committee are, therefore, constrained 
to reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry exercise due diligence in th eir 
budget formulation and make concerted efforts to utilize the limited funds allocated, 
especially in strengthening the infrastructure and capacity of their statutory bodies, 
headquarters set-up and field offices. The Committee further recommend that the  high 
fees charged by the Ministry in pricing their services should be rationalized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) With regards to utilisation of the allocated funds  and strengthening the infrastructure 
and capacity building of the headquarters of the Ministry and its statutory bodies and 
field offices, it is submitted that utilisation of funds and progress of activities under each 
budgetary unit/ organisation are closely monitored at Senior Level in the Ministry by 
reviewing meetings/field visits from time to time and funds are re -allocated through re -
appropriation from one head to another for accomplishing the tasks.  

(ii) As regards utilisation of funds during 2019 -20 is concerned, a s against the R.E. of 
Rs. 576.00 crore, Rs.514.72 crore i.e. 89.36% has been utilised as on 6.3.2020 and the 
details are given below:- 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure (upto 
06.03.2020 ) 
 Capital Revenue Total Capital Revenue Total Capital Revenue Total 
2019-20 41.00 545.34 586.34 12.50 563.50 576.00 10.08 504.64 514.72 
(89.36% of 
RE) 
 
(iii)  With regards to strengthening the infrastructure and capacity of their statutory 
bodies, headquarters set -up and field offices, it is submitted that theMinistry is making 
all-out efforts to strengthen all the regulatory bodies and its headquarters by 
augmenting human resources and their capacity building through various skill training, 
software and other infrastructure development as explained in replies to point  No.8 
below 
(iv) With respect to surrender of funds during 2018 -19, it is submitted that the actual 
surrendered amounts was Rs. 9.72 crore (Rs.19.22 – 9.50= 9.72) in FY 2018 -19. That 
the 2nd Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants  of Rs. 19.00 crore  to minor works 
under the Revenue Section through Technical Supplementary from the Capital Section 
with the condition that equal amount from the Revenue Section should be surrendered. 
Since there was only Rs.9.50 crore available as savings under the Revenu e Section for 
surrender, equal amount i.e. Rs.9.50crore only was re -appropriated to the Revenue 
Section for minor works as against the Technical Supplementary amount of Rs.19.00 
crore. Hence, the actual surrendered amount was Rs.9.72 crore ( i.e. Rs. 19.22 – 
Rs.9.50= Rs.9.72) in FY 2018-19.  
(v)   With regards to the Committee’s recommendation that the high fees charged by the 
Ministry in pricing their services should be rat ionalized, it is submitted that the fee 
collected by MCA for enabling filing of any d ocument, fact or information has been kept 
reasonable. When stakeholders commit default in filing such documents, fact or 
information within the period, as provided under the Companies Act, 2013 and Rules 

thereunder, an additional fee is charged which serv es the purpose of disincentivizing  
non-compliance with law and also enables making good the default.  The Government is 
also taking necessary steps to amend Section 403 of the Companies Act, 2013 whereby 
the additional fee applicable for default on two or more occasions in timely filing of any 
document, fact or information, is proposed to be reduced from the present amount of at 
least Rs.200/-per day which is presently provided under that Section.  
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2) 
The Committee note that the Ministry implemented an e -Governance project named 
'MCA21' in 2006 aimed at providing stakeholders a convenient, easy to use and secure 
access and delivery point for all their services. Towards this end, the Ministry have 
informed that version 2 of MCA21 i.e. MCA21v2 was implemented in 2015 -16 and that 
the Ministry has embarked upon version 3 of the MCA-21 system by introducing artificial 
intelligence to further facilitate ‘ease of doing business’ for corporates. The Secretary, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also submitted that the MCA -21 version 3 is an 
ambitious project and would require more funding. The Committee further note that 
India has jumped 14 places from 77th rank to 63rd rank in World Bank’s ‘Doing 
Business Report’ (DBR, 2020). While the improvement in World Bank DBR rankings is 
laudable, the Committee are of the opinion that still more distance has to be traversed 
before the final goal is achieved. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should equip themselves with adequate resources and expertise for smooth 
implementation of MCA -21 version 3 for bringing about greater simplification and ease 
in filing/processing of documents.  
Reply of the Government 
The new version of MCA21 i.e. MCA 21 V3 which is h aving advanced technology like 
AI/ML is assisting MCA for its smooth implementation and easy to use and access by all 
the stake holders. Further, it will follow the principle of “ Single Source of Truth”, which 
means once an information is sought and provid ed, the same piece of information will 
not be sought again from the company and the information already provided by it will be 
used to prefill the form where such information is required. Moreover, a n independent 

team of the Programme Monitoring Unit (PMU) is monitoring the Service Level 
Agreements (SLA) and assist ing officers of Ministry of Corporate Affairs in supervising 
the implementation and execution of the project. Further, the Ministry has proposed for 
cadre review to increase the strength of ICLS Of ficers who will have domain knowledge 
and expertise in MCA 21 project. The proposal is currently with DoPT.  
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3) 
The Committee note that the Champion Service Sector is a new Central Sector Scheme 
under the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and that the Union Cabinet has identified 12 
Champion Service Sectors for promoting and realizing their development. The 
Committee also note that Accounting and Financial Services is one of the 12 Champion 
Sector identified under which, the scheme 'GST Account Assistant' has been 
conceptualized to build capacity and to create a cadre of GST Account Assistants at the 
ground level to enhance availability of trained professionals in every nook and corner of 
the country for better compliance of GST by SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) & 
SMPs (Small and Medium Professionals) at affordable cost to them. The Committee 
also note that a token provision of Rs. 5.00 crore was made for the scheme in BE 2019 -
20. At this nascent stage, the Committee hope that the Ministry would strive for 
enhancement of budgetary provision for full and effective implementation of the 
scheme, as it would help in achie vement of the twin objectives of employment 
generation as well as simplification of GST processing and compliance.  
Reply of the Government 
The GST Account Assistant Scheme under the Champion Sector Scheme was not 
considered for budgetary support by the EFC (Expenditure Finance Committee) in its 
meeting held on 06.09.2019. Thereafter, Secretary (CA) has written to the Secretary, 
Deptt. of Expe nditure with a revision of the proposed scheme for the consideration of 

the EFC. Meanwhile, the proposal of revised GST Account Assistant Scheme has been 
sent to the Department of Commerce for their views/comments.  Upon approval of the 
scheme, it will be implemented with higher allocation of funds across the country.  
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4) 
The Committee note that the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO)  is a multi -
disciplinary investigating agency set u p to investigate serious corporate frauds and has 
been accorded statutory status. The Committee find that out of 91 cases assigned to 
SFIO since 2016 -17, only 35 cases have been completed so far. The Committee also 
note that out of 133 sanctioned posts in SFIO, only 66 posts are filled up by regular 
incumbents and 6 officers have been posted on loan basis. The Ministry have informed 
that efforts are being made to improve the vacancy situation by expediting the selection 
process, incentivizing posting of off icials by special grant of 20% of Basic Pay and 
engagement of technical consultants. The Committee are of the view that keeping in 
mind the large number of cases and the rising workload with greater complexity, the 
Ministry should strengthen the workforce in SFIO and equip them with the requisite 
expertise and motivation to fulfil the mandate. It also needs to be ensured that the cases 
referred/taken up are investigated thoroughly and in a professional manner with a view 
to improving their prosecution outcomes.  
Reply of the Government 
The observation s of the Committee have been noted. It is submitted that keeping in 
mind the large number of cases and the rising workload with greater complexity, the 
Ministry is making all -out efforts to strengthen the workforce in SFIO. Those officers 
having requisite expertise are selected and Special Security Allowance is paid to the 
officers of SFIO for motivating them. 
Upon recommendation by the Selection Committee, offer of appointment on deputation 
basis have been given to 21 candidates; out of them, 13 candidates have already joined 
and remaining are likely to join shortly. As on date, working strength in the SFIO has 
increased from 66 to 76 as against the sanctioned strength of 133. Dossiers of six 

selected candidates for the post of Assistant on DR basis have been received from the 
Staff Selection Commission(SSC) and they are expected to join very soon. The process 
of filling up of vacant posts on both deputation (ISTC) and Direct Recruitment is 
continuing.  Furt her, the officers of SFIO are given training in investigation process 
through programmes being conducted by ICAI, IICA and UNODC etc. Progress of 
Investigations is closely monitored and reviewed by MCA so as to ensure quality 
investigation and timely completion thereof. 
 [No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
The Committee note that Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) Authority was 
established in 2016 with the objective of promoting investor education, awareness, 
protection and to make refunds of shares, unclaimed dividends and matured 
deposits/debentures. The Committee also note that Section 124 (6) of the Companies 
Act, 2013 states that all shares in respect of which dividend has not been paid or 
claimed for seven consecutive years or more shall be transferred by the company to 
IEPF Authority. The Mi nistry have informed that the amount transferred to the IEPF is 
about Rs. 4200 crore and that 1667 companies have transferred about 67.28 crore 
shares to the IEPF Demat account. The Ministry have also informed that the quantum of 
work in the Authority has increased manifold during the last two years and that the 
Authority may be required to dispose of 12000 claims every year. Towards this end, the 
Ministry informed that the R.S.Sahoo Committee have recommended creation of 
additional posts, which is being ta ken up with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
note that the number of claims have been increasing steeply year after year i.e. from 
343 in 2016 -17,3683 in 2017 -18 and 10661 in 2018 -19. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the manpower requirements  of the Authority needs to be addressed 
expeditiously in order to meet the increasing number of claims filed as well as to fulfil its 
objective of spreading awareness among investors.   
 
 

Reply of the Government 
Based on the recommendations of R.S. Sahoo C ommittee Report on manpower 
requirements, the IEPF Authority has submitted a proposal for creation of 33 posts, 
which is under the consideration of the Government. For filling up the vacancies in 
existing posts, advertisements have been issued in the Newsp apers and Employment 
news in the month of December, 2019. For claim processing, Company Secretaries are 
engaged on contract basis through Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI). 
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6) 
The Committee note that the Competition Commission of India (CCI) was established in 
March, 2009 under the Competition Act, 2009 to prevent practices having adverse effect 
on competition, to promote and sustain competition in markets, to protect interests of 
consumers and to ensure freedom of trade. The Committee also note that as on 30 
September, 2019, the Commission has received 1037 cases relating to anti -competitive 
conduct and that 162 cases are pending in the Commission. With regard to staffing, the 
Ministry have informed that out of the total 192 sanctioned posts, 123 posts are filled 
while 72 posts are lying vacant. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should in all urgency endeavour to fulfil the human resource requirements in the 
Commission in order to expedite the process of disposing off the huge backlog of cases. 
Reply of the Government 
As on 31 st December 2019, the Commission received 1051 cases relating to anti -
competitive conduct under Section 3 & 4 of the Competition Act and 890 cases have 
been decided by the Commission. 
The Commission has received 728 notices under Section 6(2) and 6(5)  of the Act. Out 
of these, 723 cases have been disposed of within the stipulated time and 5 cases are 
under consideration of the Commission. 
 

Staff Position of CCI and DG’s office as on 09.01.2020 
(a) The details of existing sanctioned strength of posts as well as va cancies in the 
Competition Commission of India (CCI), including those in the office of Director 
General, CCI are as under:- 
Name of the office Present Sanctioned 
Strength 
Present Working 
Strength 
Present vacancy position 
CCI 154 104 50 
O/o. DG, CCI 41 18 23 
Total 195 122 73 
 
(b) Status regarding filling of vacant posts in CCI: 
 
(i) As per the Recruitment Rules for the sanctioned posts in the CCI, the mode 
of recruitment is by Direct Recruitment, Deputation and promotion.  
(ii) Sixth round of direct recruitment was conducted and 20 candidates were 
selected and all of them have joined in the Commission. 
(iii) An advertisement to fill up 10 posts in CCI on deputation basis was issued on 
26.11.2019. The last date for receipt of applications by the CCI was 
7.01.2020. The a pplications which were received, are scrutinized to make 
selection of eligible candidates at the earliest.   
(iv) To fill-up vacant posts under deputation quota, a circular is issued. 
(v) Promotions quota posts have been filled up by promoting eligible officers in 
CCI recently (i.e. w.e.f. 1.1.2020). 
 
Status regarding filling up of vacant posts in the O/o the DG CCI 
 
i) In so far as the office of Director General, CCI is concerned, the prescribed mode 
of recruitment is only by deputation. One of the essential eligibility requirement 
prescribed in the existing RRs in respect of the Professional posts is experience 
in ‘investigation under any Economic law’.   Due to non -receipt of sufficient 
applications from the eligible persons, all the sanctioned posts of Professionals 
were not filled up in the O/o. DG, CCI. Subsequently,  advertisement were issued 
on 19.06.2019 and 26.09.2019 to fill up all the 20 vacant posts on deput ation and 

presently, selection of eligible applicants is under process and  it is hoped that 
this time all the vacant posts will be filled on deputation basis. 
 
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7) 
The Committee note  that National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) were constituted in 2016 for faster resolution 
of corporate disputes and reducing the multiplicity of agencies thereby promoting ‘ease 
of doing business in the c ountry. The Ministry have informed that on the formation of 
NCLT, 5345 cases pending with Company Law Board (CLB) were transferred to NLCT 
and that till 31.08.2019, 4073 cases were received on transfer, 45820 cases were filed 
fresh, bringing the total case s with NCLT to 55,238 out of which 35,536 cases have 
been disposed and 19702 cases are pending.  The Ministry have also informed that the 
creation of 320 posts of officers/staff in NCLT has been approved and that Recruitment 
Rules for these posts are being  finalized. Regarding implementation of e -Courts, the 
Ministry have informed that version 2.0 is under progress and that as on 13.09.2019, 
total e-filed cases were 17,787. The Committee are constrained to note that while the 
Ministry is unable to fully uti lise the funds at its disposal, resulting in funds allocated 
lapsing year after year, important fora such as the NCLT and NCLAT are seriously 
understaffed and under -funded. As a result, there is a massive pendency of critical 
cases. This has rendered these  important Tribunals unable to work to their full potential 
and to meet the demands of laws like the IBC which are therefore being rendered 
ineffectual. The Committee feel that in order to tackle the huge pendency of cases, 
more benches of NCLT with adequa te manpower are required,  for which the 
Recruitment Rules may be finalized at the earliest and that implementation of version 2 
of e-courts should be expedited for faster resolution of cases.  
Reply of the Government 
 (i)  With regard to strengthen ing the manpower in the NCLT/NCLAT with adequate 
funding, etc., it is submitted that the Government has approved for 320 posts at various 
levels in NCLT and 59 posts in NCLAT. Recruitment Rules have been notified vide 

Notification dated 21.01.2020 and NCLT and NC LAT are initiating the process to fill up 
regular posts as per the notified rules.  Prior to regular appointments to these posts, staff 
have been made on contractual/outsourced and deputation basis.  Law Research 
Associates have been engaged as per the req uirement.  NCLT has been authorized for 
engaging supporting staff/offices on contractual/outsourcing basis for administrative 
exigencies.     
 
(ii)  Regarding opening of more benches of NCLT and strengthening them with 
adequate manpower and capacity building, it is submitted that the Government is taking 
all steps to strengthen the NCLT and NCLAT in terms of number of Benches, number of 
courts and number of Members.  Five new Benches of NCLT which were announced 
during 2018-2019, are functioning at Jaipur, Cuttack Kochi, Indore and Amaravati.  One 
Bench of NCLAT opened newly at Chennai is also functioning.  Government has also 
appointed 28 more Members in NCLT recently and 6 new Members in NCLAT.  Vacant 
posts of Members in NCLT and NCLAT are being fil led up regularly.  For capacity 
building of Members, regular colloquiums are being held. It is expected that all the 
pending cases will be disposed of. 
          
(iv) Regarding implementation of Version 2 of e -Courts, it is submitted that the e -Court 
project is implemented through NIC for all the benches of NCLT.  Subsequent to version 
1 of e-courts software which were completed, version 2 of e -Courts software have been 
introduced. Under the version 2 of e -courts, various activities have been undertake n 
such as  
(a) report filing by government bodies, modifications in the Cause List, refiling 
functionality for external users (general public/advocates/IRP/RP etc.), 
automatic case number generation in CIS, etc., from 01.01.2020; 
(b) WACOM usage has been initiated  in NCLT Delhi court from January, 2020.  
Metadatta creation for cases has been completed at Delhi.  All petitions/ 
applications received at filing counter are filed through e -filing module as well.  
Metadatta creation is in progress at NCLT Mumbai, Jaipur , Chandigarh, 
Allahabad, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Chennai.  E -filing application has been 

launched for public in Mumbai on 03.02.2020.  CIS has also been launched for 
registry in Mumbai on 03.02.2020.  
(c) Training was conducted for NCLT Delhi, Mumbai, Jaipur, C handigarh, 
Allahabad users.  Trainings were also conducted for all data entry operators 
joining in different NCLT locations.   
(d) Disaster Recovery setup has been initiated for NCLT e -courts project.  Roll out 
plan have been prepared for launch of e-filing across all NCLT benches in India.  
Display boards have been installed and running in most of the NCLT locations.   
(e) As on 11.02.2020, applications and documents were e -filed for a total of 25,696 
cases.  
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8) 
The Committee notes that the multi -year pattern of high vacancies and lack of human 
resources should be addressed at a structural level so that these gaps are closed as 
soon as possible. MCA's various regulatory entities are critically important for a smoo th 
functioning economy. They should be suitably equipped in terms of human capital and 
systems so that they can provide necessary support to the economy.  
Reply of the Government 
The concerns of the Committee have been noted. The Ministry is making all -out efforts 
to strengthen all the regulatory bodies besides its headquarters by augmenting human 
resources and their capacity building through various skill training, software and ot her 
infrastructure development for smooth functioning of the system.    As far as SFIO is 
concerned, working strength has been increased from 66 to 76 as against the 
sanctioned strength of 133 and the process of filling up of vacant posts in the SFIO is 
going. All the posts of members in the NCLAT have been filled.   Government has 
appointed 28 more members in NCLT recently bringing the total number of members in 
position to 52 against the sanctioned strength of 63.  Since some of themembers in the 
NCLT demitted the office, the present strength of Members is 47 and filling up of the 
vacant posts of Members in NCLT is under process.  Govt. has sanctioned 54 posts of 

Officers and Staff in NCLAT and 320 posts in NCLT for which Recruitment Rules have 
been framed.  NCLT & NCLAT are taking necessary action to fill these posts on regular 
basis.  The officials/staff of the Ministry and its regulatory bodies are provided with 
various skill training as a capacity building measures besides online operation of many 
of functions of the Ministry for easy compliance of stakeholders and efficient monitoring.  
[No.G-20018/14/2019-BGT  Dated: 06.03.2020] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
  

 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  

CHAPTER - IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                       SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
08 September, 2020                       Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on Finance 
   
 
 

 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the r ecommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 

(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained  in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Mach inery 
in the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
  

APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2019-20) OF THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
8  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(vide Recommendation at  Sl. Nos. 
1,2,3,4,5,6,7 & 8) 
 
8 100% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
Nil 0.00 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 