 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fiftieth 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining 
Of Statistics Collection Machinery in the Country, including Management 
Information System for Project Monitoring/Appraisal'] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020 /       Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
23 


 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION  
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fiftieth 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘ 'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining 
Of Statistics Collection Machinery in the Country, including Management 
Information System for Project Monitoring/Appraisal'] 
  
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 9 September, 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ____________, 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ______________, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
September, 2020 /       Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 


CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………   
 
CHAPTER II* Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III* Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV* Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V* Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08 September, 2020. 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the Fiftieth Rep ort ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Finance o n ‘Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining 
Of Statistics Collection Machinery in the Country, including Management 
Information System for Project Monitoring/Appraisal'  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
   
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.       Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -         Additional Director  
 4. Shri Preetam Prabhakar    -  Committee Officer 
 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Twenty-third Report on action taken by Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report of the Committee 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics 
Collection Machinery in the Country, including Mana gement Information System for 
Project Monitoring/Appraisal’. 
  
2. The Twenty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 20 December, 2017.   The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were 
received from the Government vide their communication dated 20 February, 2019.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           08 
September, 2020.       
4. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference , the observations / recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                     SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
08 September, 2020                                 Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) deals 
with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 
their Fiftieth Report of Sixteenth Lok Sabha on the subject 'Review of NSSO and CSO and 
Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery in the Country, including Man agement 
Information System for Project Monitoring/Appraisal ' which was presented to Lok Sabha  / 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2017. 
 2.  Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 12 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report . These have been analyzed a nd 
categorized as follows: 
  
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12. 
       (Total 10) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  4 
                  (Total : 1) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government  
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Nos.  2  
       (Total : 1)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL                 
(Total : NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
 

3. The Committee desire that the replies to the observations / recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.      
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee believe  that GDP data should ideally reflect the prevailing 
momentum of all economic activities across the spectrum, which would provide accurate 
inputs for policy formulation. Otherwise, it may leave a policy vacuum, which will not be 
conducive for the health of  the economy. It is, therefore, imperative that the economic 
activities and services including those in the unorganised / informal sector are 
comprehensively reflected in the GDP data so that the ground realities of the prevalent 
economic scenario emerges clearly. 
6. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under :- 
"GDP series are revised from time to time to ensure momentum of all economic 
activities across the spectrum. This is in accordance with the international practice 
& System of National Accounts guidelines of United Nations.  Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) series are being revised once in 5 years.  It has already been 
decided to revise the existing GDP series to 2017 -18 as the base year.  The 
Ministry is taking further steps in this direction and is taking due care to improve the 
coverage of the formal & informal sector based on the availability of resources." 
 
7. The Committee note that the GDP Series are being revised once in 5 years 
and that it has already been decided to revise the exist ing GDP Series to 2017-18 as 
the base year. While appreciating the endeavors made by the Ministry thus far, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the economic activities and 
services including those in the unorganized/informal sector ar e comprehensively 
captured and reflected in the GDP framework so that the ground realities emerge 
clearly and data gaps on various socio -economic indices are bridged 
comprehensively, as authentic and credible data is crucial for planning, policy 
structuring, informed decision making and inclusive growth. It is imperative that all 
methodological ambiguities are sorted out once and for all.   
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
8. The Committee are  concerned to note that there are as many as 861 vacancies at 
the level of Junior and Senior Statistical Officer in the statistical cadre of the Ministry. 
Thus, the resource requirements for various statistical activities remain undermined. The 
Committee note that the existing statistical manpower is grossly insufficient to cope with 
the entire gamut of activities, including various ancillary activities in relation to mainstream 
industrial statistics, apart from service sector statistics and statistics of i nternational trade. 
The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend immediate filling up of all vacancies 
in the statistical cadre, so that the Ministry's core competency is not compromised. 
Further, they desire that a study be conducted to find out the  reasons for high level of 
attrition from this sector and their inability to attract talent. In this connection, the 
Committee are of the view that out -sourcing of data collection should be avoided and 
instead, enumerators should be appointed on contractua l basis, whenever required, for 
maintaining reliability and authenticity of data.                      
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated as under :- 
"The post of Junior Statistical Officer  (JSO) of Subordinate Statistical Services 
(SSS) cadre at entry level is filled through Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and 
the SSS Division in MoSPI takes necessary action in this regard. As suggested by 
the Committee, for maintaining reliability and aut henticity of data, the National 
Sample Survey Office (NSSO) engages enumerators on contract basis instead of 
outsourcing the data collection." 
 
10. The Committee observe with concern that despite their repeated 
recommendations regarding filling up of vacan t posts in the Statistical Services 
cadre, as on 30th November, 2019 there were as many as 785 total vacant position in 
the grade of Senior Statistical Officer and Junior Statistical Officer (Annual Report 
2019-20 of the Ministry of Statistics and Programm e Implementation). The 
Committee are, therefore, constrained to reiterate their recommendation of 
immediate filling up of all vacancies in the statistical cadre so that the Ministry’s 
core competency is not compromised. They further reiterate that a study be 
conducted to figure out the reasons for high level of attrition from this sector and 
the Ministry’s inability to attract requisite manpower. 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
11. The Committee note  that the Consumer Price Index (CPI) does not adequately 
capture the rising cost of services like education, healthcare, transport etc, which leave an 
adverse impact on the standard of living of our people. They, therefore, consider it 
opportune that our s tatistical apparatus has an exclusive Service Price Index for essential 
services, so that the government can formulate policy responses accordingly. It is high 
time the indices compiled and published by the Government approximate to the prevailing 
market conditions at the consumer level and get as close to his consumption pattern and 
standard of living as possible. 
 
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under :- 
 
Updated status of Experimental Business Service Price Index (BSPI) 
Serial 
No 
Sectors Updated Status on Action taken 
1. Air Transport Service Experimental Air Service Price Index with revised base year(2015 -
16) has been compiled and published from April 2016 till March 
2018. 
2. Railway Service Experimental RSPI with base year 2011-12 for the period from April 
2012 to November 2017 has been uploaded in the website of Office 
of the Economic Adviser (OEA). 
3. Postal Experimental Postal Service Price Index with 2004-05 as base year 
from April 2005 to June 2017 has been uploaded in  Office of 
Economic Adviser (OEA)’s website. 
 
Department of Posts is in process of updating the base year of the 
index, along with a new product basket and weighting diagram. 
4. Banking Service Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has compiled Banking Service Price 
Index (BkSPI) with base year 2004 -05 from April 2005 to May 
2017. 
 
RBI is in process of compiling new Banking Service Price Index 
based on 2011 -12 as base year, with new item basket and 
weighting diagram. 
5. Telecom (Cellular) Experimental Telecom Service Price Index with 2015 -16 as base 
year has been compiled from QE June2016 to QE December 2017. 
6. Insurance Service An Experimental Insurance Service Price Index with 2011 -12 as 
base year  has been compiled from QE June 2012 to QE 
September 2016. 
 
In view of high volatility in the estimates of the index, the index is 
being refined in consultation with Insurance Regulatory and 

Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Department of Financial 
Services (DFS) and Central Statistics Office(CSO). 
7. Trade Service Experimental Trade Service Price Index with 2011 as base year 
has been compiled using data from the MCA -21 of Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs for the period 2010 to2015. 
 
Due to very volatile nature of the data, ways and means of using 
GSTN data to construct the index is being explored. 
8. Road 
Transport(Freight) 
Given the unorganized and fragmented nature of the service  
providers in this sector, it is proposed to use data from Goods & 
Services Tax Network(GSTN)  for building this experimental index 
once the GSTN data has stabilized. 
9. Port Service Ministry of Shipping is in process of developing Experimental Port 
Service Price Index with data from the 12 Major ports and 19 Non - 
Major ports. 
10. Business Service It is proposed to develop experimental Information Technology 
Service Price Index in consultation with Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MEITY) and its subordinate organisations 
 
13. The Committee note that in the Action Taken note, the Ministry has furnished 
information pertaining to the Experimental Business Service Price Index (BSPI) 
which inter alia relate to Air Transport Service, Railway Service, Postal, Banking 
Service, Insurance Service, Business Service etc. while they have not provided any 
information with respect to services like education and healthcare which have 
immense impact on the standard of living of people. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that the indices compile d and published by the Government approximate 
to the prevailing market conditions at the consumer level and get as close to the 
consumption pattern and standard of living as possible.   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
14. The primary aim of official statistics is to provide an accurate, up -to-date, 
comprehensive and meaningful empirical picture of society and economy for supporting 
formulation and monitoring of socio -economic policies by the Government. Public Health 
being a crucial sector requiring Government support and active intervention, the 
Committee are of the view that Health related data collection and surveys be taken up by 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation without any delay. Such 
statistical inputs on the social side would, no doubt, go a long way in helping both the 
Central and State Governments in their public interventions.                      
 

 
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated as under :- 
"Besides regular surveys, NSSO takes up other subjects as and when requested by 
other Ministries etc. with approval of NSC. M/o Health itself is conducting some 
health related surveys on regular basis. NSSO takes up health related subjects as 
requested by M/o Health. The recent health r elated survey conducted by NSSO 
was during July,2017 to June, 2018 on 'Social consumption: Health'." 
 
16. In the aftermath of the global Covid -19 pandemic, Public Health as such has 
become all the more crucial, requiring Government support and active intervention. 
The Committee would, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that health 
related data col lection and surveys be taken up by the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation on priority basis, as such statistical inputs would be of 
immense help to both the Central and State Governments in formulating appropriate 
policy responses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 The Committee believe  that GDP data should ideally reflect the prevailing 
momentum of all economic activities across the spectrum, which would provide accurate 
inputs for policy formulation. Otherwise, it may leave a policy vacuum, which will not be 
conducive for the health of  the economy. It is, therefore, imperative that the economic 
activities and services including those in the unorganised / informal sector are 
comprehensively reflected in the GDP data so that the ground realities of the prevalent 
economic scenario emerges clearly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 "GDP series are revised from time to time to ensure momentum of all economic 
activities across the spectrum. This is in accordance with the international practice & 
System of National Accounts guidelines of United Nations .  Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) series are being revised once in 5 years.  It has already been decided to revise the 
existing GDP series to 2017 -18 as the base year.  The Ministry is taking further steps in 
this direction and is taking due care to improve the coverage of the formal & informal 
sector based on the availability of resources." 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee observe that there are surprisingly wide variations between sample 
survey data collected by NSSO and those collected by the State Governments. Further, 
within the same Ministry, the CSO and NSSO adopt different standards to measure certain 
things, such as, definition of "disability impact services" rolled out for citizens. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that such variations in standards and methodologies 

should be addressed to bring consi stency, standardisation and uniformity in sample 
surveys conducted by different agencies including State Government Departments. 
Reply of the Government  
 “For ensuring adoption of appropriate scientific methods in conducting the survey 
and coverage of items relevant to the user Ministries & other users, with approval of 
National Statistical Commission (NSC), Working Groups are constituted comprising 
eminent economists, statisticians, officers from user Ministries / organizations and other 
domain experts  to oversee the development of survey instruments including 
concept/definitions, standards etc. While defining different parameters / terms for use in 
the survey and formulating related instructions for the field investigators, the Working 
group takes into  account all related national and international definitions, 
recommendations, etc. The data collected by State Governments, through the state 
samples, are processed by them as per the data processing protocols and a common 
tabulation plan developed by NSSO . Thus, several methodological and conceptual 
frameworks have been designed by the Ministry, which are aimed at minimizing difference 
in the data and estimates generated by various State Government and Central 
Government agencies. NSSO has also developed a uniform methodology and software for 
use by the State Governments to bring out sub-state level estimates by pooling the data of 
Central and States sample. The pooling methodology and software are shared with the 
State Governments. Training of State Govern ments officers is organized by the NSSO on 
regular intervals in order to enable them to adopt uniform methodology for bringing out 
quality data at state and sub-state level.” 
 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 The primary aim of official statistics is to provide an accurate, up -to-date, 
comprehensive and meaningful empirical picture of society and economy for supporting 
formulation and monitoring of s ocio-economic policies by the Government. Public Health 
being a crucial sector requiring Government support and active intervention, the 
Committee are of the view that Health related data collection and surveys be taken up by 
the Ministry of Statistics and  Programme Implementation without any delay. Such 

statistical inputs on the social side would, no doubt, go a long way in helping both the 
Central and State Governments in their public interventions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 “Besides regular surveys, NSS O takes up other subjects as and when requested 
by other Ministries etc. with approval of NSC. M/o Health itself is conducting some health 
related surveys on regular basis. NSSO takes up health related subjects as requested by 
M/o Health. The recent health related survey conducted by NSSO was during July,2017 to 
June, 2018 on 'Social consumption: Health'.” 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 Needless to emphasise, lack of reliable and quality data poses a serious challenge 
toeconomic policy making as also economic revival, especially on the employment front. A 
major gap in our statistical armory is the absence of regular employment, unemployment 
data. The official unemployment figures which are obviously out -of-date seem very 
unrealistic. Although the Government has been earnestly seeking to promote self -
employment and skill development thr ough the National Skill Development Programme, 
some industries like garments, gems and jewellery, handicrafts, carpets etc. need more 
attention for more job creation. As revival and creation of employment is a stated objective 
of the Government, it is imperative that accurate, current and reliable data on employment 
to assess employment situation is readily available to assess employment trends and to 
formulate appropriate policy responses. In this regard, discrepancies with private data also 
need to be addressed and ironed out. 
Reply of the Government 
 “In view of requirement of reliable official data on employment and unemployment 
with frequent/short interval NSSO is conducting Periodic Labour  Force Survey (PLFS) for 
generating quarterly estimates for urban areas and annual estimates for both in urban and 
rural areas. Sample design for this survey has been recommended by the Standing 
Committee on Labour Force Statistics (SCLFS). Ministry has al so started bringing out 

employment related statistics in the formal sector covering the period September, 2017 
onwards, using information on the number of subscribers who have subscribed under 
three major schemes, namely, Employee Provident Fund Organizati on (EPFO), New 
Pension Scheme (NPS) and Employees’ State Insurance (ESI) Scheme, in order to 
measure growth of workers entering the formal sector.” 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee feels that although the economy has grown much larger and 
become more complex, the nature of manpower planning in Statistical departments has 
not changed over the years. It has thus become difficult to attract and retain talent. Good 
statisticians are now being lapped up by the private sector especially financial services 
firms or, they prefer to go abroad. The Committee, therefore, recommend that besides re -
formulating the teaching methodologies and curriculum at t he University level to reflect 
changing requirements, a suitable rewards / incentive structure should be devised to 
attract expertise and quality statisticians for Government duties, albeit at the lateral level. 
Field level statistical machinery should als o be strengthened simultaneously. Field staffs 
are required to be adequately trained and motivated in the use of modern 
techniques/methods of data collection. 
Reply of the Government 
 “In order to increase the awareness about importance of statistics amongst the 
post graduate students in the universities, the Ministry has been organizing “in the spot 
essay writing competition” on the subjects relevant to statistics. It is organized every  year 
on the birth anniversary of Prof. P. C. Mahalanobis.  Two National Awards for outstanding 
and meritorious research work in the field of statistics are also given by the Ministry. One 
award is in the memory of Prof. P.V. Sukhatme and other is in the h onour of Prof. C.R 
Rao. The Ministry also implements Grant in Aid Scheme to promote research and studies, 
conduct of workshops/seminars, etc. in the area of Official Statistics , wherein funds are 
provided to institutions/organizations. National Statistica l Systems Training Academy 
(NSSTA) of the Ministry has also been making efforts to sensitise the potential human 
resources through awareness programmes in Official Statistics, both at its campus and 

various universities. These programmes also include train ing of faculty and students from 
various universities by officers of NSSTA and Central Statistics Office. Further, to attract / 
retain talented aspirants to the statistical service streams of the Government, the Ministry 
has taken steps to strengthen caree r progression through regular promotions, cadre 
reviews, etc. The Ministry has taken steps to introduce digital technologies for data 
collection, compilation and dissemination in order to increase the quality and timeliness of 
data. The field staff are imp arted training in the use of latest technology for data 
collection.” 
   [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 Ministry of Statistics and Programme  Implementation is the nodal agency for 
coordination with other Central Ministries and States for collection and standardisation of 
statistics. However, as observed earlier, discrepancies in real - time State and Central data 
on the same subject continue to  persist due to differences in set of samples, data 
collection and processing, resulting in misleading differences in outcomes of data analysis 
and results. Such lacunae have, therefore, to be corrected forthwith with a view to 
ensuring accuracy and reliability of data. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 “The Ministry has been providing financial support to States/UTs under Support for 
Statistical Strengthening Project, a sub -scheme under Scheme of Capacity Development, 
for strengthening their capacity for collecting, compiling and disseminating reliable Of ficial 
Statistics. Under the scheme, the Ministry conducts workshops to provide technical 
guidance to State/ UT Governments for expediting the compilation of State Index of 
Industrial Production (IIP) and for developing strategy for regular dissemination o f 
comparable State level IIP with updated base year. As a result, 11 States/ UTs have 
started compiling State level IIP with base 2011 -12 and 16 other States/ UTs are at 
various stages of compilation of State level IIP with base 2011-12. MoSPI plans to conduct 
similar workshops at regular intervals to provide assistance on various technical issues 
and monitor the implementation of the roll out of comparable State IIP. Quality assurance 
framework and data dissemination issues will also be discussed in the wo rkshops with 
State/ UTs in detail.  

 While preparing survey instruments and concepts on any socio -economic survey, 
NSSO always attempts to adopt the standard practices followed by different national 
andinternational bodies. Through extensive deliberations with experts/members of 
Working Groups and National Statistical Commission (NSC), a standard set of concepts 
corresponding to each subject of the survey is prepared. However, differences exist in the 
State level estimates and Central estimates on the same subject due to different set of 
samples of data collection and processing. A Gazette Notification was issued by the 
Ministry vide No. M -12011/12/2011- NSSO (CPD) dated 31st October 2011, making it 
mandatory for the administrative Ministries and States to c onsult NSC before taking up 
any new survey in order to maintain uniformity and consistency.” 
 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 Further, the Committee find  that collection of data and compilation of various 
indices are still dispersed among different departments / agencies, although Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation is the nodal Ministry for this purpose and is 
better equipped for carrying out various statistical activities. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend synchronisation and integration of all statistical work including 
publication of various indices within the ambit of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation with a view to arriving at broad-based conclusions & decisions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 “The statistical system in Government of India is laterally decentralised among the 
Ministries/Departments. MoSPI is the nodal Ministry for laying down norms and standards 
on statistical matters. MoSPI provides technical support and assistance to various 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government in collection and compilation Official 
Statistics. However, the Offic ial Statistics generated by these agencies are based on their 
administrative requirements to supplement evidence based policy formulation.  
 The Ministry aims to establish a dedicated Administrative Statistics Division in the 
National Statistical Organization which would promote and advise on data integration and 
data/ indicator pooling as per requirements and similar exercises for providing re liable 
indicators of development at the national and sub -national levels required for planning. 

Appropriate procedures and protocols to promote data matching, linking and data 
integration will be developed, particularly in respect of administrative statist ics to provide 
usable frames for censuses and sample surveys, using Information Technology (IT) and 
sharing of data among Government Departments and public institutions.” 
 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
  
 The Committee also desire to be apprised of the progress with regard to the 
formulation of the new Index of Industrial Production (IIP), especially the implementation of 
agreements with participating Ministries for supply of data, updation of the basket of  items 
and their specifications, wage structure, reporting entities and review methodology. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) The new series of all -India IIP with base 2011 -12 was launched by this Ministry on 
12th May, 2017 with due approval from the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). As a part 
of the CoS recommendation, a mechanism has been worked out for smooth supply of 
data and coordination between MoSPI and the 14 Source Ministries/ Departments/ 
Organizations providing monthly data for all India IIP.  
(ii) Proposal for online data collection and compilation of IIP has been merged with the 
Integrated Information Platform/ Data Warehousing project.  
(iii) The CoS has recommended constitution of a Technical Review Committee (TR C) 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (S&PI) with Secretary (DIPP) and the Chief 
Economic Adviser as its members with a mandate to review periodically the item 
basket and factories reporting data for these items and suggest methodology for 
inclusion of ne w and emerging items/ factories and exclusion of obsolete/ closed 
items/ factories. The recommendations of TRC will be reviewed by the CoS before 
implementation. 
(iv) Emoluments/ remuneration to workers (wages) are outside the scope of IIP. 
 
   [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
 The mandate of Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation is to 
monitorcentral sector projects of Rs. 150 crore  and above, being the nodal Ministry for 
Programme Implementation. However, the Committee is constrained to note that the 
Ministry has become a mere compilation agency as far as the mandate for Programme 
Implementation is concerned. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to develop tools 
and methodologies to play a more proactive and dynamic role as the nodal agency for real 
time monitoring of implementation of not only central sector projects, but also the 
operationalisation and progress of various flagship schemes of the Central Government as 
well as the tracking of implementation and status of various sustainable development 
goals (SDGs) set by the Government in coordination with State Governments. It is 
necessary that the Ministry makes available co mprehensive data-base of the Government 
at regular intervals so that course corrections can take place promptly and effectively. 
Reply of the Government 
 “The Infrastructure and Project Monitoring Division (IPMD) of the Ministry monitors 
the implementation status of the Central sector infrastructure projects costing more than 
Rs. 150 crore taken up by respective Central Ministries/Departments and their PSUs.  It is 
done through the mechanism of Online Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS). The 
OCMS platform is improved as per the feedback received from the Central PSUs. The 
IPMD has been instrumental in flagging the projects lagging behind the schedule or faci ng 
cost overruns in the periodical review meetings of projects by the concerned 
administrative Ministries. This enables the administrative Ministries in identifying the 
constraints for each projects and take corrective measures. Some of the major systemic 
improvements to reduce delays in project implementation brought out by IPMD of the 
Ministry include setting up of Central Sector Project Coordination Committees (CSPCCs) 
in the States under Chief Secretaries, Standing committees in the respective 
Ministries/Departments headed by Addl. Secretaries to fix responsibility for time and cost 
overruns. Further, IPMD of the Ministry raises issues of time and cost overruns of project 
implementation at the item of the draft MoUs of the MoU Task Force meetings of CPSU s 
conducted by Department of Public Enterprises.  
 
 MoSPI is entrusted with development of National Indicator Framework (NIF) 

consisting of various statistical indicators for measuring goals and targets of SDGs at 
national level. The draft National Indicator Framework is under finalization.” 
 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme  
Implementation should, in the final count, become a modern and vibrant data collecting, 
compiling, presenting as also analysing agency, aiding and advising not only the 
Governments but also corporations and organisations in the private and public sectors.  
The onus lies on this Ministry to generate and disseminate credible data, which will be 
more meaningful and purposeful for public policy and governmental action. For this 
purpose, secondary data can also be obtained from and shared with other Government 
agencies as well, like Income Tax, EPFO, Corporate Affairs etc. In this context, the 
Committee would also suggest that the Ministry may explore setting up an internal 
Commercial & Marketing Unit, which can share relevant data with different users on 
commercial basis with free access to researchers, students and universities. 
Reply of the Government 
 “MoSPI  is in the process of evolving a National Policy on Official Statistics (NPOS) 
with the objective of providing reliable, timely and credible social and ec onomic statistics, 
to assist decision -making within and outside the Government, stimulate research and 
promote informed debate relating to conditions affecting people’s life. Optimal utilization of 
ICT for data sharing is one of the thrust areas of the proposed NPOS. 
 The various Official Statistics generated by MoSPI  is accessible to public on its 
website. In case of unit level data pertaining to various surveys of NSSO and Economic 
Census, the same is made available to the users at a very affordable cost. MoSPI is in the 
process of establishing an ICT based National Data Warehouse on Official Statistics 
(NDWOS) which would be repository of Official Statistics in the country. NDWOS will 
provide a high end solution for analytics interpretation of statistical data for various 
Ministries/State Governments to provide one step platform for Official Statistics.” 
 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 

CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee notes that the Consumer Price Index (CPI) does not adequately 
capture the rising cost of services like education, healthcare, transport etc, which leave an 
adverse impact on the standard of living of our people. They, therefore, consider it 
opportune that our statistical apparatus has an exclusive Service Price Index for essential 
services, so that the government can formulate policy responses accordingly. It is high 
time the indices compiled and published by the Government approximate to the prevailing 
market conditions at the consumer level and get as close to his consumption pattern and 
standard of living as possible. 
Reply of the Government 
Updated status of Experimental Business Service Price Index (BSPI) 
Serial 
No 
Sectors Updated Status on Action taken 
1. Air Transport Service Experimental Air Service Price Index with revised base year(2015 -
16) has been compiled and published from April 2016 till March 
2018. 
2. Railway Service Experimental RSPI with base year 2011-12 for the period from April 
2012 to November 2017 has been uploaded in the website of Office 
of the Economic Adviser (OEA). 
3. Postal Experimental Postal Service Price Index with 2004-05 as base year 
from April 2005 to June 2017 has been uploaded in Office of 
Economic Adviser (OEA)’s website. 
 
Department of Posts is in process of updating the base year of the 
index, along with a new product basket and weighting diagram. 
4. Banking Service Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has compiled Banking Service Price 
Index (BkSPI) with base year 2004 -05 from April 2005 to May 
2017. 
 
RBI is in process of compiling new Banking Service Price Index 
based on 2011 -12 as base year, with new item basket and 
weighting diagram. 
5. Telecom (Cellular) Experimental Telecom Service Price Index with 2015 -16 as base 
year has been compiled from QE June2016 to QE December 2017. 

6. Insurance Service An Experimental Insurance Service Price Index with 2011 -12 as 
base year  has been compiled from QE June 2012 to QE 
September 2016. 
 
In view of high volatility in the estimates of the index, the index is 
being refined in consultation with Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India (IRDAI), Department of Financial 
Services (DFS) and Central Statistics Office(CSO). 
7. Trade Service Experimental Trade Service Price Index with 2011 as base year 
has been compiled using data from the MCA -21 of Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs for the period 2010 to2015. 
 
Due to very volatile nature of the data, ways and means of using 
GSTN data to construct the index is being explored. 
8. Road 
Transport(Freight) 
Given the unorganized and fragmented nature of the service  
providers in this sector, it is proposed to use data from Goods & 
Services Tax Network(GSTN)  for building this experimental index 
once the GSTN data has stabilized. 
9. Port Service Ministry of Shipping is in process of developing Experimental Port 
Service Price Index with data from the 12 Major ports and 19 Non - 
Major ports. 
10. Business Service It is proposed to develop experimental Information Technology 
Service Price Index in consultation with Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MEITY) and its subordinate organisations 
 
  [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee is concerned to note that there are as many as 861 vacancies at 
the level of Junior and Senior Statistical Officer in the statistical cadre of the Ministry. 
Thus, the resource requirements for various statistical a ctivities remain undermined. The 
Committee notes that the existing statistical manpower is grossly insufficient to cope with 
the entire gamut of activities, including various ancillary activities in relation to mainstream 
industrial statistics, apart from service sector statistics and statistics of international trade. 
The Committee would, therefore, strongly recommend immediate filling up of all vacancies 
in the statistical cadre, so that the Ministry's core competency is not compromised. 
Further, they des ire that a study be conducted to find out the reasons for high level of 
attrition from this sector and their inability to attract talent. In this connection, the 
Committee is of the view that out -sourcing of data collection should be avoided and 
instead, e numerators should be appointed on contractual basis, whenever required, for 
maintaining  reliability and authenticity of data. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 "The post of Junior Statistical Officer (JSO) of Subordinate Statistical Services 
(SSS) cadre at entry level is filled through Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and the SSS 
Division in MoSPI takes necessary action in this regard. As suggested by the Committee, 
for maintaining reliability and authenticity of data, the National Sample Survey Office 
(NSSO) enga ges enumerators on contract basis instead of outsourcing the data 
collection." 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M No.G-20017/3/2018-B&F (Pt.1) dated 20.02.2019] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
  

CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;          SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
8 September 2020        Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
  

Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
 
 

PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration and 
adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public Asset 
Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public Asset 
Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the  recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Program me 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery in 
the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 

 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble Speaker 
/ Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  

APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTIETH REPORT OF SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA ON THE SUBJECT 'REVIEW OF NSSO AND CSO AND 
STREAMLINING OF STATISTICS COLLECTION MACHINERY IN THE COUNTRY, 
INCLUDING MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR PROJECT 
MONITORING/APPRAISAL' OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND 
PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
12  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation at 
Sl.Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 
12) 
10 83.33% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies (vide Recommendation at 
Sl.Nos. 4) 
  1 8.33% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepte d 
by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 2) 
 
1 8.33% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 