 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE             
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Tenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (20 20-21)' ] 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020/       Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
21 


 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Tenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2020-21)' ] 
  
    
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 9 September, 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ________, 2020  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on __________, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
September, 2020 /     Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
  


 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………           
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......            
 
CHAPTER I  Report ............................................................ .......…………  
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replie s .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 0 8 September, 2020  
 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the Tenth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2020-21)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________  
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (20 19-2020) 
   
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry   
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre   
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh   
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak   
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki   
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma   
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.      Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -          Additional Director  
 4. Ms. Madhumita     -  Assistant Committee Officer 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Fin ance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-first Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of 
the Committee (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of th e 
Ministry of Planning.  
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 12 March, 2020 .  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were received 
from the Government vide their communication dated 11 June, 2020. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
8 September, 2020.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendi x. 
5. For facility of reference, the observations / recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
08 September, 2020                          Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance  
  

 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 10th Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning which was presented 
to Lok Sabha / Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2020.  
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 4 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation No. 1 and 3              
(Total 02)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation No.2 
          (Total 01)                           
(Chapter- III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
NIL 
 (Total NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation No.4 
 
(Total - 01)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
 
 

 
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations contained 
in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2020-21) 
5.  The Committee noted that the Budget Estimates (BE) of the Ministry of Planning under 
Demand No.76 for the year 2020-21 was Rs.650 crore, out of which Rs.649.22 crore was under 
Revenue Head and Rs.0.78 crore was under Capita l Head. The scrutiny of the Budget of the 
Ministry of Planning revealed under-utilisation of funds in important area. Under the major head 
3475 for Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO), out of the allocated fund of 
Rs.11 crore for BE stage of 2019-20, only Rs.6.18 crore was utilized till December 2019, which 
was 56.18% of the total allocation. Similarly, for the scheme named Official Development 
Assistance (ODA) from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), out of the allocated fund of Rs. 120 crores at BE stage of 2019-20, 
only Rs.61 crore, which was 50.83% of the total allocation, was utilized till December 2019.  
The Committee had persistently pointed out the Ministry’s inability to utilize fun ds in a 
timely and even manner in the earlier reports. The Committee were, therefore, constrained to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry exercise due diligence in their budget 
formulation and make concerted efforts to utilize their funds in a timely manner. 
6. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
“The NITI Aayog (Ministry of Planning) exercises due diligence while formulating Budget. 
However, all the spending authorities in the NITI Aayog have been sensitized time to time for 
ensuring proper utilization of Budget in timely manner in consonance with the instructions 
issued by the Ministry of Finance in this regard.” 
 
7. The Committee have consistently pointed out the inability of the Ministry to utilize 
funds evenly and in a timely manner. They have learnt that the spending authorities in 
the Niti Aayog have been sensitized time to time for ensuring proper utilization of 
Budget. The Committee would expect the Ministry to devise a coherent and e ffective 
mechanism to ensure timebound utilization of budgetary allocation. 
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO)  
8. The Committee were constrained to note that even after four years of the constitution of 
DMEO, more than 100 positions were vacant out of the sanctioned strength of 157. The 
Committee were of the view that DMEO being provided with the critical function of evaluation 
and monitoring of important schemes and initiatives of the Government, that acute manpower 
shortage surely acted as an impediment to effectively carry out their assigned function. The 
Committee, therefore, urged the DMEO and the Ministry to fill those vacant posts at the earliest.  
The Committee appreciated NITI’s action of preparing the Output -Outcome Monitoring 
Framework (OOMF) for the year 2019 -20 and thereafter for 2020 -21. They expected the 
framework to act as a tool of judicious use and eff ective management of the resources and 
increased accountability for the Government/Ministries. While noting that the NITI had also 
developed a dashboard for updating the progress on certain output / outcome indicators, the 
Committee hoped that the dashboar d would act as a comprehensive and superior tool for 
monitoring the progress and utilization of resources and allocate/ release budget based on 
scheme performance for other stakeholders viz. Ministry of Finance etc.  
The Committee noted that a large number  of private professionals and consultant firms 
were being engaged by the Ministry, especially for evaluation of schemes. Here, the Committee 
expected that the qualification were well laid down and recruitment was done in a transparent 
manner and open tendering process be followed for engaging the consultant firms. At the same 
time DMEO should work towards developing a pool of Human Resources, that was well -
qualified, possessing skills and expertise to carry out the critical function of evaluation and 
monitoring. 
9. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
“Urged the DMEO and the Ministry to fill these vacant posts at the earliest.  
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) was formed in September, 2015 
after merging the erstwhile Program Evaluation Office (PEO) and Independent Evaluation 
Office (IEO). The sanctioned strength of DMEO is 157 out of which 53 are regular officials 
and 25 are contractual engagement. As on April, 2020 more than 100 positions at di fferent 
level are vacant.  
This was one of the reasons that DMEO was not able to undertake many activities which 
it planned including large scale evaluations among others. In August, 2019 DMEO has been 
allowed to engage additional eight consultants and all those have joined except one. Further 
two Director level officers have also joined in December, 2019. DMEO has also approached 
Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) for the filling up the post of Joint Secretary and 

 
Director through Central Staffing Scheme and similarly the pos ts of Under Secretary and 
Assistant Section Officers through Central Secretariat Services. In addition DMEO has also 
formulated its Recruitment Rules (RRs), for engaging positions of Directors General (DG), 
Deputy Director General (DDG), Director, Senior R esearch Officer/Research Officer, 
Economic Officer/EI on the pattern of NITI Aayog’s flexi pool RRs. The same have been 
approved by Minister of State (I/C), M/o Planning (NITI Aayog). The proposal has been sent 
to the DoPT for their concurrence. Once appro ved, these RRs will enable DMEO to fill key 
positions. 
Engagement of private professionals and Consultant firms  
As regards to the engagement of private professionals, the same are being engaged 
under the engagement guidelines formulated by NITI Aayog for Consultants/Young 
Professionals (YPs). Under these qualifications and work experience requirements are 
clearly laid down. These positions are advertised in leading newspapers and the candidates 
are shortlisted based on objective criterion and interaction with high level committee in a very 
transparent way.  
For engagement of Consultant firms, usually engagements are done through open 
tender process. Presently DMEO has been undertaking evaluations of 125 Central Sector 
Schemes under 10 packages. All consulta nt firms for each of these packages have been 
selected through open tender process only. In only few cases, depending upon the specific 
expertise or experience required, the firms are selected out of limited competent firms. Even 
these engagements, are don e under the guidelines of NITI Aayog duly approved by the 
competent authority.  
Developing a pool of Human resource  
As mentioned above the engagement of private professionals is being done under the 
engagement guidelines formulated by NITI Aayog for Consu ltants/YPs with specific 
experience required for monitoring & evaluation domain. In addition under the proposed RRs, 
provisions have been made to enable DMEO to tap best talent in government and private 
sector.” 
10. The Committee have time and again pointe d out the large vacancies (more than 
100 positions being vacant out of the sanctioned strength of 157) in Development 
Monitoring Evaluation Office (DMEO). It has been conceded that many activities as 
planned, including large scale evaluations among others,  could not be undertaken 
because of staff shortage.  The Committee, therefore, are not satisfied with the progress 
in this regard, especially taking into account the critical functions of monitoring and 
evaluation being assigned to it. The Committee while noting the measures undertaken by 
DMEO like formulating it’s Recruitment Rules (RR) on the pattern of NITI Aayog’s flexi 
pool RRs, expect it to actively pursue the matter with DoPT so that recruitment induction 

 
could begin at the earliest. The Committee have been informed about the engagement of 
large number of professionals and consultant firms by DMEO. They would like to be 
apprised of the “engagement guidelines” formulated by the NITI Aayog for 
consultants/Young Professionals (YPs). While acknowledging t he completion of the 
process of selecting consultant firms for undertaking evaluations of 125 Central Sector 
Schemes under 10 packages, the Committee would expect the process to be completed 
within the stipulated timeframe. Results of such an evaluation ma y be shared with the 
Committee. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) India Index  
11. While the Committee appreciated NITI for bringing out SDG India Index 2019, covering 
all SDGs, unlike SDG India Index 2018, which covered o nly 13 SDGs, they recommended the 
Ministry to consider options of bringing out a similar index taking districts as the base. The 
Committee pointed out that there were huge differences among the different districts of a State 
and hence an Index ranking dist ricts on the basis of their level of implementation of SDGs, 
would be an even better example of cooperative federalism, ensuring development at the 
grassroots level.  
The Committee liked to further understand how the NITI efforts to prepare SDG India 
Index dovetailed with the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation. In particular, data collection on the SDGs should be independently verified and 
then prepared at the District level. There should be enough field –level staff to ensure that these 
efforts were resulting in accurate data. SDG results for each District should then be provided in 
the public domain so that the performance of each District could be evaluated on a continuous 
basis. 
The Committee noted that the NITI w as increasingly engaging with international 
communities and bodies for the effective implementation of SDGs. The committee 
recommended that this engagement should be further deepened to ensure greater collaboration 
and financial assistance from developed c ountries and international bodies. This, according to 
the Committee, would help in faster implementation of SDGs, particularly in vulnerable areas 
and among the weaker sections of the society.  
[ 

 
The Committee observed that the NITI had undertaken a number  of steps to ensure 
SDGs localisation in the country entailing process of understanding, planning, implementing and 
monitoring the SDGs from national to local levels by relevant institutions. The Committee were 
of the opinion that the centuries-old indigenous knowledge with regard to food habits, mitigation 
and adaptation mechanisms against climate change and other hazards etc., that were known to 
the local population, particularly the tribal and rural population, should be made a part of the 
solution to different problems, particularly the local and regional ones, that would further assist 
in SDGs localisation in the country.  
12. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
“SDG India Index whereby NITI Aayog ranks all the States and Union Territories.  
The SDG India Index measures the progress of the States and UTs on all SDGs and select 
indicators. It is stated that the indicators are basically a subset of the National Indicator 
Framework (NIF) developed by the Minist ry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI). So, the NIF has a set of 306 indicators, from which we have taken 100 indicators 
some perfectly aligned, while a few being close refinements, primarily for ranking the 
performance of States and Union Territories.  
Whether NITI Aayog plan to do the similar thing in terms of ranking all the districts 
within the country on the SDG indicators.  
It is submitted that while going by the spirit of cooperative federalism and the differences in 
the realities and the contextual specificity of different States, as we have the hilly States, we 
have the coastal States, the realities and the priorities of these States are quite different. So, 
what has been done is that all States have been encouraged and also guidelines have been 
issued that every State has to develop its own context -specific State Indicator Framework 
and a similar District Indicator Framewo rk. Now, we are working with the States so that the 
States can do the similar ranking of their own districts at their level.  
It is stated here that some of the States which have already done this ranking of their districts 
are Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, and  Tamil Nadu. Even Haryana and 16 Uttarakhand are in 
different stages of doing the same. We have just released the State Indicator Framework of 
eight of the North –Eastern States and they would also be coming out with a similar ranking 
of their districts at  their level. So, NITI Aayog does not prepare a centralized ranking of 
districts on SDGs because these are very specific to the different States and the States are 
encouraged to undertake this exercise in the spirit of cooperative federalism.  
How aligned is the data pertaining to the SDG India Index and the MoSPI’s National 
Indicator Framework.  
Since the indicators are completely a subset of the National Indicator Framework, hence the 
data is also taken from the MoSPI sources, which are largely the source s developed by the 
Union Ministries whether it is the administrative data sources and the MIS systems or the 
National and Union Survey Reports on different subjects. So, the data is totally aligned 

 
between the SDG India Index of NITI Aayog and the Ministry  of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation.” 
13. The Ministry in their action taken notes remained silent on two issues that were 
pointed out by the Committee. The first relates to the increasing engagement of NITI 
Aayog with international communities and  the ways in which it can gain from such 
international collaborations. The second relates to the issue of SDG localisation and how 
indigenous knowledge could be made a part of the solution to different problems, 
particularly the local and regional ones. Th e Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Ministry on these aspects within one month of presentation of this 
report. 
 
  

 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2020 -21) 
 The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (BE) of the Ministry of Planning under 
Demand No.76 for the year 2020 -21 is Rs.650 crore, out of which Rs.649.22 crore is 
under Revenue Head and Rs.0.78 crore is under Capital Head. The scrutiny of the 
Budget of the Ministry of Planning reveal under -utilisation of funds in important area. 
Under the major head 3475 for Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO), 
out of the allocated fund of Rs.11 crore for BE sta ge of 2019-20, only Rs.6.18 crore was 
utilized till December 2019, which is 56.18% of the total allocation. Similarly, for the 
scheme named Official Development Assistance (ODA) from Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable Development  Goals (SDGs), out of the 
allocated fund of Rs. 120 crores at BE stage of 2019 -20, only Rs.61 crore, which is 
50.83% of the total allocation, was utilized till December 2019.  
  
The Committee have persistently pointed out the Ministry’s inability to utilize  
funds in a timely and even manner in the earlier reports. The Committee are, therefore, 
constrained to reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry exercise due 
diligence in their budget formulation and make concerted efforts to utilize their funds in a 
timely manner. 
   
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
The NITI Aayog (Ministry of Planning) exercises due diligence while formulating Budget. 
However, all the spending authorities in the NITI Aayog have been sensitized time to 
time for ensuring proper utilization of Budget in timely manner in consonance with the 
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance in this regard.  
 
  Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) O.M. No.18/2/2020 -Parl. dated 11.06.2020  
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 7 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) and Self Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU)  
 The committee note that to promote innovation and research in the Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector and Start-ups, AIM is going to launch a new 
initiative called Applied Research and Innovation for Small Enterprises (ARISE) along 
with partner Ministries/Departments. The Committee expect that the initiative would be 
implemented effectively and comprehensively , so that the MSME sector develops in a 
fast track manner leading to viable start -ups, that provide effective solutions to various 
sectoral problems. 
  
While the Committee appreciate the creation of a dashboard ‘MyATL’ for providing 
latest information with  regard to Atal Tinkering Labs (ATL), they recommend that there 
should be even greater use of   latest technological tools like Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
Machine Learning etc. to monitor the labs, centres, conducting of challenges etc. These 

 
latest tech nologies should also be made a part of the ATLs for the students to get 
skilled in modern technologies.  
  
The Committee appreciate the independent evaluation of the AIM by the Quality Council 
of India (QCI) findings within the next 3 months so that Hearing  can be conducted on 
this important program. In particular, Tinkering Labs and Incubation Centres should be 
appropriately benchmarked so that it is possible to determine which units are doing 
better relative to the median unit and why.  
Reply of the Government: 
 3(1).  The Committee’s recommendation is duly noted. All efforts are being made to 
expedite launch of the ARISE program, in partnership with sectoral ministries;  so that 
the MSME Sector develops in a fast   track manner leading to viable start-ups, that 
provide effective solutions to various sectoral problems.  
 3(2).   The recommendation from the Standing Committee is duly noted.AIM regularly 
launches curated modules for 21 st century and technology skills for its beneficiaries. 
These modul es are freely available on the AIM website for public consumption. 
Link: https://aim.gov.in/resources-for-atl-incharge.php. More modules are under 
development and shall be added periodically.  
  3(3).    The recommendation from the Standing Committee is dul y noted. 
 Summary of Assessment of Atal Incubation Centres by QCI  
Recommendations and Suggestions 
from QCI 
Improvements and potential solutions 
and suggestive action by AIM team  
Use of Benefits of Scale: NITI Aayog     
can create a portal with shared netw ork of 
ICs that will help in accessing:  
• Angel networks and VCs in India: Top 
150 Angel Investors and 50 VC firms 
globally should be given access to the 
AIM is already in the process of creating a 
similar tech -enabled platform for its 
incubator network in collaboration with Bill 
and Melinda Gates Foundation and 
Wadhwani Foundation. The platform will 
enable all stakeholders of the innovation 

 
portal. 
• Network with government agencies: 
Government networks should be 
provided available to connect start-ups to 
various governmental, non -
governmental, and international bodies.  
• All mentors engaged with the Atal 
Innovation Mission: All the mentors 
engaged across all the ICs under AIM 
should be made accessible to the 
incubatees by creating a pool  
• Best practices followed at both Incubator 
and Incubatee level: Best practices 
followed by some ICs can be shared with 
the rest so that all can learn from the 
same and can inculcate into their system 
to the extent possible. 
 A platform for the ICs to connect with 
others via messages, e-mails etc. 
and entrepreneurship ecosystem to 
network, exchange knowledge & 
information and collaborate through 
multiple avenues. The platform will have 
separate functionalities for investors, 
government agencies, incubators, start -
ups and mentors, enabling all stakeholders 
to effectively leverage the scale benefits of 
the AIM Incubator network. 
Reduce response time: Response time 
especially for the funding from NITI Aayog 
to the ICs should be reduced. Many ICs 
have exhausted the first tranche of AIM  
funds and are awaiting the second 
tranche. Next tranche needs to be 
disbursed. ICs should be allowed to 
provide seed funding to the incubatees 
from other heads also. The response time 
of the queries of the ICs also needs to be 
reduced 
The AIM team has alr eady put in place 
robust procedures to ensure timely and 
efficient processing all Grant -in-Aid 
requests (including subsequent tranches), 
based on its learnings / takeaways from 
issues faced in previous disbursements as 
well as feedback form the incubators.  
Moreover, in order to expedite the due 
diligence and disbursement process even 
further, the AIM team will look to 
strengthen its finance and legal 
capabilities either through in -house team 
expansion or by empaneling external 
agencies. 
Focused group train ings: ICs face 
difficulties w.r.t. PFMS portal interface. 
PFMS portal trainings and support could 
be made available to ICs. As the number 
of ICs grow, trainings should be split into 
senior team training and new team 
training. In-depth trainings should be d one 
rather than training on general topics.  
The AIM team regularly conducts capacity 
building training programs for all 
incubators in its network (with at least two 
such training programs being conducted 
annually). Given the feedback received 
regarding the  challenges faced by the 
incubators on the PFMS portal, AIM team 
organised a detailed and comprehensive 
training program for all the AIM incubators 
on 28th May 2020. The same was 
attended by all the operational AIM 
Incubators and was very useful and very 
well received by the AIM incubators.  
Creating structured mentor management 
programme: Since ICs have different scale 
of mentor management, NITI Aayog can 
Currently each incubator part of the AIM 
network has its own mentorship program 
in place. Given the feedback regarding 

 
come up with a structured mentor 
management program for incubators to 
follow. 
some incubators not being able to 
successfully develop and implement an 
effective mentorship program, AIM has 
already initiated the proce ss to create a 
pan-India mentorship platform for its 
network. The program is currently is in a 
pilot stage with the official launch being 
scheduled in 2020. 
  
Summary of Assessment of Atal Tinkering Labs by QCI  
Recommendations and Suggestions 
from QCI 
Ongoing Interventions, improvements 
and potential solutions and suggestive 
action by AIM team 
Academic Management: 
a. ATL In charge – 
• Transfer of ATL in charge breaks 
continuity. 
• Difficulty in managing academics and 
ATL. 
b. Integration in school schedule - 
• Maintaining a timetable and activity 
logbook. 
• Obtaining permissions from parents 
for post school extra classes for ATLs.  
c. ATL Teacher training 
• Training of Teachers on ATL 
philosophy, concepts, technology, soft 
skills and equipment is critical for the 
ATLs to strive is required 
• A formal and periodic training 
mechanism must be in place for the 
ATL teachers. 
d. Engagement 
plan/content/curriculum – 
• A dedicated plan/calendar of activities 
and ATL course content/curriculum 
must be created and mandated for 
each ATL school. 
Encouraging participation: 
a. Students from the ATL school: 
• Irregular participation and dropouts 
due to academic pressure. 
 
b. Students from other 
schools/community: 
• Non ATL students are not able to 
Academic Management: 
a. ATL In charge – AIM shall direct the 
schools to maintain continuity of ATL 
teachers as far as possible and ensure 
proper mode of knowledge transfer during 
transfers. 
b. Integration in school schedule – 
Directions from AIM to maintain regular 
ATL interactions in their timetable along 
with a logbook is resent in the AIM 
guidelines, also, various Parent 
engagement activities are being planned 
to sensitize parents regarding the ATL 
activities 
c. ATL Teacher Training – AIM 
organises regular Teacher training 
sessions across the country. AIM has also 
designed and is implementing a training 
mechanism with its partners for the same.  
d. Engagement 
plan/content/curriculum -AIM has designed 
an annual calendar of ATL activities and 
relevant content. AIM is also working on 
designing and launching more such 
content periodically. 
Encouraging participation: 
a. Students from the ATL schools are 
being introduced to ATL through a formal 
inclusion of AT L activities in the timetable 
which shall improve participation.  
b. AIM is exploring stronger 
community outreach activities through 
events such as Community Day which will 

 
manage ATL and regular classes 
simultaneously. Further, lack of 
mentorship from teacher, parental 
pressure discourages them to take 
part in ATL activities. 
c. Participation in external events:  
• Students must be encouraged to 
participate in various science and 
technology research -based 
competitions by both gov ernment and 
private organisers. 
sensitize and encourage the parents as 
well as students from Non ATL schools to 
participate in ATL events and activities.  
 
 
c. AIM is encouraging schools to 
leverage ATL funds to participate in 
external events endorsed by AIM or any 
Govt. body. AIM also regularly shares 
information about all such events and 
contests being held in India and abroad. 
External Collaborations 
a. Majority of the schools seek 
assistance from local academic institutions 
and industry. 14% of the schools are 
connected to the AIC network. 
 
 
 
b. Schools need to try their best so as 
to host more competitions and creat e 
awareness so that more children from 
nearby communities can visit the ATLs.  
c. Few patents created. IP mentorship 
needed. 
 
 
 
d. Adoption of ATL by a corporate 
partner heavily improves the impact.  
External Collaborations 
a. To leverage external collaborat ions 
schools are directed to independently 
explore corporate partnerships. Along with 
the above AIM is also parallelly exploring 
ways in which India Inc. can participate 
and help the ATLs in their journey towards 
building the future of India. 
b. AIM has al so created a calendar of 
activities to engage the ATL community 
along with conducting challenges and 
creating awareness on their own.  
c. AIM has created a free IPR module 
with CIPAM, DIPP. AIM is exploring further 
areas of collaboration with CIPAM to help 
the ATLS students in their journey of 
creating patents. 
d. More than 100 schools across India are 
already adopted by corporate partners. 
AIM is strengthening its partner base to 
increase the number of adopted schools 
as it realizes the importance and impact of 
such partnerships. 
Improvising AIM operations  
a. Mentor of Change Network:  
• More active participation of the 
Mentor of Change needs to be ensured.  
 
 
 
b. Training Sessions: 
• More teacher training sessions 
must be conducted on ATL tools and 
technologies. 
• More digital training sessions on 
ATL operational aspects like PFMS, ATL 
Dashboard, Fund Utilization, GeM. 
 
 
Improvising AIM operations  
a. Mentor of change – AIM is 
continuously allocating and reallocating 
mentors and schools through an effective 
matchmaking process along with providing 
the mentors with continuous engaging 
programs to improve participation  
b. ATL Teacher Training – AIM 
organises regular Teacher training 
sessions across the country. AIM has also 
designed and is implementing a training 
mechanism with its partners for the same. 
AIM has conducted 32 teacher training 
sessions across the country and is 
planning the next phase of online and 
offline teacher training sessions in 

 
 
 
c. Need of dedicated ATL Helpline  
 
 
d. Translation of ATL content in local 
languages. 
e. More funds for honorarium: 
• More funds need to be allocated for 
honorarium; it would incentivize more 
dedication since ATL In -charge takes up 
dual responsibilities of the ATL and the 
school. 
f. Student/Teacher engagement: 
• Devise ATL calendar for the 
schools’ ease to get informed about 
external events. 
• Increase national and regional level 
activities like competitions, hackathons, 
trainings etc. so as to acknowledge 
students’ efforts 
collaboration with GeM, PFMS, and 
corporate partners. 
c. ATL Helpline – AIM has created an 
online query resolution portal to provide 
necessary assistance to the ATL schools  
d. Translation – AIM has successfully 
translated the ATL handbook in 6 Indian 
languages and is in the process of 
translating the guidelines, content and 
modules available on AIM website in Hindi.  
e. More funds for honorarium – AIM is 
exploring better recognition strategies for 
the ATL In-Charge 
 
 
f. Student/Teacher engagement – AIM has 
created an annual calendar of activ ities for 
ATLs. Further, ATL contests, events and 
trainings are scheduled and notified 
periodically to the schools. 
Improvising School operations  
a. Infrastructure - In majority schools 
the infrastructure is available at ATLs 
according to the AIM guidelin es (area, Wi -
Fi, safety first aid, power backup)  
b. Adherence to ATL guidelines 
c. Communications – Presence on 
Social Media, Whatsapp, phone, email.  
d. Equipment – Almost all of total 
schools assessed are satisfied with the 
equipment procured. Procurement  on GeM 
is mandated 
e. Document and record maintenance  
Documentation for Audit and Inventory 
management needs to be robustly done 
and maintained. 
Improvising School operations  
AIM has directed the schools to maintain 
records of regular classes conducted fo r 
students within the school and for students 
from other schools and community. Also, a 
proper record is to be maintained for all 
the workshops, events, trainings and 
seminars conducted by the schools.  
 
Necessary instructions to the schools for 
guideline a dherence are sent periodically 
and verified through the data collected 
through the dashboards. 
To ensure schools are adhering to the AIM 
guidelines, AIM must conduct periodic 
evaluation of ATL schools and support 
wherever necessary. This activity will also 
enable AIM to understand ground level 
insights and do the needful action for 
course correction. 
AIM is Monitoring the ATL performance on 
ATL Dashboard which gives it a visual 
insight on the progress of the program. 
Adding the element of periodic onsit e 
evaluations gives AIM team more connect 
to the ground and more control on the 
program to take necessary course 
correction measures quickly. 
 
 Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) O.M. No.18/ 2/2020-Parl. dated 11.06.2020 

 
CHAPTER - III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
Development Monitoring and Evaluations Office (DMEO)  
The Committee are constrained to note that even after four years  of the constitution of 
DMEO, more than 100 positions are vacant out of the sanctioned strength of 157. The 
Committee are of the view that DMEO being provided with the critical function of 
evaluation and monitoring of important schemes and initiatives of t he Government, this 
acute manpower shortage surely acts as an impediment to effectively carry out their 
assigned function. The Committee, therefore, urge the DMEO and the Ministry to fill 
these vacant posts at the earliest.  
  
The Committee appreciate NITI’s action of preparing the Output -Outcome Monitoring 
Framework (OOMF) for the year 2019 -20 and thereafter for 2020 -21. They expect the 
framework to act as a tool of judicious use and effective management of the resources 
and increased accountability fo r the Government/Ministries. While noting that the NITI 
has also developed a dashboard for updating the progress on certain output / outcome 
indicators, the Committee hope that the dashboard would act as a comprehensive and 
superior tool for monitoring the  progress and utilization of resources and allocate/ 
release budget based on scheme performance for other stakeholders viz. Ministry of 
Finance etc. 
  
The Committee note that a large number of private professionals and consultant firms 
are being engaged by  the Ministry, especially for evaluation of schemes. Here, the 
Committee expect that the qualification are well laid down and recruitment be done in a 
transparent manner and open tendering process be followed for engaging the 
consultant firms. At the same time DMEO should work towards developing a pool of 
Human Resources, that is well -qualified, possessing skills and expertise to carry out the 
critical function of evaluation and monitoring.  
  

 
Reply of the Government: 
  
Urged the DMEO and the Ministry to fil l these vacant posts at the earliest.  
           Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office  (DMEO) was formed in 
September, 2015 after merging the erstwhile Program Evaluation Office (PEO) and 
Independent Evaluation Office (IEO).  The sanctioned strength  of DMEO is 157 out of 
which 53 are regular officials and 25 are contractual engagement. As on April, 2020 
more than 100 positions at different level are vacant.  
  
          This was one of the reasons that DMEO was not able to undertake many 
activities wh ich it planned including large scale evaluations among others. In August, 
2019 DMEO has been allowed to engage additional eight consultants and all those 
have joined except one. Further two Director level officers have also joined in 
December, 2019.  DMEO has also approached Department of Personnel & Training 
(DoPT) for the filling up the post of Joint Secretary and Director through Central Staffing 
Scheme and similarly the posts of Under Secretary and Assistant Section Officers 
through Central Secretariat Services. In addition DMEO has also formulated its 
Recruitment Rules (RRs), for engaging positions of Directors General (DG), Deputy 
Director General (DDG), Director, Senior Research Officer/Research Officer, Economic 
Officer/EI on the pattern of NITI Aayo g’s flexi pool RRs. The same have been approved 
by Minister of State (I/C), M/o Planning (NITI Aayog). The proposal has been sent to the 
DoPT for their concurrence. Once approved, these RRs will enable DMEO to fill key 
positions. 
 Engagement of private professionals and Consultant firms  
 As regards to the engagement of private professionals, the same are being engaged 
under the engagement guidelines formulated by NITI Aayog for Consultants/Young 
Professionals (YPs). Under these qualifications and work exper ience requirements are 
clearly laid down. These positions are advertised in leading newspapers and the 
candidates are shortlisted based on objective criterion and interaction with high level 
committee in a very transparent way.  

 
  
For engagement of Consulta nt firms, usually engagements are done through 
open tender process. Presently DMEO has been undertaking evaluations of 125 Central 
Sector Schemes under 10 packages. All consultant firms for each of these packages 
have been selected through open tender proc ess only. In only few cases, depending 
upon the specific expertise or experience required, the firms are selected out of limited 
competent firms. Even these engagements, are done under the guidelines of NITI 
Aayog duly approved by the competent authority.  
 Developing a pool of Human resource  
As mentioned above the engagement of private professionals is being done under the 
engagement guidelines formulated by NITI Aayog for Consultants/YPs with specific 
experience required for monitoring & evaluation domain.  In addition under the proposed 
RRs, provisions have been made to enable DMEO to tap best talent in government and 
private sector. 
  
  Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) O.M. No.18/ 2/2020-Parl. dated 11.06.2020 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer pa ra No.10 of Chapter I)  
 
  

 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) India Index  
 
 While the Committee appreciate NITI for bringing out SDG India Index 2019, covering 
all SDGs, unlike SDG India Index 2018, which covered only 13 SDGs, they would like to 
recommend the Ministry to consider options of bringing out a similar index taking 
districts as the base. T he Committee would like to point out that there are huge 
differences among the different districts of a State and hence an Index ranking districts 
on the basis of their level of implementation of SDGs, would be an even better example 
of cooperative federalism, ensuring development at the grassroots level.  
           The Committee would like to further understand how the NITI efforts to prepare 
SDG India Index dovetail with the efforts undertaken by the Ministry of Statistics & 
Programme Implementation. In p articular, data collection on the SDGs should be 
independently verified and then prepared at the District level. There should be enough 
field –level staff to ensure that these efforts are resulting in accurate data. SDG results 
for each District should the n be provided in the public domain so that the performance 
of each District can be evaluated on a continuous basis.  
           The Committee note that the NITI is increasingly engaging with international 
communities and bodies for the effective implementat ion of SDGs. The committee 
recommend that this engagement should be further deepened to ensure greater 
collaboration and financial assistance from developed countries and international 
bodies. This, according to the Committee, would help in faster implemen tation of SDGs, 
particularly in vulnerable areas and among the weaker sections of the society.  
  
          The Committee observe that the NITI has undertaken a number of steps to 
ensure SDGs localisation in the country entailing process of understanding, p lanning, 
implementing and monitoring the SDGs from national to local levels by relevant 
institutions. The Committee are of the opinion that the centuries -old indigenous 
knowledge with regard to food habits, mitigation and adaptation mechanisms against 

 
climate change and other hazards etc., that are known to the local population, 
particularly the tribal and rural population, should be made a part of the solution to 
different problems, particularly the local and regional ones, that would further assist in 
SDGs localisation in the country.  
    
Reply of the Government: 
SDG India Index whereby NITI Aayog ranks all the States and Union Territories.  
The SDG India Index measures the progress of the States and UTs  on all SDGs and 
select indicators.  It is stated that the indicators are basically a subset of the National 
Indicator Framework (NIF) developed by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI). So, the NIF has a set of 306 indicators, from which we have 
taken 100 indicators some perfectly al igned, while a few being close refinements, 
primarily for ranking the performance of States and Union Territories.  
Whether NITI Aayog plan to do the similar thing in terms of ranking all the 
districts within the country on the SDG indicators.  
It is submitt ed that while going by the spirit of cooperative federalism and the 
differences in the realities and the contextual specificity of different States, as we have 
the hilly States, we have the coastal States, the realities and the priorities of these 
States a re quite different. So, what has been done is that all States have been 
encouraged and also guidelines have been issued that every State has to develop its 
own context -specific State Indicator Framework and a similar District Indicator 
Framework. Now, we a re working with the States so that the States can do the similar 
ranking of their own districts at their level.  
          It is stated here that some of the States which have already done this ranking of 
their districts are Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, and Tam il Nadu. Even Haryana and 
Uttarakhand are in different stages of doing the same. We have just released the State 
Indicator Framework of eight of the North –Eastern States and they would also be 
coming out with a similar ranking of their districts at their level. So, NITI Aayog does not 
prepare a centralized ranking of districts on SDGs because these are very specific to 

 
the different States and the States are encouraged to undertake this exercise in the 
spirit of cooperative federalism.  
How aligned is the d ata pertaining to the SDG India Index and the MoSPI’s 
National Indicator Framework.  
Since the indicators are completely a subset of the National Indicator Framework, hence 
the data is also taken from the MoSPI sources, which are largely the sources develop ed 
by the Union Ministries whether it is the administrative data sources and the MIS 
systems or the National and Union Survey Reports on different subjects. So, the data is 
totally aligned between the SDG India Index of NITI Aayog and the Ministry of Stati stics 
and Programme Implementation.  
**** 
 Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) O.M. No.18/ 2/2020-Parl. dated 11.06.2020 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 13 of Chapter I)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER- V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                              SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
8 September 2020                             Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Finance  
  

 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
 

 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’.  
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Mini stry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Tak en Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery 

 
in the Country, including Management  Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept . 
  

 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction)  
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  
 
04  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1 & 3) 
 
02 50% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.No. 2) 
 
01 25% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
 
Nil 0.00 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited(vide 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 4) 
01 25% 
 