     
24 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2020-2021) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
THE FACTORING REGULATION (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2020 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
TWENTY – FOURTH REPORT 
 
                                    
 
 
 
 
       
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2021 / Magha, 1942 (Saka)  


     
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2020-2021) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
THE FACTORING REGULATION (AMENDMENT)  
BILL, 2020 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
             
Presented to Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February, 2021 / Magha, 1942 (Saka)


     
CONTENTS 
Page Nos. 
 
Composition of the Committee………………………………………………….. (iii) 
 
Introduction…………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
REPORT 
 
Background 
 
 
Salient Features of the Bill 
 
 
Domestic Factoring Ecosystem vis-à-vis Global Scenario 
 
Issues Discussed 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
 
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 5th November, 2020,  
1st December, 2020 and 12th January, 2021.  
 
II. The Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020  
  
 
 
 

     
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
 
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. 
4. 
Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
12. Shri Pinaki Misra 
13. 
14. 
Prof. Sougata Ray 
Shri P.V Midhun Reddy 
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
17. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki 
18. Shri Manish Tewari 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21 Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan  
24. Shri Praful Patel 
25. Shri Amar Patnaik 
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan 
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
31. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan - Director  
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Yugma Malik   - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 

     
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the  Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance having been 
authorised by the Committee present this Twenty -Fourth Report on the Factoring 
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020. 
2. The Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020, introduced in Lok Sabha 
on 14 September, 2020 was referred to the Committee on 24 September, 2020 for 
examination and report thereon, by the  Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services) at their sitting held on 5 November, 2020. 
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 1 December, 2020 heard the views of 
the representatives of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (SIDBI), Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) and 
IFCI Factors Limited on the subject. 
5. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their Sitting held on 12th 
January, 2021. 
6. The Committee wish to express their appreciation to the officials of the 
Ministry of Finance (De partment of Financial Services), the Reserve B ank of India 
(RBI), Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), Industrial Development 
Bank of India (IDBI) and IFCI Factors Limited concerned with the Bill for their co -
operation and all the organisations for their valuable suggestions on the Bill .  The 
Committee would like to also thank Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) for their views on 
the Bill. 
7. For facility of reference, observation/ recommendations of the Committee 
have been pointed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi              Shri Jayant Sinha 
12 January, 2021                    Chairperson, 
22 Pausha, 1942(Saka)                             Standing Committee on Finance 
  

     
Report 
1. Background 
1.1 Factoring can be defined as a transaction where an entity (like Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises)  ‘sells’ its receivables (dues from a customer) to a third 
party (a ‘factor’ like a bank or NBFC) for immediate funds (partial or full). Domestic 
factoring includes invoice discounting, recourse factoring, non -recourse factorin g, 
collections and reverse factoring. International factoring includes export factoring, 
import factoring, export invoice discounting and reverse factoring.  Factoring is 
advantageous as it leads to prompt payment for seller and addresses liquidity 
issues; ensures smoother working capital cycle for seller; increases productivity and 
provides growth opportunity with healthier cash -flow as all or part of invoice can be 
sold to factor (bank or NBFC) for getting money immediately at competitive interest 
rate; the factor collects payment from buyer of goods and gains by earning interest.  
1.2 In order to address the delay in payment and liquidity problems faced by 
enterprises, including MSMEs, the Regulation of Factor (Assignment of Receivables) 
Bill, 2011 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24 March, 2011. It was referred to the 
Standing Committee on Finance on 29 March, 2011 for examination and report 
thereon and the Committee submitted its Thirty -Ninth Report on the Bill to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 30 th August, 2011 and thereafter the Factoring Regulation 
Act, 2011 was enacted to provide for regulating the assignment of receivables to 
factors, making provision for registration for doing factoring business, and the rights 
and obligations of the parties to the factoring contract. 
1.3 As per the Factoring Act, 2011 four types of entities can do factoring in India 
at present:- 
(i) Banks – Exempted from registration under Section 5 
(ii) Statutory Corporations – Exempted from registration under Section 5 
(iii) NBFCs - Have to obtain registration from RBI under Section 3  
(iv) Companies - Have to obtain registration from RBI under Section 3 
1.4 Currently, 7 NBFCs called NBFC-Factors do the majority of factoring through 
the ‘ principal business ’ condition. They are Canbank Factors, Ind ia Factoring and 
Finance, SBI Global Factors, Siemens Factoring, Bibby Financial Services, IFCI 
Factors and Pinnacle Capital Solutions. At present, factoring is carried out both – 
(a) Manually; and  

     
(b) on the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS); an electronic 
exchange that allows transparent and online selling of receivables by MSMEs. 
Guidelines regarding TReDS were issued by RBI in December, 2014 and in 
2017 TReDS  came into existence. Three entities (RXIL, M1xchange and 
Invoicemart) are running T ReDS and have since collectively discounted 
invoices worth INR 15,000 crores drawn by 25,000 MSMEs. The TReDS 
platform over the last three years has shown its robustness and scalability in 
terms of providing low -cost receivables financing to MSMEs across t he 
country. 
1.5 However, even today,  MSMEs continue to face financing issues especially 
access to formal credit channels including through factoring. T here is often delay in 
MSMEs getting payment against their bills for supplying to various buyers. Due to 
this, their working capital gets locked  up, and further productive activities by MSMEs 
get hampered. 
1.6 In January, 2019, the Reserve Bank of India constituted an Expert Committee 
on MSMEs under the Chairmanship of Shri U.K. Sinha to suggest long –term 
measures for the economic and financial sustainability of the MSME Sector. The 
Expert Committee, interalia, recommended that N on-Banking Finance Companies 
(NBFCs) other than NBFC -Factors should be permitted to discount invoices on the 
Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) in order to widen the scope of 
financiers, that TReDS entities should be permitted to act as agents fo r financiers for 
filing of registration of charge with the Central Registry for gaining operational 
efficiency, and that the time period for registration of invoice and satisfaction of 
charge upon it should be reduced in order to check the possibility of d ual financing. 
The Expert Committee recommended that the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 be 
amended accordingly, and the Government declared its intention to do so in the 
Budget speeches of 2019-20 and 2020-21.    
1.7 Accordingly, The Factoring Regulation ( Amendment) Bill, 2020 was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 24 September 2020 and t he purpose of the 
proposed amendments is to liberalize the restrictive provisions in the Act and at the 
same time ensure that a strong regulatory / oversight mechanism is in pl ace through 
the Reserve Bank of India.  
1.8 Many government initiatives such as the launch of Unified Payments Interface 
(UPI), Goods and Services tax (GST), shift to online tax reporting through GST, etc . 
have helped accelerate formalization and digitizat ion of MSMEs, creating a treasure 

     
trove of digital data from MSMEs that is verified, granular, current, and electronically 
accessible. The proposed amendments coupled with these initiatives are expected to 
provide an impetus to factoring as attractive source for short term financing for 
MSMEs by providing added avenues for getting credit fac ility, especially through 
TReDS as the t otal number of NBFC factors offering finance could go up from 7 to 
several thousands fostering  greater competition , MSMEs will be able to avail 
cheaper financing  and i ncrease in the availability of working capital will lead to 
growth of the business of the MSME sector, allowing them to supply to more buyers, 
leading to further increase in business and resultant profit ability in a virtuous cycle. 
This will also boost employment in the country. 
2. Salient Features of the Bill 
2.1 The amendments proposed through various clauses of the Factoring 
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020 are as follows: 
a) Clause 2 seeks to amend the definitions of “assignment”, “factoring business” 
and “receivables”, so as to bring them in consonance with international 
definitions and also to insert a new definition of “Trade Receivables 
Discounting System” in section 2 of the Act.   
b) Clause 3 seeks to amend section 3 to widen the scope of financiers and to 
permit other non -banking finance companies also to undertake factoring 
business and participate on the Trade Receivables Discounting System 
platform for discounting the invoices of micro, small and medium enterprises. 
c) Clause 4  seeks to amend sub -section (1) of section 19 to reduce the time 
period for registration of invoice and satisfaction of charge upon it, in order to 
avoid possibility of dual financing; and also to insert a new sub -section (1A) in 
that section to allow the concerned Trade Receivables Discounting System to 
register charge with the Central Registry on behalf of the factors using the 
platform. 
d) Clause 5 seeks to insert a new section 31A to empower the Reserve Bank of 
India to make regu lations in respect of matters relating to (a) the manner of 
granting certificate of registration; (b) the manner of filing of particulars of 
transactions with the Central Registry on behalf of factors; and (c) any other 
matter which is required to be specified by regulations. 
e) Clause 6 seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 32 of the Act 
to empower the Central Government to make rules to provide the time within 

     
which every factor shall register the particulars of every transaction of 
assignment of receivables in his favour with the Central Registry. 
2.2 At the outset, t he Committee note that the Factoring Regulation Act, 
2011 was enacted to address the delay s in payment and liquidity problems 
faced by enterprises including MSMEs. The Factoring Regulation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2020 has been introduced to further address the issue and address the 
still prevalent delays in payments to MSMEs by creating a broader and deeper 
liquid market for trade receivables. The widening of the factoring ecosystem is 
expected to enhance credit facilities to MSMEs and lead to increased turnover 
and growth of businesses and profitability and also give positive impetus to 
employment in the country.  That said, the Committee would like to draw 
attention to the following pertinent points concerning growth of factoring 
business in our country: 
(i) With the volume of business expanding as intended through the 
proposed amendments, it may becom e necessary to have a credit 
rating mechanism for receivables in place. This may be accomplished 
by encouraging the existing credit rating agencies to provide ratings 
for the MSMEs that are actively seeking to factor their receivables. 
(ii) RBI as regulato r should clarify regarding direct and indirect factoring 
by way of regulations, which, if warranted, may be incorporated 
appropriately in the rules that will be defined after the Bill is passed. 
(iii) Existing mechanisms in the present ecosystem available with 
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) to provide more wholesale 
financing for factors to generate more liquidity in the system should 
be worked upon in the course of implementation of the statute. 

     
(iv) Clarifications regarding import factoring business i. e. highlighting the 
fact that there is no bar/restriction preventing factoring from being 
done on import debts should be suitably included in the rules. 
3. Domestic Factoring Ecosystem vis-à-vis Global Scenario 
3.1 The factoring credit contributes only 2.6 % of total formal MSME credit in India 
versus 11.2% in China. It is estimated that only 10% of the total receivable market is 
presently covered under formal bill discounting mechanism in the financial system, 
while the rest is covered under conventional ca sh credit/overdraft arrangements with 
banks. As one of the principal instruments of working capital and trade finance, bill 
discounting and factoring remains underutilized . The Indian factoring market is at a 
very nascent stage with its size currently pegg ed at around $6 billion. As a 
percentage of GDP, it is significantly lower (0.2%) than comparable developing 
economies such as Brazil (4.1%) and China (3.2%). Mature factoring markets 
globally, more specifically Europe continue to dominate the factoring ma rket,with 
two-third of the world factoring (68%) .Within Europe there is high level of 
concentration with the top 5 countries in 2019 representing 73.6% of entire European 
market: France (18.3%), United Kingdom (17.3%), Germany (14.5%), Ital y (13.8%), 
and Spain (9.7%). Asia and other emerging markets continue to see an increase in 
the use of factoring as more business owners get engaged in growth in these 
markets. 
3.2 During 2014, more than USD $3 trillion changed hands between businesses 
and companies who provide factoring. A 2019 study published by Reports Monitor 
(RM) determined that by 2026, more than $4,600 billion will be handled in this 
manner. The global factoring market is projected to reach $ 9.2 trillion by 2025. 
3.3 Globally, i t is seen that the best factoring services try to bring in cost and 
operational efficiencies by either not charging start up or termination fees or charging 
a very low percentage. There is no compulsion to factor all invoices with no 
insistence for any minimum invoice either  and no binding commitments on the 
MSMEs. The fee structure, upfront payment upto 95% and low processing charges 
are the key factors that drive global business of this nature.  
3.4 The demand for factoring is expected to grow  due to t he technological 
advancements, need for financing, efficiency in process of receiving payment for 
invoices, increasing trade, growing awareness and growing SME s. The growth 
potential is driven by enhanced liquidity for efficient working capital management and 

     
improved inventory management. Further, a growing need for an alternative source 
of financing for MSMEs is anticipated to boost the growth of the market as well. Also, 
with tighter banking regulations, better security, and block -chain technology, there is 
further growth potential existing in the factoring market globally.  
3.5 The Committee are of the opinion that the best global practices should 
be adopted to bring domestic factoring companies at par with their global 
peers and make credit finance more accessible to MSMEs. In this regard, the 
Committee would recommend the following measures: 
 (i) Extend credit insurance for domestic factoring to provide additional 
protection to the factor and further encourage and promote the factoring 
companies to lend more aggressively to the MSMEs. 
(ii) Grant status of specialized MSME funding entity to fac toring companies 
so that a major portion of their corpus is earmarked for the benefit of 
MSMEs. 
(iii) Establish guidelines to enable the adoption of best technology and 
security standards, especially those related to block -chain technology 
as the Committee  are of the opinion that it will be one of the prime 
drivers of factoring market growth during the coming years. 
(iv) Promote educational initiatives so as to enable all concerned parties to 
know in detail the processes and how they can be optimally utilis ed to 
their benefit, so that factoring takes off and reaches significant 
proportion of GDP as in other countries like China. 
4. Issues Discussed 
4.1 The following points were discussed during the interaction of the Committee 
with the nodal Ministry, i.e De partment of Financial Services and various other 
stakeholders like RBI SIDBI, IFCI Factors Ltd. And IDBI :- 
(I) Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) 
4.2 The Committee enquired from the representatives of the nodal Ministry 
(Department of Financial Services)about the rationale for defining TReDS as a 

     
‘payment system’, as with the proposed amendments, the number of players will 
drastically shoot up and the T ReDS platform will be like a marketplace model and 
would be taking on a role similar to an exchange. The Committee further enquired 
about making Reserve Bank of India the regulator of this marketplace instead of 
Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), which is the capital markets regulator. 
4.3 The Ministry in their post evidence replies submitted the following with regard 
to defining TReDS as a payment system: 
“The TReDS platform, on which factoring is done electronically can be termed as 
an auction pla tform. It brings MSME sellers (holders of invoices) and financiers 
(Banks / NBFCs, etc .) together by allowing financiers to extend upfront payment 
for the invoices to the sellers. It is not an exchange in the traditional sense a 
stock exchange is understoo d to operate since once an invoice is financed, it 
gets extinguished unlike a share or a debt instruments which can be traded... 
….In other words, in exchanges, the same asset (like shares / commodities / 
forex) can change hands repeatedly by buyers and se llers constantly bidding and 
re-bidding for it.  Whereas the TReDS platform allows a one -time financing of an 
invoice through auction, i.e., it is a single transaction, after which the asset 
(invoice) does not exchange hands again”. 
4.4 And with regard to t he regulator, the Ministry in their post evidence replies 
submitted as follows:- 
“Since the core function of the TReDS platform is to enable finance (payment) to 
be availed upfront and to seamlessly enable such payment to be settled 
electronically among al l parties, TReDS entities are licensed under the Payment 
and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. As per the Act, RBI is the regulator for 
entities registered under the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. 
Further, regulations / guidelines are also issued by  RBI for such entities. It may 
also be noted that activities of those financiers namely CERSAI, Banks and 
NBFCs, etc. participating in TReDS are also regulated by RBI.” 
4.5 The Committee understands the rationale for defining TReDS as a 
payment system or a n auction platform and recognise s its role in helping 
MSMEs improve their working capital, reducing their interest servicing costs 
and expanding businesses. TReDS is a purely voluntary platform and the 
Committee desires that it should be made more attracti ve and seamless and 

     
thus recommends  the integration of TReDS platform with GSTN e -invoicing 
portal leading to automatic uploading of all GST invoices onto the TReDS 
platform to enable real time sharing of data that will allow buyers and sellers to 
have a s ingle window access to invoices . The Committee believe that  the 
availability of e-invoices, vetted through GSTN, will provide an added layer of 
authenticity, which will make the platform more attractive  and give more 
comfort tothe financiers, thereby encou raging enterprises to make a shift to 
TReDS platform, and creating an efficient working capital cycle for MSMEs. 
4.6 Therefore, the language of Section 19 (1A) may be modified thus: 
(1A) All invoices uploaded on the GST Network above the threshold notified 
by regulations shall automatically be uploaded on all Trade Receivables 
Discounting Systems. When any invoice is then financed by the factor, 
the particulars specified in sub -section (1) and sub -section (3) shall be 
filed with the Central Registry on beha lf of the factor by the Trade 
Receivables Discounting System concerned, in such a manner as may 
be specified by regulations. 
4.7 The Committee would like to further recommend that receivables 
coming from the Central and state governments should compulsoril y be 
brought under the ambit of TReDS through this legislation so that payments 
pending from governments which have already been approved for various 
MSMEs are made available to them on a timely basis. Government entities can 
use the TReDS platform to demo nstrate that they are good at paying their bills 
and thus get more bidders for their projects.  
4.8 The Committee believes that making GSTN invoices available for 
factoring will generate tremendous volumes of receivables that can be 
financed and grow the factoring business manifold. It will increase competition 

     
and ensure a liquid market thereby reducing the price paid for factoring. The 
Committee’s opinion is that the compulsory listing of all GSTN invoices on the 
TReDS and the consequent tracking of when these payments are made, 
provides excellent economic data on the state of the economy. It will also 
provide valuable credit information to enable credit scoring of various 
companies and government entities. 
(II) Change of nomenclature from ‘factor’ to ‘company’ 
 
4.9 The Reserve Bank of India furnished the following suggestion  in their 
submission to the Committee:- 
“It is necessary to replace 'factor’ by 'company' so as to enable all NBFCs to undertake 
factoring business even if it is not its principal business without obtaining Certificate of 
Registration (CoR) under ERA. CoR under Factoring Regulation Act (FRA) will be 
required only if factoring is its principal business.” 
4.10 The Ministry furnished the following comments on the above suggestion: 
“The definition of “Factor” in Section 2 of the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 clearly 
specifies the types of entities who can do factoring business, including inter alia NBFCs 
(registered under the RBI Act) and companies (registered under the Companies Act). 
Both NBFCs and companies require a Certificate of Registration from RBI before doing 
factoring business. The proposed amendments seek to permit all NBFCs to do factoring 
business, and not only those who do it as their principal business. However, permitting 
all NBFCs to do such business without obtaining Certificate of Registration (CoR) from 
RBI (and requiring only companies to obtain CoR) carries the risk of some NBFC entities 
without much experience/ capability of factoring business undertaking such business 
without proper risk appraisal and other regulatory checks. It also carries the risk of 
NBFCs choosing to do factoring business only as their non-principal business, for which 
no Certificate would be required. From the legislative prudence also word ‘’factor” need 
not be substituted by “company” as company is a sub-set of factor which is defined 
under section 2”. 
 
4.11 The Committee desires that the afore-mentioned suggestion of RBI to replace 
the word ‘factor’ by ‘company’ with a view to expand the scope of business be 
explored by the Ministry. This might cut red-tape by reducing the number of 

     
registrations required and make it easier for NBFCs to participate on the TReDS 
platform, while making the process seamless for the existing NBFCs to undertake 
factoring business by removing the mandatory requirement of separate registration 
as factors. 
(III) RBI as Regulator 
 
4.12 During their interaction with the representatives of RBI, the Committee 
enquired if they had the regulatory capacity, the systems, the processes and the 
people to be able to take on the onerous and complex task of supervising factoring 
activities, to which they replied as under:- 
“As far as the supervisory capacity of the RBI is concerned, we are confident that 
we have the wherewithal to train up the required manpower; we are in the 
process of planning for additional staff to come into the RBI; and we will be able 
to provide for the ad ditional staff which would be required. We are already in the 
planning stage of beefing up our supervisory cadre. So, I think, it would be 
possible for us to supervise this.” 
4.13 Further, in their post evidence replies, the RBI submitted the following: 
“….However, considering that factoring business is more prone to frauds, 
additional resources may be required to check the internal control mechanisms. 
While this aspect is covered in regular onsite inspection, it would require specific 
focus from factoring business perspective, for which capacity development of 
supervisors will be required. Our assessment indicates that there may be a 5 to 
7.5 percent increase in the supervisory resources currently allocated to the 
supervision of NBFCs. As already mentioned,  at the time of unification of the 
supervisory function, the Reserve Bank has carried out an assessment on 
augmentation of supervisory requirements, which may cater to the above 
additional requirement also” 
4.14 While taking note of RBI’s submission regarding their regulatory 
capacity, the Committee would like to point out that with the expansion in the 
number of players from the current seven NBFC -Factors to potentially 
thousands of factors, RBI will be undertaking a mammoth regulatory 
responsibility. The Committee emphasises the need for RBI to build up 
sufficient regulatory staff /resources for efficient supervision of factoring 

     
activities so that the intent and purpose of the proposed amendments to 
address the lingering issues involving factoring industry, particularly the 
chronic delays in payment and liquidity crunch faced by enterprises is 
effectively addressed. 
4.15 The Committee thus endorse s the proposed amendments in the 
Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi           Shri Jayant Sinha 
12 January 2021              Chairperson 
22 Pausha, 1942 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
  

     
Minutes of the First sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2020-21) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 05 November, 2020 f rom 1 500hrs. to 
1630hrs. in Main Committee Room , Parliament House Annexe  Extension, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
3. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Shri Pinaki Misra 
8. Prof. Saugata Roy 
9. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
10. Shri Manish Tewari 
11. Shri Rajesh Verma 
12. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
14. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
15. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
16. Shri Bikash Ranjan 
17. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to 
the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Financial 
Services (Ministry of Finance) made a brief presentation highlighting k ey 
amendments to be made through the Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020. 
The major issues discussed during the sitting included the plan of expanding 
factoring business in the country from current 7 NBFCs to 9500 NBFCs, need of 
bringing more MSMEs  on TReDS platform, evaluating the size of factoring in terms 
of country’s GDP, understanding the resource sources of factoring companies, 

     
experience of regulating factoring business till now and need for extensive 
regulation, global best practices and the  lessons learnt, rationale behind making RBI 
the regulator of TReDS instead of SEBI and whether RBI has the required 
wherewithal to do so, possibility of an independent regulatory authority and credit 
insurance for domestic factoring, provision of minimum interest rate / discounting 
rate on factoring invoices, expected growth of factoring business in future and 
specific goals to be achieved through the amendment. The witnesses responded to 
the queries raised by the Members on the subject. The Committee dire cted the 
witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which could not be readily replied 
by them during the sitting.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No.1 regarding selection of 
subjects for examination during 2020 -21 and decided to exa mine the subjects as 
indicated in the Annexure to the Minutes.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

     
ANNEXURE 
SUBJECTS SELECTED FOR DETAILED EXAMINATION BY THE COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (2020-21) 
 
1. Long term impact of the Covid -19 pandemic on the global economy, tra de 
flows, and financial markets 
2. Increasing the availability of equity and debt capital for the rural economy 
3. Financing infrastructure requirements including long-term corporate debt 
4. Financing the MSME sector; its growth and regulation 
5. Providing credit to t he agricultural sector including appraisal of NABARD’s 
role 
6. Efficacy of overall taxation framework including long-term corporate debt 
7. Analysis of disinvestment programme 
8. Performance and regulation of insurance and pension sectors 
9. Implementation of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code- Pitfalls and solutions 
10. Strengthening RBI and SEBI’s regulatory and operational capabilities 
 
 
 
 
  

     
Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2020-21) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 01 December, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 
1630hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy 
10. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
11. Shri Manish Tewari 
12. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
14. Shri Amar Patnaik 
15. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
PART I (1500 hrs - 1545 hrs) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
 
1.  Shri M. Rajeshwar Rao, Deputy Governor  
2. Shri Manoranjan Mishra, Chief General Manager, DNBR 
  

     
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to 
the sitting of the Committee.  After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the ‘Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 
2020’.  The major issues discussed include rationale behind suggestion of changing 
nomenclature from factor to company; cre dit insurance for domestic factoring; import 
factoring business; estimated increase in liquidity in the economy with the advent of 
increased players; impact of COVID -19 on factoring; encouragement to Scheduled 
Commercial Banks to lend to new factoring companies; issue of delay in payments to 
MSMEs by state governments and whether it can be resolved through factoring; 
regulatory capacity available with RBI to take on the supervising of factoring 
activities and additional funding or personnel strength, if any , required to carry out 
the same. 
   
3. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the 
subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within a week.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
PART II (1545 hrs - 1630 hrs) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
1. Shri Manoj Mittal, Deputy Managing Director , SIDBI 
2. Shri Ketan Gaikwad, Managing Director & CEO, Receivables Exchange of 
India Limited (RXIL) 
IFCI Factors Limited 
1. Shri Bikash Kanti Roy, Managing Director 
2. Shri Ravi Ranjan Singh, Sr. Vice President 
3. Shri Mayank Thareja, Sr. Associate Vice President 
Industrial Development Bank Of India (IDBI) 
1. Shri Rajiv Sharma, Chief General Manager 
2. Shri Nityam Kumar, General Manager 
3. Shri Abdul Muqeet, General Manager 
 

     
  
4. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the Chairpers on initiated 
the discussion on the ‘Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020’.  The major 
issues discussed include integration of Trade Receivables Discounting System 
(TReDS) and GST platform in a manner that if an invoice above a certain threshold 
is uploaded into the GST system, it will  automatically fillip over onto the TReDS 
platform and be available for factoring; importance of e -invoicing; increasing 
quantum of factoring as a percent of GDP and expanding the market for factoring.  
 
5. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the 
subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within a week. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  

     
Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12th January, 2021 from 1100hrs. to 1310 
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘3’, Parliament House Annexe Extension Block A, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
3. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
5. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
7. Shri Praful Patel 
8. Shri Amar Patnaik 
9. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
10. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
11. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 
 
PART I  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson  welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report on 'Factoring 
Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020 ' for consideration and adoption. After some 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Repor t and authorised the 
Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to Hon’ble Speaker / 
Parliament. 
PART II  
 
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

1
THE FACTORING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
A
BILL
to amend the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011.
    B E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 2 of the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words commencing with "transfer by agreement" and
ending with "outside India", the words "transfer by agreement to a factor of an
undivided interest, in whole or in part, in the receivables of an assignor due from a
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
12 of 2012.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
   Bill No. 115 of  2020
5
10

2
debtor and includes such transfer where either the assignor or the debtor is situated or
established outside India" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (j),—
(A) in the opening portion, for the words commencing with "acquisition of
receivables" and ending with "any receivables but", the words "acquisition by
way of assignment of receivables of assignor for a consideration for the purpose
of collection of such receivables or for financing, whether by way of making
loans or advances or otherwise, against such assignment, but" shall be
substituted;
(B) in sub-clause (i), after the word "bank", the words "or a non-banking
financial company" shall be inserted;
(iii) for clause (p), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(p) "receivables" means the money owed by a debtor and not yet paid to
the assignor for goods or services and includes payment of any sum, by whatever
name called, required to be paid for the toll or for the use of any infrastructure
facility or services;
(pa) "regulations" means regulations made by the Reserve Bank under
this Act;';
(iv) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(sa) "Trade Receivables Discounting System" means a payment system
authorised by the Reserve Bank under section 7 of the Payment and Settlement
Systems Act,2007 for the purpose of facilitating financing of trade
receivables;'.
3. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section (2), the proviso and the Explanation shall be omitted;
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) The Reserve Bank may grant the certificate of registration in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.".
4. In section 19 of the principal Act,—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
"(1) Every factor shall register the particulars of every transaction of
assignment of receivables in his favour with the Central Registry set up under
section 20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, within such time from the date of
such assignment, in such manner and subject to payment of such fee, as may be
prescribed.";
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(1A) Where any trade receivables are financed through a Trade
Receivables Discounting System, the particulars specified in sub-section ( 1)
and sub-section (3) shall be filed with the Central Registry on behalf of the factor
by the Trade Receivables Discounting System concerned, in such manner as
may be specified by regulations.".
5. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"31A. (1) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, make regulations consistent
with this Act to carry out the provisions of this Act.
51 of 2007.
Amendment
of section 3.
Amendment
of section 19.
54 of 2002.
Insertion of new
section 31A.
Power to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

3
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of granting certificate of registration under sub-section (4)
of section 3;
(b) the manner of filing of particulars of transactions with the Central
Registry on behalf of factors under sub-section (1A) of section 19;
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations.
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made by the Reserve
Bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Central Government shall
cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation
should not be made, the regulation shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that regulation.".
6. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause (a), for the words
"the form and manner", the words "the time within which, the form and manner" shall be
substituted.
Amendment of
section 32.
5
15
10
20

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 was enacted to provide for regulating the
assignment of receivables to factors, registration of factors carrying on factoring business
and the rights and obligations of parties to the contract for assignment of receivables.
2. Though the very purpose of the said Act was to address the problems of delay in
payment and liquidity faced by all enterprises, including micro, small and medium enterprises,
the said problems persist. These enterprises continue to face delay in payment against their
bills for supplies made to various buyers. Due to this, their working capital gets locked and
further production activities by such enterprises get hampered. Therefore, in January, 2019,
the Reserve Bank of India had constituted an expert committee on micro, small and medium
enterprises under the Chairmanship of Shri U.K. Sinha to suggest long-term measures for the
economic and financial sustainability of said sector.
3. The expert committee has recommended that, (i) non-banking finance companies,
other than those non-banking finance companies whose principal business is factoring,
should also be permitted to discount invoices on Trade Receivables Discounting System in
order to widen the scope of financiers; (ii) the Trade Receivables Discounting System
concerned should be permitted to act as agents of financiers for filing registration of charges
with the Central Registry as it would bring operational efficiency; and (iii) the time period for
registration of invoice and satisfaction of charge upon it should be reduced in order to check
possibility of dual financing.
4. After considering the above recommendations, the Government has decided to
amend the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011 on the above lines and has also declared its
intention in the Budget speech of 2019-20 and 2020-21. The amendments are expected to help
micro, small and medium enterprises significantly, by providing added avenues for getting
credit facility, especially through Trade Receivables Discounting System. Increase in the
availability of working capital may lead to growth in the business of the micro, small and
medium enterprises sector and also boost employment in the country.
5. The Factoring Regulation (Amendment) Bill, 2020, inter alia, seeks to—
(i) amend the definitions of "assignment", "factoring business" and
"receivables", so as to bring them in consonance with international definitions and
also to insert a new definition of "Trade Receivables Discounting System" in section 2;
(ii) amend section 3 to widen the scope of financiers and to permit other non-
banking finance companies also to undertake factoring business and participate on
the Trade Receivables Discounting System platform for discounting the invoices of
micro, small and medium enterprises;
(iii) amend sub-section (1) of section 19 to reduce the time period for registration
of invoice and satisfaction of charge upon it, in order to avoid possibility of dual
financing; and also to insert a new sub-section ( 1A.) in that section to allow the
concerned Trade Receivables Discounting System to register charge with the Central
Registry on behalf of the factors using the platform;
(iv) insert a new section 31A to empower the Reserve Bank of India to make
regulations with respect to factoring business.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.
The 3rd September, 2020.
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.

6
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 31A in the Factoring Regulation
Act, 2011 so as to empower the Reserve Bank of India to make regulations in respect of
matters relating to, (a) the manner of granting certificate of registration; (b) the manner of
filing of particulars of transactions with the Central Registry on behalf of factors; and (c) any
other matter which is required to be specified by regulations.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 32 of the said
Act to empower the Central Government to make rules to provide the time within which every
factor shall register the particulars of every transaction of assignment of receivables in his
favour with the Central Registry.
The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

7
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE FACTORING REGULA TION ACT, 2011
(12 OF 2012)
*****
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "assignment" means transfer by agreement, of undivided interest of any
assignor in any receivable due from any debtor in favour of a factor and includes an
assignment where either the assignor or the debtor, are situated or established outside
India.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, undivided interest of any
assignor in any receivable shall not include creation of rights in receivables as security
for loans and advances or other obligations by a bank or a financial institution;
*****
(j) "factoring business" means the business of acquisition of receivables of
assignor by accepting assignment of such receivables or financing, whether by way
of making loans or advances or otherwise against the security interest over any
receivables but does not include—
(i) credit facilities provided by a bank in its ordinary course of business
against security of receivables;
*****
(p) "receivables" means all or part of or undivided interest in any right of any
person under a contract including an international contract where either the assignor
or the debtor or the assignee is situated or established in a State outside India; to
payment of a monetary sum whether such right is existing, future, accruing, conditional
or contingent arising from and includes, any arrangement requiring payment of toll or
any other sum, by whatever name called, for the use of any infrastructure facility or
services;
*****
CHAPTER II
R
EGISTRATION OF FACTORS
*****
3. (1)*                          *                          *                    *                    *
(2) Every factor shall make an application for registration to the Reserve Bank in such
form and manner as it may specify:
Provided that a company registered as a non-banking financial company and existing
on the commencement of this Act and engaged in factoring business as its principal business
before such commencement shall make an application for registration as a factor to the
Reserve Bank before the expiry of the period of six months from such commencement and,
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), may continue to carry on the
factoring business until a certificate of registration is issued to it or rejection of application
for registration is communicated to it.
Definitions.
Registration
of factors.

8
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts it is hereby clarified that a non-banking
financial company engaged in factoring business shall be treated as engaged in factoring
business as its "principal business" if it fulfils the following conditions, namely:—
(a) if its financial assets in the factoring business are more than fifty per cent. of
its total assets or such per cent. as may be stipulated by the Reserve Bank; and
(b) if its income from factoring business is more than fifty per cent. of the gross
income or such per cent. as may be stipulated by the Reserve Bank.
*****
(4) In the case of existing non-banking financial company the Reserve Bank may
issue a fresh certificate of registration as a factor, if the principal business of the non-
banking financial company is the factoring business.
*****
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTRATION OF ASSIGNMENT
19. (1) Every factor shall file, for the purposes of registration, the particulars of every
transaction of assignment of receivables in his favour with the Central Registry to be setup
under section 20 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002, within a period of thirty days from the date of
such assignment or from the date of establishment of such registry, as the case may be, in
the manner and subject to payment of such fee as may be prescribed in this behalf.
Explanation. —For the purpose of filing of particulars of every transaction of
assignment of receivables with the Central Registry, the receivables may be described
specifically or generally with reference to the debtor, or the period to which they relate or by
any other general description by which such receivables can be identified.
*****
32. (1) *                          *                          *                    *                    *
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner in which the transactions of assignment of receivables
in favour of a factor shall be filed and the fee for filing such transaction under
sub-section (1) of section 19;
*****
54 of 2002.
Registration
of certain
assignments of
receivables
transactions.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Factoring Regulation Act, 2011.
————
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)
MGIPMRND—375LS—(S3)—09.09.2020.