 
 
53 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2022-2023) 
  
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES BY BIG TECH COMPANIES  
 
 
 
 
FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
 
 
 
                        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2022/ PAUSHA, 1944 (SAKA)


 
 
 
 
 FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2022-2023) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES BY BIG TECH COMPANIES  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December 2022 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2022/ PAUSHA, 1944 (SAKA) 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
       Page Nos. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.......................    (iii) 
INTRODUCTION......................................................     (v) 
PART-I 
 
Chapter –I Page 
 
Digital Markets  
Background 1 
Digital Markets vs Traditional Markets: Defining Characteristics 2 
Anti-Competitive Practices (ACPs) in Digital Markets in India 3 
Chapter II  
Major Issues Discussed  
(i) Anti-Steering Provisions 12 
(ii) Platform Neutrality/ Self-Preferencing 12 
(iii) Bundling and Tying 14 
(iv) Data Usage 16 
(v) Mergers and Acquisitions 17 
(vi) Pricing / Deep Discounting 19 
(vii) Exclusive Tie-ups 23 
(viii) Search and Ranking Preferencing 23 
(ix) Restricting Third-Party Applications 25 
(x) Advertising Policies 25 
(xi) Ex-Ante Restraint 26 
Chapter-III  
Enhancing Competition Law for Digital Markets in India 29 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 31-39 
Annexure-I  
Global Overview of Ex-ante Provisions 
 
40 
 
 
 
APPENDICES (1-6)       
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 28.04.2022, 19.05.2022, 21.07.2022 
28.07.2022, 23.8.2022 and 19.12.2022 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2022-23) 
 
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
9. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
10. Shri Pinaki Misra 
11. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
13. Shri Nama Nageshwara Rao 
14. Prof. Sougata Ray 
15. Shri P.V. Midhun Reddy 
16. Shri Gopal Chinayya  Shetty 
17. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh  
18. Dr. (Prof) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
19. Shri Manish Tewari 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri P. Chidambaram 
25. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
26. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
27. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
28. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
29. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
30. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
31. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan                                -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan                 -    Director  
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                          -    Additional Director 
4. Ms. Yugma Malik                                          -    Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance, having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fifty-third Report on the subject ‘Anti-
Competitive Practices by Big Tech Companies’. 
 
2. At their sitting held on 28 April, 2022, the Committee took evidence of the officials 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
and Competition Commission of India. On 19 May 2022, the Committee heard the views 
of representatives of hospitality, restaurants and travel agents associations, digital 
media and newspaper associations viz. The Federation of Hotel and Restaurant 
Association of India (FHRAI), Digital News Publishers Association (DNPA), Alliance of 
Digital India Foundation (ADIF) Newspapers Association of India (NAI) and 
Confederation of all India Traders (CAIT). The Committee further on 21 July, 2022 
heard views of industry stakeholders from the representatives of PayTM, Ola, 
MakeMyTrip India Pvt. Ltd, Zomato, Oyo, Swiggy, Flipkart and All India Gaming 
Federation (AIGF). The Committee again had the oral evidence of Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs and Competition Commission of India on the subject and also heard the views of 
representatives of Alliance of Digital India Foundation (ADIF) on 28 July, 2022. The 
Committee then on 23 August, 2022 interacted with the representatives of various Big 
Tech Companies viz. Amazon India, Apple India, Facebook India, Google India, Netflix 
India, Twitter India and Uber India. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 19 
December, 2022. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and Competition 
Commission of India and representatives of The Federation of Hotel and Restaurant 
Association of India (FHRAI), Digital News Publishers Association (DNPA), Alliance of 
Digital India Foundation (ADIF), Newspaper Association of India (NAI), Confederation of 
all India Traders (CAIT), PayTM, Ola, MakeMyTrip India Pvt. Ltd, Zomato, Oyo, Swiggy, 
Flipkart, All India Gaming Federation (AIGF), Amazon India, Apple India, Facebook 
India, Google India, Netflix India, Twitter India and Uber India for appearing before the 

 
 
Committee and furnishing the requisite material and information which were desired in 
connection with the examination of the subject. 
5. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the 
Stakeholders/Organisations for providing their views/suggestions against the Press 
Communiqué on the aforementioned subject. 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                       Shri Jayant Sinha 
19 December, 2022                        Chairperson, 
28 Agrahayana, 1944(Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance

1 
 
REPORT 
   PART I 
Chapter-I 
Digital Markets 
Background 
1.1 The world is digitizing rapidly. As a result, in the past few decades, novel and 
powerful business models have evolved in the digital ecosystem. The widespread 
adoption of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) along with the growth of 
multitudes of digital companies has led to distinct digital markets, comprising millions of 
interacting participants, which are often interconnected across the ecosystem. These 
digital markets are present across the national and global economy in most sectors from 
healthcare to finance from transportation services to education.  
 
1.2 It is also abundantly clear that the underlying economic drivers of digital markets 
inevitably lead to the rise of a relatively few leading players. These leading players are 
collectively referred to as Big Tech companies. The rise of Big Tech is due to the 
fundamental difference in the way digital markets operate, as compared to traditional 
markets. Digital markets are driven by massively powerful increasing return to size 
economies. These increasing returns result not just from the traditional scale and scope 
effects, but also dramatically powerful learning and network effects. Due to these 
powerful increasing returns to size, digital markets often tip quickly (within 3 to 5 years) 
to winner-take-all monopolistic outcomes. On the other hand, traditional markets tend to 
have diminishing returns to size, leading to strong competition among multiple players. 
Thus, while traditional markets tend to be fair and contestable, digital markets quickly 
result in limited fair competition. Moreover, leading players in one digital market can 
quickly unlock these increasing return effects in adjacent markets as well. Since digital 
markets do not have sufficient competition, they also are prone to significant anti-
competitive behaviour by leading players. 
 
Digital Markets vs Traditional Markets: Defining Characteristics 
1.3 Digital markets are essentially different from traditional physical markets. In a 
traditional market, as the size of a business entity increases, its returns increase only up 

2 
 
to the maximum efficiency point, or the equilibrium point, and then continue to decrease. 
Another way of describing this is to highlight that marginal costs increase rapidly with 
size for traditional physical markets. This is referred to as diminishing returns to size. 
With diminishing returns, there is a competitive disadvantage to getting bigger and that 
leads to a competitive equilibrium and welfare-optimizing outcomes. On the other hand, 
digital markets have increasing returns to size, driven primarily by learning and network 
effects. Simply put, digital businesses tend to have rapidly diminishing marginal costs as 
they grow, so scaling quickly is the best strategy. The bigger you get, in digital markets, 
the more competitive you are. This results in winner-take-all market outcomes. Thus, 
digital markets often ‘tip’ quickly and one or two winners or leading players emerge in a 
short span of time. 
 
1.4 Increasing Returns to Scale: In any digital market, as the size of the firm 
increases, so do the returns, with rapidly decreasing marginal costs. In other words, 
once a search engine or a messaging application has become fully functional, it can 
cater to millions of new users, without a proportional increase in its costs. With 
increasing returns to scale, competition between two firms producing the same product 
will not allow them to cover their costs. Indeed, were they to cover their (total) costs, 
they would have to price above the cost of serving an additional consumer (the marginal 
cost) and each of them would find it profitable to lower their price to capture the other’s 
clients. As a consequence, no firm, unless armed with a much superior and cheaper 
technology, would want to enter a market dominated by an incumbent, even when this 
incumbent is making large profits (EU Report, 2019). 
 
1.5 Network Effects: An ‘incumbent platform’ continues to grow, also due to network 
effects. As the number of users on a platform grows, so does the utility of every user of 
that platform. The larger platforms, with more number of users may provide increased 
efficiency to all its users. But this leaves space for only a small number of platforms in 
the market. A classic example of this is the way social networking and messaging apps 
work. A new user would only want to join that platform that already has a high number 
of users. This gives the incumbent platform an advantage as follows: Due to network 
externalities, there is always a difficulty for users to coordinate migration to a new 
platform. No individual user would want to migrate to a new platform. Even if they would 

3 
 
be better off on a different platform, that would not happen unless there is a mass 
movement of users from the leading platform to the new platform. 
1.6 Winner-take-all markets: The combined effect of network externalities and 
increasing returns to scale often results in a winner-take-all market. Such markets lead 
to significant competitive conduct issues. The leading players in a market can 
systematically and strategically leverage their position in the market to cut off innovative 
start-ups, thereby eliminating a competition. This creates entry-level barriers for an 
emerging firm. Moreover, it leads to the entrenchment of the leading firms market 
position and strength. These issues emerged in the various sittings of the Committee, 
as well as in the different competition cases of the Commission. 
1.7 First, monopolistic players can always use their pricing power to extract rents or 
other value (such as precious usage data) from consumers. Second, winners can stifle 
dynamic innovation by buying out possible competitors that are much smaller or by not 
engaging in sufficient innovation themselves. Third, winners can use their advantage in 
one market to gain competitive advantage in other markets through bundling, tying, and 
other unfair behaviours. Finally, winners can corner the market for valuable inputs (such 
as talented people) making it difficult to compete against them. 
1.8 These winner-take-all markets also present a particular challenge to policy-
makers. Typically, winners emerge within 3-5 years after the market starts to develop. 
By the time policy-makers can react or anti-competitive behaviours can be adjudicated, 
markets can tip in one direction and a winner emerges. Therefore, competitive 
behaviour needs to be evaluated ex ante before markets end up monopolized. 
Anti-Competitive Practices (ACPs) in Digital Markets in India 
1.9 The Indian digital ecosystem is expanding rapidly. Being the fifth largest, and the 
fastest growing economy in the world, our digital markets are huge. India is expected to 
have 907 million internet users by 2023. India’s consumer digital economy is expected 
to become a US$ 1 trillion market by 2030, growing from US$ 537.5 billion in 2020, 
driven by the strong adoption of online services such as e-commerce and ed-tech in the 
country. As of June 8, 2022, the Government e-Marketplace (GeM) portal served 10.35 
million orders worth Rs. 2,58,359 crores (US$ 33.07 billion) to 60,632 buyers from 4.56 
million registered sellers and service providers. These statistics indicate not only the 
size and potential of the digital sector in India but also, towards the need to make sure 

4 
 
that it operates within a truly competitive ecosystem, ensuring utmost efficiency and 
consumer welfare. 
 
1.10 The winner-take-all markets of the digital economy prompt ‘winners’ to resort to 
certain actions that discourage competition. Based on the submissions received by the 
Committee on part of the various stakeholders, a variety of concerns have been brought 
to the forefront. Apart from the various submissions, these issues have also been 
identified in the numerous orders by the Commission, particularly under Section 26(1), 
of the Competition Act, 2002 against firms operating in digital markets. 
 
1.11 Based on these submissions, the following ten Anti-Competitive Practices 
(ACPs) have been identified. Competition law may largely address these ACPs in order 
to ensure market efficiency as well as fair competitive conduct. 
 
 
 
I. Anti-Steering Provisions 
1.12 Prominently associated with ‘App stores’, anti-steering provisions prevent their 
business users, for instance app publishers, from moving out of the platform and using 
other alternatives for payments. The issue lies in the fact that this does not allow the 


5 
 
user any choice of alternatives which may cost him less and provide a better interface. 
By mandating the use of their own payment system, App stores eliminate possible 
competition from other payment applications. Worldwide, App stores have been at the 
centre of many anti-competitive cases, particularly in regard to their payment 
mechanisms. 
 
1.13 Google’s Play Store and Apple’s App Store are the major players in this 
marketplace and both have been found to have anti-steering provisions on their 
platforms. In a 2020 CCI’s prima facie order directing investigation against Alphabet 
Inc., the parent company of Google, it was noted that,  
In relation to mandatory use of Play’s payment system for paid apps & in-app 
purchases, the Commission is of prima facie view that mandatory use of application 
store’s payment system for paid apps & in-app purchases restricts the choice 
available to the app developers to select a payment processing system of their 
choice especially considering when Google charges a commission of 30% (15% in 
certain cases) for all app purchases and IAPs. Further, considering that Play is the 
dominant source of downloading apps in the Android OS (90% of the downloads) 
and its condition requiring use of application store’s payment system for paid apps & 
in-app purchases, it appears that Google controls the significant volume of payments 
processed in this market. 
II.  Platform Neutrality/ Self-Preferencing 
1.14 The digital economy largely operates through digital platforms- a business entity 
working as a marketplace, connecting its business users to the end consumers. 
However, most of these entities are not merely platforms for other business users to list 
their applications/products/services, rather, their respective parent companies also list 
their different applications/products/services on these stores/platforms. This raises 
concerns of self-preferencing and warrants the assurance of platform neutrality. If the 
platform engages in self-preferencing, it leads to a negative effect on downstream 
markets, as their profits may go down and, at the same time, gives an unfair advantage 
to the leading player-the platform itself. 
 
1.15 In the same 2020 Alphabet Inc. case, it was alleged that Google unfairly 
privileges ‘Google Pay’ by prominent placement on the Play Store,  Android OS and 
Android based smartphones by skewing the search results on the Play Store in favour 
of Google Pay, by manipulating the search advertisements algorithm on the Play Store 

6 
 
in favour of Google Pay; and by pre-installing and prominently placing Google Pay on 
Android smartphones at the time of initial set-up resulting in a “status-quo bias” to the 
detriment of other apps facilitating payments through UPI as well as other methods of 
payment, such as mobile wallets, net banking, etc. In this regard, the CCI’s in its prima 
facie order noted that,  
Manipulation of these features on/by the dominant platform, along with other self- 
preferencing means, may work as a potent instrument to divert traffic to its newly 
launched app and thus interfering with the process of ‘competition on the merits’. If 
Google started featuring Google Pay in the list of top apps, user choice apps and top 
free apps, not on objective parameters but simply as a means of self-preferencing, 
then the same, in conjunction with other preferential policies, may amount to 
imposition of unfair condition on both user groups (apps and app users), imposition 
of discriminatory condition on apps, an act of leveraging its dominance in the 
application stores market to enter/protect the relevant market for UPI based 
payments market and may thus contravene the provisions of Section 4 of the Act as 
alleged by the informant. 
III. Adjacency/ Bundling and Tying 
1.16 Many digital firms force consumers to buy related services. For example, food 
delivery apps make it mandatory for restaurants to only use the platform’s delivery 
services. Similarly, a mobile OS encourages the user to their own search engine. 
Upstream TV networks offer bundles of channels to downstream distribution companies 
and earn advertising revenue when their channel is viewed.  First, this leads to the 
consumer not being given an option to choose, and may in fact lead to her paying 
higher prices ultimately. Second, and more importantly from a competitive perspective, 
it may also lead to elimination of rival firms. A classic example of this has been the 
success of Microsoft Office. About two decades ago, Lotus was an important rival of 
Microsoft, particularly its spreadsheet software- Lotus 1-2-3. Later, it became Lotus 
SmartSuite, where the spreadsheet software was clubbed with a word processor, a 
presentation software, database software, and an organizer-quite similar to Microsoft 
Office Suite. However, what allowed Microsoft to beat Lotus was largely this: Microsoft 
bundled its entire Office Suite to its Windows Operating System. Lotus could not keep 
up with the transition from 16 to 32-bit applications on Windows 95. Microsoft, to this 
date, largely stands undefeated in the desktop applications market. That was the 1990s. 
Bundling and Tying in new digital markets continues to impact competition. Leading 
players can leverage their market power in one core platform service to another.  

7 
 
 
1.17 While dealing with a case against Google LLC in 2018 that pertained to this 
issue, the CCI in its order directing investigation noted that, 
…mandatory pre-installation of entire GMS suite under MADA (Mobile Application 
Distribution Agreement) amounts to imposition of unfair condition on the device 
manufacturers and thereby in contravention of Section 4(2)(a)(i) of the Act. It also 
amounts to prima facie leveraging of Google’s dominance in Play Store to protect the 
relevant markets such as online general search in contravention of Section 4(2)(e) of 
the Act. 
IV.  Data Usage 
1.18 Data is the driving force of the digital economy. Digital firms work through 
computer algorithms and those run using massive databases of consumer and business 
information. Monopolistic control over data, inevitably leads to a monopolistic digital 
market. Imagine if there was only one factory that was possible in a physical market. All 
firms would then rush to build large factories, and the player that has the largest factory 
would quickly push out all other players. In digital markets, due to network effects, as 
more and more users get on a platform, the more data the platform collects, and then 
processes. A key issue with digital platforms is that of the monopolistic usage of this 
data. Digital platforms have become vast repositories of consumer as well as business 
data. The concern here is that leading platforms may leverage that position and put 
consumer preference data to their own use. This may give the platform an upper-hand 
in the digital market. This also enables these platforms to collect and store large 
amounts of data for comprehensively tracking and profiling end customers and business 
users. Privileged data from one market may be, thus, used by a leading platform in 
another market to gain competitive advantage. This further leads to the position of the 
leading platform getting entrenched. Second, the use of data needs to be seen as a 
zero-price or non-price factor that can hamper privacy. A competitive digital business 
environment must not only ensure an equal relationship between the leading platforms 
or Big Tech companies and its business users, but must also ensure data privacy. 
 
1.19 It was highlighted by the Informant in Case 16 of 2021 of the CCI, involving food 
delivery applications, 
…that Swiggy and Zomato collect data from customers based on their past purchases 
and uses that data to customise the offerings being made to each consumer…Thus, the 

8 
 
data they possess also strengthens their market positioning, dissuading new players 
from entering the relevant market.  
V. Acquisitions and Mergers 
1.20 One recurrent issue in digital markets concerns the risk of so-called ‘killer 
acquisitions’ or of large firms buying highly valued start-ups without the transaction 
being subject to merger control rules that focus upon turnover. In the choice between 
‘Build versus Buy’, the larger platforms tend to pick the latter, thereby disallowing the 
smaller firms to grow beyond a certain limit, in the digital markets. While mergers may 
be vertical or horizontal, it may in fact be conglomerate mergers that are most likely to 
lead to competition concerns. 
 
1.21 As per current competition law, the Commission reviews mergers and 
acquisitions on two grounds: assets and turnover. Due to this reason, many high-value 
deals between Big Tech firms in India have escaped scrutiny because the parties 
involved have had few assets and low turnover. Importantly, due to this reason, 
Facebook`s acquisition of WhatsApp in 2014 for $19 billion, for example, required no 
CCI clearance. 
VI. Pricing/ Deep Discounting 
1.22 A common concern peculiar to e-commerce sites, but also to food delivery and 
hotel booking sites, is that of huge discounts offered on leading platforms. However, 
there is a lack of transparency about the basis of these discounts. Platforms practice 
tactics like ‘dynamic pricing’ (tracking consumer demand and preference data and 
raising prices when demand is high), and bogus sales and markdowns (inflating price 
and then offering a ‘sale’ or ‘discount’). Such practices and discounts lead to service 
providers losing control over the final price, as the authority to decide on discount rates 
rests with the platform. In the case of below-cost pricing, the ability of offline players to 
sell and make profits also stands impaired. 
 
1.23 In a 2019 case order, involving e-commerce websites, Amazon and Flipkart, the 
issue of deep discounting was also raised by the Informant:- 
Flipkart provides deep discounts to a select few preferred sellers (such as 
Omnitech Retail) on its platform which adversely impacts non-preferred sellers...(it 
is) alleged that there is evidence in the form of communications from Flipkart to its 

9 
 
sellers stating that it would incur a part of the cost during the Big Billion Days 
(BBD) sales or Diwali sales etc. However, no such opportunity is available to other 
sellers who are, thus, unable to compete with such preferred sellers....Similar 
allegations of deep discounts by Amazon to the detriment of non-preferred sellers 
have been levelled. Further, the fact that Amazon and these preferred sellers have 
the same contact details are also evidence of linkage between them. Moreover, 
Amazon has its own private label brands which are sold only through these 
preferred sellers.  
VII.  Exclusive Tie-ups 
1.24 One of the most common anti-competitive behaviours on part of e-commerce 
platforms is that of exclusive arrangements. An e-commerce platform may decide to 
enter into an agreement with a brand, to allow sale of the brand’s products on its 
platform, absolutely exclusively. This not only hampers with the business of other e-
commerce platform but may also lead to losses for brick-and-mortar sellers. A related 
phenomenon is that of platform price parity clause in agreements, linked closely to Anti 
Competitive Practice (ACP) 6, mentioned above. This implies that a platform may 
disallow a business user to sell at lower rates on any other platform, except its own. 
This ultimately leads to increased prices for the end-user and inflation. 
 
1.25 Many cases of exclusive tie-ups have been reported to the CCI. In Case 16 of 
2021, the Commission dealt with food delivery apps, Swiggy and Zomato. The 
Commission was of the view that these platforms, by way of such clauses, hinder the 
entry of new players in the market. In Case 40 of 2019, the Commission is looking at 
allegations made by the Informant against Flipkart and Amazon. It was averred that 
these platforms engage in preferential listing and exclusive tie-ups with certain sellers 
by using tags like, “Assured Seller” and “Fulfilled”. In this regard, it was noted by the 
Commission that, 
…it can be prima facie inferred that there appears to be exclusive partnership 
between smartphone manufacturers and e-commerce platforms for exclusive 
launch of smartphone brands. Thus, exclusive launch coupled with preferential 
treatment to a few sellers and the discounting practices create an ecosystem that 
may lead to an appreciable adverse effect on competition.  
VIII.  Search and Ranking Preferencing 
1.26 Users search using keywords on any platform and receive results based on 
algorithms. Organic search results should return products/services without any bias-  

10 
 
top selling or highest rated results on the top. However, if any other products take 
precedence, it indicates search bias- in favour of sponsored products, or orders fulfilled 
by the marketplace itself. 
 
1.27 In the same 2019 case involving Amazon and Flipkart, CCI had noted that, 
The issue of preferential listing should also be viewed in conjunction with the 
foregoing (exclusive tie-ups). Competition on the platforms may get influenced in 
favour of the exclusive brands and sellers, through higher discounts and 
preferential listing. Thus, the allegations are interconnected, and warrant a holistic 
investigation to examine how the vertical agreements operate, what are the key 
provisions of such agreements and what effects do they have on competition. 
Given that both the major platforms are stated to follow the same mechanics in 
terms of their exclusive tie ups and preferential terms with brands/sellers, 
competition between the platforms prima facie does not play a role in mitigating the 
potential adverse effect on competition on the platforms. 
IX.  Restricting third-party Applications 
1.28 Gatekeepers have been found to restrict the installation or operation of third-
party applications. An example of this is the anti-steering provision discussed earlier. 
Apart from payments, an operating system, for instance, may altogether prevent users 
from utilising the services of an application other than its own.  
 
1.29 In a 2021 case against Apple Inc., CCI noted, 
that App Store is the only channel for app developers to distribute their apps to iOS 
consumers which is pre-installed on every iPhone and iPad. Further, third party 
app stores are not allowed to be listed on Apple’s App Store as the developer 
guidelines as well as agreement prohibits app developers from offering such 
services. Article 3.2.2(i) of the App Store Review Guidelines restricts the app 
developers from “Creating an interface for displaying third-party apps, extensions, 
or plug-ins similar to the App Store or as a general- interest collection”. Further, 
Article 3.3.2 of the Apple Developer Program License Agreement inter alia 
provides that “...the Application must not create a store or storefront for other code 
or applications...”.These restrictions imposed by Apple forecloses the market for 
app stores for iOS for potential app distributors. It prima facie results in denial of 
market access for the potential app distributors/app store developers in violation of 
Section 4(2)(c) of the Act. 
X.  Advertising Policies 
1.30 With digital markets, marketing has also become largely digital. Consumer data 
can be leveraged with the help of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning(AI/ML) for 

11 
 
cost-effective targeted advertising. Competition agencies are increasingly concerned 
about competition in digital advertising markets, with a number of recent market studies 
highlighting a range of potential competition concerns. In particular, there appears to be 
increasing market concentration, consolidation and integration across many levels of 
the supply chain. In regard to digital advertising, there rises the issue of self-
preferencing, as well as conflict of interest, when platforms operate at all levels of ad-
tech supply chain. 
 
1.31 In 2021 case, while dealing with a case against Alphabet Inc. regarding online 
news publishing, the CCI prima facie noted that, 
Based on the information available, it appears that the instant information 
highlights the alleged bargaining power imbalance that flows from the alleged 
position enjoyed by Google as a necessary trading partner for digital news 
publishers in accessing online audience as well as in generating digital ad 
revenue. The case also brings forth the issue of alleged lack of transparency and 
information asymmetry in the ad tech services provided by Google, which does not 
allow publishers to optimize the yield on their ad inventory. 
The Committee took into account the responses of a number of relevant parties and 
stakeholders, to better understand competitive conduct in digital markets. The following 
Chapter presents those responses.  
 

12 
 
 
Chapter II 
Major Issues Discussed 
2.1. During the course of multiple meetings with the representatives from the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, Competition Commission of India, various industry associations, 
industry stakeholders and major digital companies across industries, the Committee 
deliberated upon the ten ACPs. Their submissions with regard to those were as follows: 
I. Anti-Steering Provisions 
2.2.  Stakeholders criticized anti-steering policies, terming them anti-competitive and 
guilty of stifling consumer choice as because of these policies, businesses cannot shift 
to third-party providers, even if they were offering more functionality and options than 
the ones provided by Big Tech companies. 
2.3. The following was submitted before the Committee by industry associations: 
The Apple App Store prohibits developers from contacting users outside the store 
about alternate options. Although Google Play did not strictly enforce its policies 
earlier, it announced in September 2020 that it would also mandate its own billing 
system and bar all other payment methods. Because of a strong push back from 
developers, they have postponed this measure multiple times in India - first until March 
31, 2022 and now to October 31, 2022. However, Google is enforcing these rules in 
other countries, and will soon remove apps for non-compliance. These anti-steering 
provisions affect developers by removing their choice of payment systems, and 
potentially giving the app stores access to sensitive commercial data. It also makes 
the commissions unavoidable, thereby adversely affecting developer bottom lines. 
The industry representatives have put forward that ‘if anti-steering provisions are not 
enforced, businesses would continue to have the freedom to choose bespoke or 
feature-rich alternatives for their services. A proliferation of such services would also 
mean that there would be greater incentives for innovation in the market. Accordingly, 
forced anti-steering results in anti-competitive exclusionary practice and therefore needs 
to be specifically declared anti-competitive.’ 
II. Platform Neutrality/ Self-Preferencing 
2.4. Domestic industry representatives submitted the following before the Committee 

13 
 
on the issue of self-preferencing: 
App stores enable the discovery of apps through their search function. Search results 
are a very important way for developers to gain new customers, as apps listed at the 
top of the results are likely to get clicks and downloads. This opens an avenue for 
Apple and Google to misuse their position as operators of app stores to distort 
competition by giving an advantage in rankings to their own apps over those of 
competitors. 
2.5.  Google India in its response furnished the following with regard to platform 
neutrality: 
Google has formal policies prohibiting the company-wide sharing of identifiable data 
about third-party apps gathered by Play. This third-party data is not shared with 
Google’s first party app developers to unfairly advantage them, or for purposes other 
than benefit across the Play and Android ecosystems. Further, Android is available 
without any proprietary apps, including from Google. Google’s own apps are licensed 
separately from Android and share ‘shelf space’ on devices with non-Google apps. In 
addition, Play’s developer policies – including the requirement that apps use Play’s 
billing system for in-app purchases of digital goods, policies of discovery and ranking – 
apply to all apps on Play, including Google’s own apps. 
2.6. The following has been furnished by Amazon India with regards to the same 
issue: 
Amazon India is not a competitor to sellers on the Amazon India Marketplace. Amazon 
India is governed by the FDI Policy and strictly complies with that policy. This means 
Amazon India cannot and does not assume a ‘dual role’ on its marketplace by offering 
retail products for sale to consumers. Amazon India’s role is limited to acting as an 
intermediary or a conduit connecting a seller to a buyer through its technology 
interface, meaning Amazon India is not a competitor to sellers on the marketplace.  
It was further stated, Amazon India must provide, and does provide services to sellers 
‘at arm’s length and in a fair and non-discriminatory manner’ under the FDI Policy. 
Amazon India’s interests are aligned with those of its sellers. As Amazon India is 
purely a marketplace, Amazon India only succeeds if its sellers succeed. Amazon 
India’s economic incentives are therefore to treat all sellers fairly and to give all sellers 

14 
 
the same opportunities to succeed. Amazon India therefore has no incentive to act 
unfairly by favoring one or more sellers because this would destroy seller trust in the 
Amazon India Marketplace. 
2.7. The Competition Commission of India representatives during the sitting of the 
Committee held on 28.04.2022 stated the following with regard to platform neutrality: 
“…this is a very fundamental issue because this kind of ensures that the markets 
remain contestable and competitive but by the presence of these Big Tech companies, 
this is under question.” 
2.8. Further, Chairperson, Competition Commission of India on the same issue 
during the sitting held on 28.07.2022 stated: 
“If somebody makes a complaint that they are not following platform neutrality, we 
should have a faster mechanism to deal with that issue. We cannot go into an 
investigation and then go through a long-drawn process of one and a half years. It has 
to be a very quick process. We have to lay down not only the unit structure and 
contours but also the methodology how it can be done faster because he has clearly 
violated.” 
III. Bundling and Tying 
2.9. The industry representatives submitted the following before the Committee: 
Both the dominant app stores offer a multitude of services beyond any standard 
payment gateway available in the market (which typically charge 1-2% commission as 
processing fee). Beyond payment processing, app stores also offer services such as 
app review, secure download, support in app development etc. In fact, the majority of 
the developers operating in India do not use the proprietary billing system of Google, 
and yet are heavily and intrinsically dependent on Google Play Store for their discovery 
and review process. But by bundling these services into one take it or leave it package, 
app stores make it difficult for developers to establish the fair fee for each service, while 
also reducing their ability to pursue other alternatives. The size and ubiquity of the 
dominant app stores, which benefit immensely from being pre-installed on their own 
operating systems, makes it almost impossible to negotiate the quantum or threshold for 
commissions. 

15 
 
It was further stated that, ‘Digital firms could leverage their market power in one market 
to expand into other markets and foreclose competitors therein. In the presence of 
substantial entry barriers, firms could do so by linking/bundling their main product or 
services to other complementary products or services to which they intend to expand 
their market position.’ 
2.10. Google India with regard to bundling furnished the following: 
Google offers phone makers the option of preloading a suite of popular Google apps 
(such as Search, Chrome, Play, Maps and Gmail), which help ensure the phone ‘just 
works’, right out of the box. Phone makers don’t have to include our services and 
they’re also free to pre-install competing apps alongside ours. 
Further, negotiations between device manufacturers and app developers for pre-
installation are highly competitive. On Android, device manufacturers can select which 
apps and app stores they would like consumers to have installed on the device “out of 
the box.” Manufacturers can monetize this channel through pre-installation deals with 
app developers. 
2.11.  The Competition Commission of India in its background note has furnished the 
following: 
If the company makes the ‘must have’ product available only when its other products 
are also taken in a composite bundle, such leveraging can harm competition. Also, the 
Commission is currently looking at a case, where it has been alleged that in order to be 
able to pre-install the ‘must have’ application store, the OEMs have to mandatorily pre-
install a bouquet of other applications of the same company. This bouquet contains 
applications, which have competing options in the same category, for instance, search 
or video streaming apps. However, once pre-installed, users may lose the incentive to 
download these competing apps. They may exhibit a behavioural bias towards the 
already available apps. This can lead to foreclosure of competition and can also deter 
innovative entry. 
And, during the sitting of the Committee held on 28.04.2022, Chairperson, Competition 
Commission of India stated: 
“I would like to say that wherever bundling or tying up is resulting in anti-competitive 
activities in contravention of the Act, definitely, we are preventing it. In some cases, 

16 
 
bundling is efficiency enhancing. In some cases, it is against competition. So, we are 
taking a very nuanced view.” 
IV. Data Usage 
2.12. The data advantage of market leaders, which/who have amassed wealth of 
personal data over a period of time, overshadows the offerings of newer platforms in 
terms of quality and data-fed personalisation. As a result, the big tends to get bigger, 
while a small entrant struggles to attain a critical mass of users and user data. 
2.13. The industry representatives submitted the following before the Committee: 
Big Tech companies in the digital market are fuelled by data. The main source of their 
power is the collection and hoarding of the digital data that fuels the software algorithms 
that deliver the companies’ services. The more users or businesses get onboarded to a 
tech giant’s business, the more data Big Tech is likely to accumulate. With their data 
pool constantly increasing, the tech giants continue to entrench their position in the 
digital market. 
Further, the Big Tech impose unfair and discriminatory conditions/initiatives including 
prominent placement results in driving more downloads/ traffic/ transactions on their 
Payments App. It allows the Big Tech to generate more user data which in turn 
empower them to innovate and offer better features than their competitors. This creates 
a vicious cycle and gives The Big Tech companies insurmountable scale advantages, 
thereby (and at the same time) creating barriers to the entry and expansion of smaller 
and newer innovative companies. 
2.14. Apple India with regard to the above issue furnished: 
Apple designs its products and services according to the principle of privacy by design 
and collects only the minimum amount of data necessary to provide users with a 
product or service. Using on-device intelligence, Apple products are designed to 
minimize the amount of data that leaves a user’s device. Data minimization both 
enhances privacy and puts the user in control of their data. Apple receives certain data 
in order to fulfill a user’s request, including transaction information, or to improve or 
personalize the service to the user. This data is associated with a random identifier and 
does not identify the user. Any data that is encrypted, not personally identifiable, or not 

17 
 
linked to the user’s ID is either not readily accessible by Apple or otherwise not readily 
associable with the user. 
2.15. Facebook India on the same issue furnished: 
While data is important, there is a risk of overstating its contestability and value. Data is 
ubiquitous and easily replicable - one firms’ collection of data does not preclude 
another’s collection of identical or substitutable data. By and large, data is not ‘collected’ 
but actually generated by businesses as they build the ability to capture signals through 
their services and technologies. Any business is in a position to create its own data 
space in such a way. But it can also purchase previously generated data. Indeed, data 
is widely available for generation or purchase. Indeed, Meta’s competitors also have 
access to comparable data to design and innovate new products and services that 
compete with Meta. 
2.16. The following has been furnished by the Competition Commission of India in its 
background note: 
The role of data in the current competition cannot be understated. Most of the Big Tech 
companies possess vast amount of data along with the capability to process it with 
artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms. Acquisition of other companies 
that possess any kind of data by these big technology companies may result in 
competitive advantage, especially compared to the new entrants in the market. 
2.17. Further, during the sitting of the Committee held on 28.04.2022, the following 
was stated by representatives of Competition Commission of India: 
“Another contributing factor has been the scale of advantages that these big tech 
companies enjoy and particularly in the context of access to data. Now, the more and 
more data that they have access to enable them to provide better services but, at the 
same time, it gives them a very huge competitive advantage against other businesses 
and over a period of time, this advantage increases exponentially and eventually 
becomes a big entry barrier. So, this is another characteristic which has led to this 
phenomenon of big tech companies.” 
V. Mergers and Acquisitions 
2.18. Competition Commission of India in their background note have furnished the 
following: 

18 
 
     The Merger and Acquisitions involving Big Tech companies that are notified to the 
Commission are assessed within the overall framework provided under the Competition 
Act, keeping in view the aforesaid characteristics of the digital markets. In case of 
identification of any likelihood of appreciable adverse effect on competition, post the 
assessment of combination, the interventions are usually in the form of modifications. 
These modifications can be in the form of structural remedies such as divestment, or 
may entail behavioural commitments on the part of combining parties. 
 
In 2018, Government of India constituted Competition Law Review Committee (‘CLRC’) 
to ensure that the Competition Act ‘is in sync with the needs of strong economic 
fundamentals’ which has observed that certain combinations (mergers & acquisitions), 
such as transactions forming part of digital markets, do not meet traditional asset 
thresholds but may still have an effect on competition. Accordingly, it proposed that an 
enabling provision empowering the Government to introduce necessary thresholds 
including a deal-value threshold for merger notification may be provided. The 
Committee also observed that certain jurisdictions like the European Union accept 
remedies from parties to antitrust disputes.  These remedies may be in the form of 
settlements and commitments. The Committee endorsed such a mechanism to ensure 
speedy resolution of cases. It recommended that the Competition Act be amended to 
empower Competition Commission of India to allow settlements and commitments for 
certain types of anti-competitive agreements and for abuse of dominance. 
2.19. With regard to mergers and acquisitions, representatives of Facebook India 
deposed as below during the sitting of the Committee held on 23.08.2022: 
“…mergers or acquisitions are legitimate valid business practices across the industry, 
across the economy, and in the technology and digital space. We will have start-ups, we 
will have entrepreneurs who would come up with new ideas, new innovation, and for 
them to have the ability and incentive to innovate, acquisitions are very important 
business element that are available to these entrepreneurs as they move it. It allows 
them to recoup their investments, it helps improve the products, and also it brings in 
talent. So, even for a company like Meta, if there is an acquisition, it is not because we 
are killing competition but it is because we want to nurture it, we want to bring in that 
talent into that company, and thereby, improve our services. At the end of the day, it is 
innovation which is the most important factor which we all of us continuously strive for.” 

19 
 
2.20. The Chairperson, Competition Commission of India on the issue stated the 
following during the sitting of the Committee held on 28.07.2022: 
“One notable thing is that we are not yet able to capture certain mergers and 
acquisitions because they do not meet the threshold of assets and turnover. That is why 
one of the enabling provisions in CLRC recommendations is to bring a deal value 
because these digital markets are asset light and they do not have a turnover. So, a 
deal value will come. In case it crosses that particular threshold, then they will have to 
come to CCI for approval.” 
 
VI. Pricing / Deep Discounting 
2.21. Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their post evidence replies furnished the following 
with regard to deep price discounting: 
Section 4 of the Act prohibits abuse of dominant position by enterprises. Imposing 
unfair or discriminatory price in purchase or sale (including predatory price) by 
dominant players, is considered, amongst others, as an abusive conduct. Predatory 
price has been further explained as sale of goods or provision of services, at a price 
which is below the cost of production of the goods or provision of services, with a view 
to reduce competition or eliminate the competitors. Also, Section 3 of the Act prohibits 
anti-competitive agreements, which cause or are likely to cause an appreciable 
adverse effect on competition.  
 Deep discounting by platforms with market power may be a concern when discounts 
are discriminatory and when they push prices to below-cost levels in certain product 
categories and affect offline and online retailer’s ability to compete. 
  
The Commission/ CCI has received cases against certain major e-commerce 
companies alleging inter alia deep discounting/ predatory pricing.  In cases where 
prima facie contraventions of the provisions of the Competition Act have been 
observed, the Commission/ CCI has ordered investigations, which are presently 
pending before the Office of the Director General.  
 Further, in the market study on e-Commerce conducted by the Commission/ 
CCI, it suggested that the marketplace platforms should adopt self-regulatory 
measures on deep discounting policies by bringing out clear and transparent policies 

20 
 
on discounts, including inter alia the basis of discount rates funded by platforms for 
different products/suppliers and the implications of participation/non-participation in 
discount schemes. 
2.22. Amazon India furnished the following with regards to the issue: 
The Amazon India Marketplace is governed by the FDI Policy which stipulates that the 
marketplace cannot and it does not directly or indirectly influence the sale price of 
goods or services, and we constantly endeavor to maintain a level playing field 
providing equal services to all similarly placed sellers. Decisions about the prices and 
products sold on the Amazon India Marketplace, including on product assortment 
offered by sellers, are taken independently by the sellers. 
2.23. Uber India representatives during the sitting of the Committee on 23.08.2022 on 
the issue of pricing submitted the following: 
“The pricing which is provided in Uber platform is transparently published as a rate card 
which is available to drivers. In a certain time of a day, the pricing does vary dynamically 
and that information in real time shared with the drivers. In addition, we also share with 
the drivers across the country upfront the destination in which the dispatch has been 
provided to them. With all this information, they can choose to do the trip or not to do 
the trip. So, they have that flexibility to do that.” 
2.24. In the context of pricing, the issue of billing policies and commissions was also 
discussed.  
2.25. Industry representatives submitted the following before the Committee: 
Big Tech app hosting platforms charge as high as up to a 30% fee for in-app 
purchases and subscription fees, which results in an unsustainable business model for 
apps for small Indian entrepreneurs. Some Big Tech companies are already charging 
and others have announced plans to charge this fee. 
Further, the Big Tech Companies have become gatekeeper firms with tactics 
undermining the natural forces of competition. With one simple policy change 
tomorrow, the Big Tech companies can widen the net to include other internet/ digital 
businesses and force them to pay certain percentage of commission. It would appear 
that Indian startups literally have to pay taxes to the Big Tech companies to run their 
digital business in India. 

21 
 
2.26. Stakeholders further elaborated as follows: 
Both Google and Apple allow apps selling physical goods to use third party payment 
services and do not charge any additional service fees on the in-app transactions. But 
for certain app categories selling digital goods, there is an additional app store fee 
which is modelled as a set rate of commission on purchases of paid apps and in-app 
purchases (IAPs). These app stores do not provide any additional service to the app 
developers who sell digital goods on the app store via paid downloads or in-app 
purchases, yet, these app stores compulsorily mandate the use of their proprietary 
billing system and also charge a high commission on each transaction. The 
commissions charged vary depending on the type of app and sometimes, according to 
the jurisdiction where it operates. The Apple App Store charges either 15 or 30% 
commission on purchases of paid apps and IAPs, depending on the type of app. 
Similarly, Google Play charges either 15 or 30%. 
2.27. Google India furnished the following response in this regard: 
Due to unique circumstances with the payments landscape in India, in October 2020, 
we had announced 31st March, 2022 as the timeline for developers in India to integrate 
with Google Play’s billing system. In December, 2021, we extended this timeline to 31st 
October, 2022 to provide developers in India the required product support for recurring 
payments through convenient user payment systems, including UPI and wallets, and to 
also provide them more time in light of the changes to India’s recurring digital payments 
guidelines. Therefore, presently developers in India who have not yet implemented 
Google Play’s billing system have time till 31 Oct, 2022 to do so. 
Further, charging a service fee is a common industry practice across distribution 
platforms. App stores such as Apple App Store, Samsung Galaxy Store, Amazon App 
Store, and Microsoft Store, all have policies that require developers to pay fees and use 
the platform’s in-app payment system to purchase in-app digital products. Our service 
fee is competitive with those of rival distribution channels - the Competition and Markets 
Authority (UK’s Competition Authority)’s Interim Report into Mobile Ecosystems, for 
example, found that Google’s rates were similar to those set by other app stores. 
Also, it is important to note that the vast majority of developers do not pay a service fee. 
The service fee is only charged when a developer chooses to charge users for their app 

22 
 
or offer digital content for purchases within their app and the user makes the purchase. 
This means that only 3% of developers are subject to the service fee, while the 
remaining 97% can distribute their app on Play and utilize all the developer tools and 
services at no cost. 
2.28. Apple India representatives during the sitting held on 23.08.2022 deposed the 
following before the Committee: 
“87 per cent of Indian developers on the app store do not pay Apple any commission at 
all. For the small number of apps they do, we have only made the app store a better 
deal for those developers overtime including with the small business programme which 
was launched in 2021 which cuts our commission to half of those who are eligible. 
Around 99 per cent of Indian developers are eligible for this programme. Finally, 17 
developers, India’s largest and the most successful, pay 30 per cent commission. There 
are 21000 Indian apps or app developers who have live apps on the app store as a 
percentage of those who pay 30 per cent is a fraction of a fraction of a single per cent, it 
is 0.08 per cent people pay the 30 per cent commission. It is 17 out of 21,000 
developers who have live apps.” 
2.29. Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their post evidence replies furnished the following 
with regard to billing policies of Big Techs: 
CCI has directed separate investigation(s) against Apple and Google in respect of 
imposition of mandatory use of their respective billing system, on app developers, for 
distribution of paid apps & in-app purchases which restrict the choice available to the 
app developers to select a payment processing system of their choice especially 
considering when Apple/ Google charge a commission which range upto 30% (15% in 
certain cases) for all paid apps or contents offered through apps.  
Further, such ‘allegedly’ high fees may also increase the cost of competitors of Apple/ 
Google affecting their competitiveness vis-à-vis verticals of Apple/ Google (the fee in 
respect of which, in any case would be internalized). Such a policy of the application 
store (of Apple/ Google) may disadvantage competitors in the downstream markets, 
such as music streaming, e-books/ audiobooks etc. If the application developers, in 
response, raise their subscription fees to offset these costs or remove/reduce 
premium/paid subscription offers for users, it may affect user experience, cost and 

23 
 
choice. Such conditions imposed by the app stores limit the ability of the app 
developers to offer payment processing solutions of their choice to the users for app 
purchases as well as in-app purchases.  
VII. Exclusive Tie-ups 
2.30. Competition Commission of India in their background note furnished: 
Exclusive tie-ups by major digital platforms can also foreclose markets and constrict 
competition in certain circumstances. 
An exclusivity arrangement between a dominant platform and a business user of the 
platform with significant market power in the downstream market can possibly allow 
them to bolster their respective strengths, but does not augur well for the market or its 
other participants.  
VIII. Search and Ranking Preferencing 
2.31.  Keywords are words or phrases that are used to match ads with the terms 
people are searching for in the search bar on the Big Tech Company. Selecting high-
quality, relevant keywords for advertising campaigns can help advertisers reach the 
right customers at the right time. A keyword can be a single word or a phrase. 
2.32. Industry representatives submitted the following in this regard: 
Bidding on company brand keywords on search engine platforms is currently allowed, 
which we believe is a copyright violation. As a result, brands and products which are 
IPR registered and licensed are forced to shell out extra money to safeguard their own 
company name, when the brand name is being used as a keyword in the search. 
Further, allowing bidding on keywords that may be registered trademarks of brands 
allows fraudsters to use this to target innocent customers by bidding on BFSI 
companies’ trademarks. The misleading search results with the search query for 
Banking, financial services and insurance (BFSI) companies appear on leading Digital 
Advertisement Platforms, search engine platform, and Social Media platforms. Further, 
these search results appear as advertisements. 
2.33. Google India with regards to the search and ranking preferencing furnished the 
following: 

24 
 
Google’s Keyword Bidding Policy, which allows bidding on trademarked terms, 
enhances user choice, enables Indian websites to promote competing goods to those 
offered by the trademark owner, and is in compliance with Indian Trademark law. 
Advertisers bid on keywords in an auction system for the opportunity to display their ads 
to users searching on the Google search engine. The placement of ads is based on a 
real time online auction mechanism. Whether a keyword bid results in Ad being placed, 
and, if so, where it is placed among other Ads (i.e. its “rank”) depends on many different 
factors, of which price is only one consideration. Other factors include the quality of the 
landing page and the ad. An ad that rarely receives clicks–which could be due to users’ 
perceptions of irrelevant or unappealing content–would have a lower quality score. In 
simple terms, an advertiser with content that is responsive to a search query will not 
have to bid as much as an advertiser with content that is not responsive or useful to the 
consumer. Google’s Ads pricing is both dynamic and dependent upon consumer 
behavior. The winning bidder of the auction that determines advertising placement on 
Google search results pages won’t necessarily pay its full bid amount, but only the 
minimum amount needed to maintain that position in the auction. 
2.34. Microsoft India on the same issue furnished the following: 
For Microsoft’s search functionality (Bing), there is no set price charged for sequencing as 
each individual advertiser decides the amount it would like to bid for specific keywords. 
This allows the auction process to remain competitive. Additionally, sequencing is 
important and helpful to search users in situations where a trademark term has become a 
common name for a certain product, such as the term “Kleenex[,]” which has become a 
common term for facial tissue.  
It is the advertiser’s responsibility to comply with Microsoft’s advertising policies, including 
its intellectual property policy, which requires advertisers to ensure its keywords and ad 
content do not infringe or violate the intellectual property rights of others.  
2.35. The Chairperson, Competition Commission of India during the sitting held on 
28.07.2022 submitted before the Committee: 
“…there should be transparency in the search ranking… Today, there is no law of the 
land that the search ranking has to be transparent.” 
IX. Restricting Third-Party Applications 

25 
 
2.36.  During the discussions with the industry representatives with regard to 
restricting third party applications, it was brought to the attention of the Committee that 
Google puts out alert while installing third party Apps saying that it is a risky application, 
while Apple does not even allow any third-party apps to be installed on the i-phone.  
X. Advertising Policies 
2.37.  Big Tech company's ad business can be a monopolist threat, because it owns 
every step in a system that connects ad sellers and buyers, which gives The Big Tech 
company an unfair edge over the market. 
2.38. The industry representatives submitted the following before the Committee: 
A Big Tech company is the dominant player in Search advertising. All websites would 
have The Big Tech company crawlers ( a program used by search engines to collect 
data from the internet) placed on its website so that they get traffic through The Big 
Tech company search results. By requiring advertisers to place crawlers in their 
websites, The Big Tech company has been able to not just perform the best in terms of 
Search Advertising but also amass copious amounts of consumer/user activity and 
data. 
Further, the Big Tech company’s Developer Policy permits apps to host advertisements 
pertaining to skill-based contests, and tournaments if, amongst other criteria, the app 
hosting the advertisement does not have any ownership interest in the advertised 
services. 
Furthermore, on bargaining power imbalances, particularly in digital news publishing, 
the industry representatives submitted: 
Many countries (such as France, Australia, and Canada) have introduced or proposed 
specific legislation in order to provide a level playing field for news publishers relative to 
digital platforms. The Australian News Media and Digital Platforms Mandatory 
Bargaining Code 2021 has set up clear bargaining guidelines. The code addresses 
bargaining power imbalances between digital platforms and Australian news 
businesses. The code enables eligible news businesses to bargain individually or 
collectively with digital platforms over payment for the inclusion of news on their 
platforms. The Code has arbitration provisions in the event of negotiating breakdowns 

26 
 
and also provisions for Big-Tech companies for being designated as a monopoly, 
engaged in offering unfair bargains and indulging in anticompetitive practices. 
2.39. Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their post evidence replies furnished the following 
information: 
As of 2021, the revenue generated by digital advertising across India was valued at 
around 246 billion Indian rupees. That same year, India’s total advertising revenue was 
over 700 billion Indian rupees and the country was ranked among the largest 
advertising markets across the world in terms of ad spending. 
The digital ad market will rapidly overtake print as well as television revenues by fiscal 
year 2024. According to these projections, the digital ad revenue in the country will be 
worth almost 540 billion rupees by fiscal year 2024, while the television and print ad 
revenues were projected to reach about 455 billion rupees and 276 billion rupees 
respectively.  These numbers clearly show that India is heading towards a digital 
advertising future. 
As India’s content consumption moved increasingly to online platforms, advertisers 
also followed their audiences to the digital world. As of January 2020, Facebook had 
an advertising reach of around 260 million users across India. This was the largest 
audience base reached via advertising in the country that year, followed by Instagram 
and LinkedIn with a reach of 80 million and 62 million users respectively. 
XI. Ex-Ante Restraint 
2.40. The industry stakeholders pointed out the following in their submission to the 
Committee: 
Large online intermediation services like marketplaces, app stores and other online 
intermediation services in various sectors including mobility, travel, food, content 
sharing etc, act as a critical platform service that connects end users and business 
users. Given the size and critical nature of these platforms, it becomes imperative to 
define what makes a platform a ‘critical service’ before proceeding to other provisions 
regulating the digital market. It is in this background that other legislations dedicated to 
digital markets necessarily define the target platforms, i.e., gatekeepers (or by whatever 
name it may be called). Having a definition of gatekeeper/digital platform in place would 
mean that once information has been filed or a suo-moto case has been picked 

27 
 
pertaining to a gatekeeper, the allegation will have to be tested against the ex-ante 
provisions that will specifically cover the anti-competitive practices of gatekeepers. This 
would help in faster and efficient disposals. 
They further stated that, ‘In India, as in many other countries, the prevailing 
Competition Acts are ex post which means that they are designed to penalise anti-competitive behaviour only after it has already occurred. Unfortunately, given the pace at 
which digital markets move, such ex post measures may be too delayed to prevent 
irreparable harm to affected parties and as a result, ex post monetary penalties are 
unlikely to be fully effective in dealing with the issue.’ 
2.41. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs on the same issue in their post evidence 
replies furnished: 
In the context of the digital sector, the rationale for ex-ante regulation is grounded in 
the imperative of adequately addressing the concerns that arise from 
systemic/structural infirmities of these markets and to be able to do so rapidly enough 
before the platforms can entrench and leverage their position by eliminating potential 
competition and/or by disadvantaging users.  
Case-by-case antitrust adjudication allows for a nuanced, evidence-based analysis of 
the effect of a specific business conduct. However, the requirement of gathering 
‘sufficient’ evidence to discern the complex effects of conduct and establish liability, 
ensuring procedural fairness in the investigation/adjudication process, and judicial 
review of decisions make this a long route to effectuate regulatory interventions in 
markets. In fast-moving digital markets, protracted litigations and delayed interventions 
could prove to be expensive or even futile.   
Moreover, while being a fact-specific exercise, antitrust enforcement helps devise well-
tailored remedies, such remedies lose their relevance and effectiveness if the 
implementation is not speedy and timely.  
In view of the foregoing, a number of academic and policy papers/reports in several 
jurisdictions, have argued in favour of complementing competition law enforcement 
with some form of ex-ante regulatory framework to ensure timely and effective action 
against risks of anti-competitive practices by critical/large digital platforms in fast-
evolving digital markets. 

28 
 
CCI has been studying the ex-ante measures proposed or already enacted by different 
jurisdictions in order to ascertain the feasibility of adopting the same in the domestic 
framework, institutional mechanism for enforcement and other attendant modalities. 
There could be a separate legislation to provide ex-ante regulatory mechanism. 
2.42. Chairperson, Competition Commission of India during the sitting of the 
Committee held on 28.07.2022 stated as follows: 
‘We strongly feel that ex-ante provisions are required. It is a different issue altogether 
who will be administering it, but we do need it.’ 
2.43.  It may be established, based on the numerous CCI cases, as well as, the discussions 
of the Committee with various representatives and stakeholders, that India needs ex-
ante provisions for digital markets, particularly for the Big-Tech. Many countries have 
already moved forward in this direction. 

29 
 
 
Chapter-III 
Enhancing Competition Law for Digital Markets in India 
3.1. Anti-competitive behaviour in digital markets has been dealt with through ex-post 
provisions in competition law around the world. So is the case with India. However, 
there is an emerging global consensus that it is necessary to identify the leading Big 
Tech players or winners- the Systemically Important Digital Intermediaries (SIDIs) and 
thereafter, subject these to specific ex-ante provisions in order to ensure fair competitive 
conduct in the digital market. In this regard, many countries, as well as the European 
Union have come up with legislation that identify these small number of leading players 
and list regulatory provisions to ensure fair and contestable digital markets. It is 
pertinent to note that while some of these new competition laws are already in force, 
some others are yet to be implemented. The importance of global harmonization of 
digital regulations is immense. Global harmonization reduces the regulatory burden for 
companies while integrating India’s digital ecosystem to global standards. Global 
harmonization is also vitally important for India’s companies so that they can compete 
successfully around the world. Accordingly, excerpts from various competition laws in 
force/proposed legislations for digital markets from across the world dealing with various 
aspects of Anti Competitive practices by Big Tech companies are placed in Annexure-I. 
 
3.2. India’s digital ecosystem is not just likely to become the largest in the world, it 
must also be the most open and innovative. To that end, it is vitally important that every 
digital market that is part of this trillion dollar ecosystem be fair and contestable. As 
global evidence and India’s own digital markets, indicate systemically important digital 
intermediaries require ex-ante competitive restraint. If such restraints are not applied, 
interconnected digital markets will rapidly demonstrate monopolistic outcomes that 
prevent fair competition. This will restrict consumer choice, inhibit business users, and 
prevent the rise of dynamic new companies. Finally, it is also necessary to harmonize 
competition law with the Consumer Protection Act 2020 and the e-commerce rules 
framed thereunder. Since the very purpose of building a robust competition law is to 
safeguard the interests of consumers as regards to fair price and quality. It should also 

30 
 
include a mechanism to ensure fair compensation to the consumers in order to address 
the grievances in cases of not providing a supply of a service or product. 
 
3.3. Much of the economic growth will likely be driven by world-leading digital 
ecosystem that includes large IT/BPO firms, start-ups, ecommerce leaders, FinTech 
companies, and digital public goods such as the India Stack. The world’s leading digital 
companies are also integral members. Thus, India’s digital ecosystem is a vital resource 
serving global humanity. India’s competition law must be enhanced so that it can meet 
the requirements of restraining anti-competitive behaviours in the digital markets. To 
that end, it is also necessary to strengthen the Competition Commission of India to take 
on the new responsibilities. India needs to enhance its competition law to address the 
unique needs of digital markets. Unlike traditional markets, the economic drivers that 
are rampant in digital markets quickly result in a few massive players dominating vast 
swathes of the digital ecosystem.  

31 
 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Traditional Physical Markets vs Digital Markets and Need for ex-ante Regulation 
1. The Committee note that unlike traditional physical markets where returns 
increase only upto maximum efficiency point with increase in size and 
decrease thereafter i.e. there is diminishing return to size, digital markets have 
increasing returns to size, driven primarily by learning and network effects. The 
Committee further understand that digital businesses tend to have rapidly 
diminishing marginal costs as they grow and scaling quickly is the best 
strategy which often results in winner-take-all market outcomes, and hence, 
digital markets ‘tip’ quickly and one or two winners or leading players emerge 
in a short span of time. The Committee take serious note of the peculiar 
challenge posed by the winner-take-all markets where winners emerge within 
3-5 years after the market starts to develop and by the time policies can be 
formulated or anti-competitive behaviours be adjudicated, markets tip in one 
direction and a winner emerges. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 
competitive behaviour needs to be evaluated ex ante before markets end up 
monopolized instead of the ex post evaluation being carried out at present. 
Defining Systemically Important Digital Intermediaries (SIDIs)/Digital Gatekeepers 
2. The Committee opine that, India  must identify the small number of leading 
players or market winners that can negatively influence competitive conduct in 
the digital ecosystem, as ‘Systemically Important Digital Intermediaries (SIDIs)’ 
based on their revenues, market capitalization, and number of active business 
and end users. The Committee further feel that India should also adopt 

32 
 
definitions to ex-ante regulate the behaviour of systemically important digital 
intermediaries as has already been done by various legislations across the 
world. The Committee, thus recommend that stakeholders, working with the 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) and the Central Government, must 
collaborate to arrive at a reasonable definition of SIDIs. Further, the SIDI within 
certain fixed months of its online platform being designated as a ‘Systemically 
Important Digital Intermediary’, and thereafter annually, submit a report to the 
Commission describing in a detailed and transparent manner the measures it 
has implemented to comply with its mandatory obligations. The Systemically 
Important Digital Intermediary operator should also publish on its website a 
non-confidential summary of the report.  
Anti-Steering Provisions 
3.  The Committee understand that anti-steering provisions are clauses whereby 
a platform prevents the business users of the platforms from ‘steering’ its 
consumers to offers other than those provided by the platform that may be 
cheaper or otherwise potentially attractive alternative in terms of a better 
interface. The Committee thus recommend that an SIDI should not condition 
access to the platform or preferred status or placement on the platform on the 
purchase or use of other products or services offered by the platform that are 
not part of or intrinsic to the platform. 
 
Self Preferencing/Platform Neutrality 
4. The Committee understand that self preferencing is a practice whereby a 
platform favours its own services or its subsidiaries directly or indirectly in 
situations when it has a dual role of providing the platform and competing on 
the same platform. The Committee opine that platform neutrality must be 

33 
 
ensured at all costs as otherwise it can lead to a negative effect on 
downstream markets, as their profits decline and an unfair advantage is 
provided to leading player i.e. the platform itself. The Committee strongly 
recommend that an SIDI must not favour its own offers over the offers of its 
competitors when mediating access to supply and sales markets, in particular, 
when presenting its own offers in a more favourable manner; and when 
exclusively pre-installing its own offers on devices or integrating them in any 
other way in offers provided by the platform.  
Bundling and Tying 
5. The Committee note that bundling and tying are prevalent across sectors in the 
digital market creating asymmetry in pricing, binding developers into taking all 
services from app store operators and removing competition from the market 
thus harming innovation and consumer interest. Further, bundling and tying 
enable leading players to leverage their market power in one core platform 
service to another. The Committee, thus, are of the view that an SIDI should not 
force business users or end users to subscribe to, or register with, any further 
services as a condition for being able to use, access, sign up for or registering 
with any of that platform’s core platform service.  
Data Usage 
6. The Committee would like to highlight that the data advantage of market 
leaders, which/who have amassed wealth of personal data over a period of 
time, overshadows the offerings of newer platforms in terms of quality and 
data fed personalization, due to which the big tends to get bigger while a small 
entrant struggles to attain a critical mass of users and user data. Thus, in the 

34 
 
interest of fairplay and to ensure a level playing field, the Committee 
recommend that an SIDI should not: 
a. process, for the purpose of providing online advertising services, personal 
data of end users using services of third parties that make use of core 
services of the platform; 
b. combine personal data from the relevant core service of the platform with 
personal data from any further core services or from any other services 
provided by the platform or with personal data from third-party services; 
c. cross-use personal data from the relevant core service in other services 
provided separately by the platform, including other core services of the 
platform, and vice-versa; and 
d. sign in end users to other services of the platform in order to combine 
personal data, unless the end user has been presented with the specific 
choice and has given consent. 
The Committee further opine that an SIDI should not use, in competition 
with business users, any data that is not publicly available, that is generated 
or provided by those business users in the context of their use of the 
relevant core services of the platform, or of the services provided together 
with the relevant core services, including data generated or provided by the 
end users of those business users. 
Mergers and Acquisitions 
7. The Committee note that certain mergers and acquisitions, particularly in the 
digital space besides having a deep impact on the market are not being 
captured by Competition Commission of India because they do not meet the 
threshold of assets and turnover. The Committee recommend that an SIDI 
should inform the Competition Commission of India of any intended 
concentration, where the merging entities or the target of concentration 

35 
 
provide services in the digital sector or enable the collection of data, 
irrespective of whether it is notifiable to the Commission. Further, the 
Committee are of the view that an SIDI should inform the Commission of such 
a concentration prior to its implementation and following the conclusion of the 
agreement, the announcement of the public bid, or the acquisition of a 
controlling interest. 
Pricing /Deep Discounting 
8. The Committee feel that deep discounting by platforms with market power is a 
matter of concern when discounts are discriminatory and push prices to below 
cost levels in certain product categories, thus affecting offline and online 
retailer’s ability to compete. The Committee thus recommend that an SIDI 
should not limit business users from differentiating commercial conditions on 
its platform, including price, increased commissions, de-listing, and other 
equivalent terms and conditions. Further, an SIDI should not prevent business 
users from offering the same products or services to end users through third-
party online intermediation services or through their own direct online sales 
channel at prices or conditions that are different from those offered through 
the online intermediation services of the platform. 
 
Exclusive Tie-ups 
9. The Committee understand that exclusive tie-ups by major digital platforms 
can foreclose markets and constrict competition and can ultimately lead to 
increased prices for the end-user. The Committee thus recommend that an SIDI 
should not prevent business users from offering the same products or services 

36 
 
to end users through third-party online intermediation services or through their 
own direct online sales channel at prices or conditions that are different from 
those offered through the online intermediation services of the platform, so 
that fair market conditions prevail. 
Search and Ranking Preferencing 
10. The Committee note that keywords which can either be a single word or a 
phrase play a critical role in  search and ranking preferencing as that is what 
are used to match with the terms people are searching for  in the search bar. 
Also, selecting high quality, relevant keywords for advertising campaigns can 
help advertisers reach the right customers at the right time. The Committee 
thus recommend that an SIDI must provide to any third-party undertaking 
providing online search engines, at their request, with access to fair, 
reasonable and non-discriminatory terms to ranking, query, click and view data 
in relation to free and paid search generated by end users on its online search 
engines. Further, any such query, click and view data that constitutes personal 
data should be anonymised and an SIDI, particularly those providing search 
and ranking functionality should not treat the products, services, or lines of 
business of the platform more favourably relative to those of another business 
user and in a manner that is inconsistent with the neutral, fair, and non-
discriminatory treatment of all business users. 
Third-party Applications 
11. The Committee note that gatekeepers have been found to restrict the 
installation or operation of third-party applications. The Committee opine that 
an SIDI should allow and technically enable the installation and effective use of 

37 
 
third-party software applications or software application stores using, or 
interoperating with, its operating system and allow those software applications 
or software application stores to be accessed by means other than the relevant 
core services of that platform. Further, the Committee recommend that an 
exception may only be made in case of preventing data from the SIDI or 
another business user from being transferred to government of a foreign 
adversary. 
Furthermore, an SIDI should, where applicable, not prevent the downloaded 
third-party software applications or software application stores from prompting 
end users to decide whether they want to set that downloaded software 
application or software application store as their default. It should technically 
enable end users who must themselves decide to set that downloaded 
software application or software application store as their default to carry out 
that change easily to ensure transparency. 
Advertising Policies 
12. The Committee note that the Big Tech Company’s ad business is a monopolist 
threat as it owns every step in a system that connects ad sellers and buyers 
and give the Big Tech companies an unfair edge over the market. The 
Committee thus recommend that an SIDI should  not process, for the purpose 
of providing online advertising services, personal data of end users using 
services of third parties that make use of core services of the platform. It 
should provide advertisers, information on a daily basis, regarding price paid 
by the advertiser and the remuneration received by the publisher. It should 
provide advertisers and publishers with access to the performance measuring 

38 
 
tools of the gatekeeper and the data necessary for advertisers and publishers 
to carry out their own independent verification of the advertisements inventory, 
including aggregated and non-aggregated data. 
Further, the Committee note that India has diverse and numerous news 
publishers who get advertising revenues primarily through SIDIs and are of the 
opinion that regulatory provisions are required to ensure that news publishers 
are able to establish contracts with these SIDIs through a fair and transparent 
process. 
 Need for Digital Competition Act 
13. The Committee feel that India needs to enhance its competition law to address 
the unique needs of digital markets. Unlike traditional markets, the economic 
drivers that are rampant in digital markets quickly result in a few massive 
players dominating vast swathes of the digital ecosystem. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the government should consider and introduce a 
Digital Competition Act to ensure a fair, transparent and contestable digital 
ecosystem, which will be a boon not only for our country and its nascent start-
up economy but also for the entire world. 
 
Revamping Competition Commission of India(CCI) 
 
14. The Committee feel that India’s competition law must be enhanced to meet the 
requirements of restraining anti-competitive behaviour in the digital markets 
and hence it is necessary to strengthen the Competition Commission of India 
to take on the new responsibilities. The Committee would thus suggest that a 
specialised Digital Markets unit be established within the Commission, staffed 
with skilled experts, academics and attorneys, enabling the Commission to 

39 
 
closely monitor SIDIs and emerging SIDIs, provide recommendations to the 
Central Government on designating SIDIs, review SIDI compliance and 
adjudicate on digital market cases and conduct for efficient and effective 
monitoring of digital markets per se. While doing so, the Committee would also 
expect that similar unfair practices of other digital players, even though not 
specifically designated as SIDIs, should also be generally kept track of, 
monitored and acted upon in larger consumer interest. 
 
 
 
New Delhi            Shri Jayant Sinha 
19 December 2022                  Chairperson 
28 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)       Standing Committee on Finance 
 

40 
 
Annexure-I 
Global Overview of Ex-ante Provisions 
Defining Systemically Important Digital Intermediaries 
1. The first step towards ensuring fair competitive conduct is the identification of 
those players in the market, that have expanded to an extent where they possibly can 
act as digital ‘gatekeepers’. This implies that these gatekeepers hold such a position in 
the market that they may impact the entry of new players, and hinder the growth of 
existing smaller players. In this regard, some important definitions have been formulated 
in different legislation, around the world: 
 
Digital Markets Act, European Union1:The Act defines ‘gatekeepers’ as: 
 
(a) It has a significant impact on the internal market 
AND 
(b) It provides a core platform service which is an important gateway for 
 business users to reach end users  
AND 
(c) it enjoys an entrenched and durable position in its operations, or it is 
 foreseeable that it will enjoy such a position in the near future. 
 
i. Further, if an undertaking achieves an annual European Union turnover 
equal or above EUR 7.5 billion in each of last three financial years or 
where its average market capitalization amounted to at least EUR 75 
billion in the last financial year, it shall be said to have a significant impact 
on internal market (point (a) above) 
ii. Secondly, undertakings providing ‘core platform services’ shall be those 
which in the last financial year, have at least 45 million monthly active end 
users in the Union and at least 10,000 yearly active business users 
established in the Union (point (b) above). 
                                                 
1 The text of Digital Markets Act has been accessed from:  
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32022R1925&from=EN 

41 
 
iii. Thirdly, (c) above will be met if the user number threshold has been met in 
each of the last three financial years.  
iv. Further, the Act lists down 10‘core platform services’ such as, 
intermediation services, search engines, social networking sites, etc. 
 
American Innovation and Choice Online Bill (AICO), USA2:The Bill uses the term 
‘covered platform’. It means an “online platform that, 
 
(A) has been designated as a covered platform under section 3(d); 
(B) is owned or controlled by a person 4 that— 
(i) is a publicly traded company; and 
(ii)(I) at any point during the 12 months preceding a designation under section 
3(d) or the 12 months preceding the filing of a complaint for an alleged violation 
10 of this Act has at least—  
(aa) 50,000,000 United States based monthly active users on the online platform; 
or  
(bb) 100,000 United States-based monthly active business users on the online 
platform; 
(II) during—  
(aa) the 2 years preceding a designation under section 3(d), or the 2 years 
preceding the filing of a complaint for an alleged violation of this Act—  
(AA) at any point, is owned or controlled by a person with United States net 
annual sales of greater than $550,000,000,000, adjusted for inflation on the basis 
of the Consumer Price Index; or  
(BB) during any 180-day period during the 2-year period, an average market 
capitalization greater than $550,000,000,000, adjusted for inflation on the basis 
of the Consumer Price Index or  
(bb) the 12 months preceding a designation under section 3(d), or at any point 
during the 12 months preceding the filing of a complaint for an alleged violation of 
this Act, has at least 1,000,000,000 worldwide monthly active users on the online 
platform; and  
                                                 
2 The text of the proposed Bill has been accessed from: 
https://www.congress.gov/117/bills/s2992/BILLS-117s2992rs.pdf 

42 
 
(III) is a critical trading partner for the sale or provision of any product or service 
offered on or directly related to the online platform; or  
(C) is owned or controlled by a person that—  
(i) is not a publicly traded company; and 
(ii)(I) at any point during the 12 months preceding a designation under section 
3(d), or the 12 months preceding the filing of a complaint for an alleged violation 
of this Act has at least—  
(aa) 50,000,000 United States based monthly active users on the on line 
platform; or  
(bb) 100,000 United States-based monthly active business users on the online 
platform; 
(II) at any point—  
(aa) during the 2 years preceding a designation under section 3(d), or the 2 years 
preceding the filing of a complaint for an alleged violation of this Act, is owned or 
controlled by a person with earnings, before interest, taxes, depreciation, and 
amortization, in the previous fiscal year of greater than $30,000,000,000, 
adjusted for inflation on the basis of the Consumer Price Index; or  
(bb) during the 12 months preceding a designation under section 3(d), or the 12 
months preceding the filing of a complaint for an alleged violation of this Act, has 
at least 1,000,000,000 worldwide monthly active users on the online platform; 
and  
(III) is a critical trading partner for the sale or provision of any product or service 
offered on or directly related to the online platform. 
 
Response to the Consultation on a New Pro-Competition Regime for Digital 
Markets, UK:The government aims to empower the Digital Markets Unit (housed within 
UK Competition and Market Authority) to designate a small number of firms who are 
very powerful in particular digital activities, such as social media and online search, with 
Strategic Market Status. Although, no such firms have been designated, as yet, with this 
status. The Draft Digital Markets, Competition and Consumer Bill, too, does not identify 
as such firms.  
Having identified the ‘gatekeepers’ or the leading players/ winners of the digital 
market, legislation then subject them to a list to ex-ante provisions. While certain 

43 
 
legislations like the Digital Markets Act of the EU are highly comprehensive and address 
all ten ACPs identified, certain others are limited in scope. 
 
Anti-Steering Provisions 
2. Digital Markets Act (DMA), EU:“The gatekeeper shall not require end users to 
use, or business users to use, to offer, or to interoperate with, an identification service, a 
web browser engine or a payment service, or technical services that support the 
provision of payment services, such as payment systems for in-app purchases, of that 
gatekeeper in the context of services provided by the business users using that 
gatekeeper’s core platform services.” (Chapter 3, Article 5, Clause 7) 
American Innovation and Choice Online Act (AICO), USA: It shall be unlawful 
for a person operating a “covered platform” to condition access to the covered 
platform or preferred status or placement on the covered platform on the purchase 
or use of other products or services offered by the covered platform operator that are 
not part of or intrinsic to the covered platform. (Section 3, Clause 5) 
Open App Markets Act, USA3: “A Covered Company shall not— 
(a) require developers to use or enable an In-App Payment System owned or 
controlled by the Covered Company or any of its business partners as a 
condition of the distribution of an App on an App Store or accessible on an 
operating system; 
(b) require as a term of distribution on an App Store that pricing terms or conditions 
of sale be equal to or more favourable on its App Store than the terms or 
conditions under another App Store; or 
(c) take punitive action or otherwise impose less favourable terms and conditions 
against a developer for using or offering different pricing terms or conditions of 
sale through another In-App Payment System or on another App Store.” (Section 
3, Clause (a)) 
 
Amendments to Telecommunications Act, South Korea: Includes to the list of 
prohibited Acts- 
                                                 
3 The text of the proposed Bill accessed from: 
https://www.congress.gov/117/bills/s2710/BILLS-117s2710rs.pdf 

44 
 
(a) Act of app market business operators forcing a specific method of payment onto 
the Business providers of mobile contents, etc. by taking advantage of their 
position in transactions. (Article 50) 
10th amendment of the German Competition Act: It introduced Section 19a to the 
Act to prohibit certain conduct patterns of platforms with “paramount importance 
for competition across markets”: The Bundeskartellamt may prohibit such 
undertaking from- 
(a) linking the use of an offer provided by the undertaking to the automatic use of 
another offer provided by the undertaking which is not necessary for the use of 
the former offer, without giving the user of the offer sufficient choice as to 
whether and how the other offer is to be used (Section 19(a), Clause (2)(3)) 
(b) refusing the interoperability of products or services or data portability, or making 
it more difficult, and in this way impeding competition; (Section 19(a), Clause 
(2)(5)) 
Platform Neutrality/ Self-Preferencing 
3. DMA, EU: The gatekeeper shall not treat more favourably, in ranking and related 
indexing and crawling, services and products offered by the gatekeeper itself than 
similar services or products of a third party. The gatekeeper shall apply transparent, fair 
and non-discriminatory conditions to such ranking. (Chapter III, Article 6, Clause 5) 
American Innovation and Choice Online Act (AICO), USA: It shall be unlawful for 
a person operating a covered platform in or affecting commerce to, 
(i) preference the products, services, or lines of business of the covered platform 
operator over those of another business user on the covered platform in a 
manner that would materially harm competition; (Section 3, Clause (a) (1)) 
(ii)  limit the ability of the products, services, or lines of business of another business 
user to compete on the covered platform relative to the products, services, or 
lines of business of the covered platform operator in a manner that would 
materially harm competition; (Section 3, Clause (a) (2)) 
(iii)  discriminate in the application or enforcement of the terms of service of the 
covered platform among similarly situated business users in a manner that would 
materially harm competition. (Section 3, Clause (a) (3)) 

45 
 
(iv) condition access to the covered platform or preferred status or placement on the 
covered platform on the purchase or use of other products or services offered by 
the covered platform operator that are not part of or intrinsic to the covered 
platform (Section 3, Clause (a)(5)) 
 
Open App Markets Act, USA: A Covered Company shall not provide unequal 
treatment of Apps in an App Store through unreasonably preferencing or ranking the 
Apps of the Covered Company or any of its business partners over those of other 
Apps in organic search results (Section 3, Clause (e) (1)). Unreasonably preferencing 
includes applying ranking schemes or algorithms that prioritize Apps based on a 
criterion of ownership interest by the Covered Company or its business partners but it 
does not include clearly disclosed advertising (Section3, Clause (e)(2)). 
10th amendment of the German Competition Act: The Bundeskartellamt may 
prohibit undertakings of paramount significance from 
“1. favouring its own offers over the offers of its competitors when mediating 
access to supply and sales markets, in particular 
(a) presenting its own offers in a more favourable manner; 
(b) exclusively pre-installing its own offers on devices or integrating them in any 
other way in offers provided by the undertaking” (Section 19(a), Clause 2). 
Bundling and Tying 
4. DMA, EU: “The gatekeeper shall not require business users or end users to 
subscribe to, or register with, any further core platform services listed in the designation 
decision pursuant to Article 3(9) or which meet the thresholds in Article 3(2), point (b), 
as a condition for being able to use, access, sign up for or registering with any of that 
gatekeeper’s core platform services listed pursuant to that Article.” (Chapter III, Article 
5, Clause 8) 
 
 “The gatekeeper shall allow and technically enable end users to easily un-install any 
software applications on the operating system of the gatekeeper, without prejudice to 
the possibility for that gatekeeper to restrict such un-installation in relation to software 

46 
 
applications that are essential for the functioning of the operating system or of the 
device and which cannot technically be offered on a standalone basis by third parties.  
It shall allow and technically enable end users to easily change default settings on 
the operating system, virtual assistant and web browser of the gatekeeper that direct 
or steer end users to products or services provided by the gatekeeper.” (Chapter III, 
Article 6, Clause 3) 
“The gatekeeper shall not restrict technically or otherwise the ability of end users to 
switch between, and subscribe to, different software applications and services that 
are accessed using the core platform services of the gatekeeper, including as 
regards the choice of Internet access services for end users.” (Chapter III, Article 6, 
Clause 6) 
American Innovation and Choice Online Act (AICO), USA: It shall be unlawful for 
a person operating a covered platform in or affecting commerce to: 
 
(a) “condition access to the covered platform or preferred status or placement on the 
covered platform on the purchase or use of other products or services offered by 
the covered platform operator that are not part of or intrinsic to the covered 
platform;” (Section 3, Clause (a)(5)) 
(b) “materially restrict or impede covered platform users from uninstalling software 
applications that have been preinstalled on the covered platform or changing 
default settings that direct or steer covered platform users to products or 
services offered by the covered platform operator, unless necessary” (Section 3, 
Clause (a)(8)) 
 
10th amendment of the German Competition Act: The Bundeskartellamt may 
prohibit undertakings of paramount significance from taking measures that impede 
other undertakings in carrying out their business activities on supply or sales markets 
where the undertaking’s activities are of relevance for accessing such markets, in 
particular taking measures that result in the exclusive pre-installation or integration of 
offers provided by the undertaking. (Section 19(a), Clause (2)) 
An SIDI shall allow and technically enable end users to easily un-install any software 
applications on the operating system of the platform, without prejudice to the 

47 
 
possibility for that platform to restrict such un-installation in relation to software 
applications that are essential for the functioning of the operating system or of the 
device and which cannot technically be offered on a standalone basis by third parties. 
It shall allow and technically enable end users to easily change default settings on 
the operating system, virtual assistant and web browser of the platform that direct or 
steer end users to products or services provided by the platform. 
 
An SIDI shall not restrict technically or otherwise the ability of end users to switch 
between, and subscribe to, different software applications and services that are 
accessed using the core services of the platform, including as regards the choice of 
Internet access services for end users. 
Data Usage 
5. DMA, EU: “The gatekeeper shall not do any of the following: 
(a) process, for the purpose of providing online advertising services, personal data of 
end users using services of third parties that make use of core platform services 
of the gatekeeper; 
(b) combine personal data from the relevant core platform service with personal data 
from any further core platform services or from any other services provided by 
the gatekeeper or with personal data from third-party services; 
(c) cross-use personal data from the relevant core platform service in other services 
provided separately by the gatekeeper, including other core platform services, 
and vice-versa; and 
(d) sign in end users to other services of the gatekeeper in order to combine 
personal data,  
unless the end user has been presented with the specific choice and has given 
consent” (Chapter III, Article 5, Clause 2) 
 
 “The gatekeeper shall not use, in competition with business users, any data that is 
not publicly available, that is generated or provided by those business users in the 
context of their use of the relevant core platform services or of the services provided 
together with, or in support of, the relevant core platform services, including data 

48 
 
generated or provided by the end users of those business users” (Chapter III, Article 
6, Clause 2) 
American Innovation and Choice Online Act (AICO), USA: It shall be unlawful for 
a person operating a covered platform in or affecting commerce to: 
“use non-public data that are obtained from or generated on the covered 
platform by the activities of a business user or by the interaction of a covered 
platform user with the products or services of a business user to offer, or 
support the offering of, the products or services of the covered platform operator 
that compete or would compete with products or services offered by business 
users on the covered platform” (Section 3, Clause (a)(6)) 
“materially restrict or impede a business user from accessing data generated on 
the covered platform by the activities of the business user, or through an 
interaction of a covered platform user with the products or services of the 
business user, such as by establishing contractual or technical restrictions that 
prevent the portability by the business user to other systems or applications of 
the data of the business user” (Section 3, Clause (a)(7)) 
Open App Markets App, USA: “A covered company shall not use non public 
business information derived from a third-party app for the purpose of competing with 
that app.” (Section 3, Clause (c)) 
10th amendment of the German Competition Act: The Bundeskartellamt may 
prohibit undertakings of paramount significance from 
“creating or appreciably raising barriers to market entry or otherwise impeding 
other undertakings by processing data relevant for competition that have been 
collected by the undertaking, or demanding terms and conditions that permit 
such processing, in particular 
(a) making the use of services conditional on the user agreeing to the processing of 
data from other services of the undertaking or a third-party provider without 
giving the user sufficient choice as to whether, how and for what purpose such 
data are processed; 
(b) processing data relevant for competition received from other undertakings for 
purposes other than those necessary for the provision of its own services to 

49 
 
these undertakings without giving these undertakings sufficient choice as to 
whether, how and for what purpose such data are processed;” (Section 19(a), 
Clause 4) 
 
The Act also prohibits such undertakings from “refusing the interoperability of 
products or services or data portability, or making it more difficult, and in this way 
impeding competition”. (Section 19(a), Clause 5) 
Acquisitions and Mergers 
6. DMA, EU: “A gatekeeper shall inform the Commission of any intended 
concentration within the meaning of Article 3 of Regulation (EC) No 139/2004, where 
the merging entities or the target of concentration provide core platform services or any 
other services in the digital sector or enable the collection of data, irrespective of 
whether it is notifiable to the Commission under that Regulation or to a competent 
national competition authority under national merger rules.  
 
A gatekeeper shall inform the Commission of such a concentration prior to its 
implementation and following the conclusion of the agreement, the announcement of 
the public bid, or the acquisition of a controlling interest.” (Chapter III, Article 14, Clause 
1) 
 
 “The information provided by the gatekeeper pursuant to paragraph 1 shall at least 
describe the undertakings concerned by the concentration, their Union and worldwide 
annual turnovers, their fields of activity, including activities directly related to the 
concentration, and the transaction value of the agreement or an estimation thereof, 
along with a summary of the concentration, including its nature and rationale and a 
list of the Member States concerned by the concentration.  
The information provided by the gatekeeper shall also describe, for any relevant core 
platform services, their Union annual turnovers, their numbers of yearly active 
business users and their numbers of monthly active end users, respectively.” 
(Chapter III, Article 14, Clause 2) 
 
The Ending Platform Monopolies Bill, USA: It shall be unlawful for a covered 
platform operator to own, control, or have a beneficial interest in a line of business 

50 
 
other than the covered platform that utilizes the covered platform for the sale or 
provision of products or services; offers a product or service that the covered platform 
requires a business user to purchase or utilize as a condition for access to the 
covered platform, or as a condition for preferred status or placement of a business 
user’s product or services on the covered platform; or gives rise to a conflict of 
interest. 
 
The term “conflict of interest” includes the conflict of interest that arises when a 
covered platform operator owns or controls a line of business, other than the covered 
platform; and the covered platform’s ownership or control of that line of business 
creates the incentive and ability for the covered platform to: 
 
(a) advantage the covered platform operator’s own products, services, or lines of 
business on the covered platform over those of a competing business or a 
business that constitutes nascent or potential competition to the covered platform 
operator; or 
(b) exclude from, or disadvantage, the products, services, or lines of business on the 
covered platform of a competing business or a business that constitutes nascent 
or potential competition to the covered platform operator 
 
UK (Government’s response to Consultation on a pro-competition regime for 
digital markets): Firms with Strategic Market Status (SMS) will only have to report 
their most significant transactions prior to completion. This shall apply when the SMS 
firm acquires over a 15% equity or voting share after the transaction, the value of the 
SMS firm’s holding is over £25m, and the transaction meets a UK nexus test. 
Pricing/Deep Discounting  
7. DMA, EU: “To ensure that business users of online intermediation services of 
gatekeepers can freely choose alternative online intermediation services or direct online 
sales channels and differentiate the conditions under which they offer their products or 
services to end users, it should not be accepted that gatekeepers limit business users 
from choosing to differentiate commercial conditions, including price. Such a restriction 
should apply to any measure with equivalent effect, such as increased commission 
rates or de-listing of the offers of business users.” (Paragraph 39) 

51 
 
 
“Pricing or other general access conditions should be considered unfair if they lead to 
an imbalance of rights and obligations imposed on business users or confer an 
advantage on the gatekeeper which is disproportionate to the service provided by the 
gatekeeper to business users or lead to a disadvantage for business users in 
providing the same or similar services as the gatekeeper” (Paragraph 62) 
 “The gatekeeper shall not prevent business users from offering the same products or 
services to end users through third-party online intermediation services or through 
their own direct online sales channel at prices or conditions that are different from 
those offered through the online intermediation services of the gatekeeper.” (Chapter 
3, Article 5, Clause 3) 
 
Open App Markets App, USA: A covered company shall not require as a term of 
distribution on an app store that pricing terms or conditions of sale be equal to or 
more favourable on its app store than the terms or conditions under another app 
store; or take punitive action or otherwise impose less favourable terms and 
conditions against a developer for using or offering different pricing terms or 
conditions of sale through another in-app payment system or on another app store. 
(Section 3, Clause (a)(2), (3)) 
Exclusive Tie-ups 
8. DMA, EU: “The gatekeeper shall not prevent business users from offering the 
same products or services to end users through third-party online intermediation 
services or through their own direct online sales channel at prices or conditions that are 
different from those offered through the online intermediation services of the 
gatekeeper.” (Chapter III, Article 5, Clause 3) 
 
Open App Markets App, USA: A Covered Company shall not: 
(a) require as a term of distribution on an App Store that pricing terms or conditions 
of sale be equal to or more favourable on its App Store than the terms or 
conditions under another App Store (Section 3(a)(2)) 

52 
 
(b) take punitive action or otherwise impose less favourable terms and conditions 
against a developer for using or offering different pricing terms or conditions of 
sale through another In-App Payment System or on another App Store (Section 
3(1)(3)). 
Search and Ranking Preferencing 
9. DMA, EU: “The gatekeeper shall provide to any third-party undertaking providing 
online search engines, at their request, with access on fair, reasonable and non-
discriminatory terms to ranking, query, click and view data in relation to free and paid 
search generated by end users on its online search engines. Any such query, click and 
view data that constitutes personal data shall be anonymised.” (Chapter 3, Article 6, 
Clause 11) 
 
American Innovation and Choice Online Act (AICO), USA: It shall be unlawful for 
a person operating a covered platform in connection with any covered platform user 
interface, including search or ranking functionality offered by the covered platform, 
treat the products, services, or lines of business of the covered platform operator 
more favourably relative to those of another business user and in a manner that is 
inconsistent with the neutral, fair, and non-discriminatory treatment of all business 
users. (Section 3, Clause 9) 
Restricting third-party Applications 
10. DMA, EU: The gatekeeper shall allow and technically enable the installation and 
effective use of third-party software applications or software application stores using, or 
interoperating with, its operating system and allow those software applications or 
software application stores to be accessed by means other than the relevant core 
platform services of that gatekeeper. 
The gatekeeper shall, where applicable, not prevent the downloaded third-party 
software applications or software application stores from prompting end users to 
decide whether they want to set that downloaded software application or software 
application store as their default. The gatekeeper shall technically enable end users 
who decide to set that downloaded software application or software application store 
as their default to carry out that change easily. (Chapter 3, Article 6, Clause 4) 

53 
 
American Innovation and Choice Online Act (AICO), USA:It shall be unlawful for 
covered platform to materially restrict or impede covered platform users from 
uninstalling software applications that have been preinstalled on the covered platform 
or changing default settings that direct or steer covered platform users to products or 
services offered by the covered platform operator, unless necessary— 
(a) for the security or functioning of the covered platform; 
(b) to prevent data from the covered platform operator or another business user from 
being transferred to the Government of the People’s Republic of China or the 
government of a foreign adversary 
Open App Markets Act, USA: A covered company that controls the operating 
system or operating system configuration on which its app store operates shall allow 
and provide readily accessible means for users of that operating system to— 
(a) choose third-party apps or app stores as defaults for categories appropriate to 
the app or app store; 
(b) install third-party apps or app stores through means other than its app store; and 
(c) hide or delete apps or app stores provided or pre-installed by the app store 
owner or any of its business partners 
Advertising Policies 
11. DMA, EU: The gatekeeper shall not process, for the purpose of providing online 
advertising services, personal data of end users using services of third parties that 
make use of core platform services of the gatekeeper. (Chapter 3, Article 5, Clause 
2(a)) 
The gatekeeper shall provide advertisers, information on a daily basis, regarding 
price paid by the advertiser and the remuneration received by the publisher. (Chapter 
3, Article 5, Clause 9) 
The gatekeeper shall provide advertisers and publishers with access to the 
performance measuring tools of the gatekeeper and the data necessary for 
advertisers and publishers to carry out their own independent verification of the 
advertisements inventory, including aggregated and non-aggregated data. (Chapter 
3, Article 6, Clause 8) 
 

54 
 
Appendix-1 
 
Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2021-22) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28th April, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5. Shri Manoj Kotak 
6. Shri Pinaki Misra 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Gopal Shetty 
10. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
11. Shri Manish Tewari 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
13. Shri Praful Patel 
14. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
15. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
16. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
17. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
18. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
1.    Shri Rajesh Verma, Secretary 
2.    Shri Manoj Pandey, Joint Secretary (Competition) 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (MeitY) 
1.    Dr. Rajendra Kumar, Additional Secretary          

55 
 
2.   Shri Rakesh Maheshwari, Scientist ‘G’ & GC 
 
COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
1.    Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta, Chairperson 
2.    Ms. Jyoti Jindgar, Secretary (I/C) & Adviser (Eco) 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson, Competition Commission of India made a powerpoint presentation on the 
subject ‘Anti-Competitive practices by Big Tech Companies’. The major issues 
discussed include reviewing the existing framework of Competition Law Review 
Committee (CLRC), need for synergy between all departments dealing with the digital 
ecosystem, maintaining the fine balance between innovation and regulation, need for 
mechanism to check abuse of dominance and power in markets, need for comparative 
analysis of competition laws in EU, US and Australia versus that of India. Issue of 
urgent need for filling up vacancies, judicial member post in particular, in Competition 
Commission of India and bringing in domain expertise within it has also been raised. 
 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  

56 
 
Appendix-2 
 
Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2021-22) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th May, 2022 from 1200 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Shri Manoj Kotak 
6. Shri Pinaki Misra 
7. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
8. Prof. Sougata Ray 
9. Shri Gopal Shetty 
10. Shri Manish Tewari 
11. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
14. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
15. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
16. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
17. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 3. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
1200 hrs - 1230 hrs 
 
The Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Associations of India (FHRAI) 
1. Mr. Paramjit Singh Ghai, Executive Committee Member 
2. Mr. Nirav Gandhi, Executive Committee Member 
3. Mr. Jaison Chacko, Secretary General 
 

57 
 
1230 hrs - 1330 hrs 
 
Digital News Publishers Association (DNPA) 
1. Ms. Kalli Purie, Vice Chairperson, India Today Group 
2. Mr. Pawan Agarwal , Dy Managing Director ,DB Corp Ltd. 
3. Mr. Tanmay Maheshwari , Managing Director , Amar Ujala Ltd. 
4. Mr. Anil Malhotra , Head – Public & Regulatory Affairs ,  Zee Entertainment 
 Limited 
5. Mr. Puneet Jain , Chief Executive Officer, HT Digital News 
6. Ms. Sujata Gupta, Secretary General, Digital News Publishers Association 
 
1400 hrs – 1500 hrs 
 
Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) 
1. Shri Praveen Khandelwal, National Secretary General 
2.  Shri Sumit Agarwal, National Secretary 
3.  Shri Abir Roy, Advisor 
4.  Shri Arvinder Khurana, Vice President 
5.  Ms. Smita Ahuja, Head, Coordination 
 
1500 hrs onwards 
 
Alliance of Digital India Foundation (ADIF) 
1. Mr. Sijo Kuruvilla, Executive Director 
2. Ms. Amanat Khullar, Head, Advocacy and Editorial 
3. Mr. Tom Thomas, Head, Policy and Research 
 
Newspapers Association of India (NAI) 
1. Dr. Vipin Gaur, General Secretary 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big-
tech companies’. The Committee interacted with representatives of various industry 
associations in four parts and deliberated on the anti competitive issues cutting across 
industries/sectors. The major issues discussed with the various associations included 
competitive conduct and behavior, platform neutrality, dynamic pricing, changes 
required in competition law in light of dominant big-tech firms, listing, deep discounting, 

58 
 
predatory pricing, loss funding, balance between disruptions caused by e-commerce to 
conventional stores and benefits to consumers, opportunity creation by technology, 
fierce pricing by aggregators, regulation of business in digital space, bundling, issues of 
ownership of data generated on various aggregator platforms, hidden charges levied by 
the platforms, comparisons with other jurisdictions worldwide, strong revenue market 
share of Google in Indian digital advertising vis-à-vis the weak revenue models of 
domestic publishing industry, non-transparency of big tech giants, uniform technical 
standards, access through technology, idea of enforcing a market share cap, capability 
of upcoming ONDC (Open Network for Digital Commerce), development of e-commerce 
portal ‘Bharat e-market’ funded entirely by Indian traders to empower traders and 
consumers, idea of allowing cluster approach in co-operative systems, hurdle to small 
traders without any GST registration to incorporate in e-commerce and penalties being 
treated as recurring cost by Big-Techs.  
 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  

59 
 
Appendix-3 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2021-22) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21st July, 2022 from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Shri Pinaki Misra 
6. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
7. Shri Gopal Shetty 
8. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
9. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
11. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
12. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
13. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
14. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Paytm 
1. Shri Vijay Shekhar Sharma, CEO Paytm  
2. Shri Dharmender Jhamb, Vice President Paytm 
OLA 
1. Mr. Arun Kumar G R, Chief Financial Officer 
2.  Ms. Sukirti Singh, Senior Manager 

60 
 
3. Mr. Rajneesh Pathak, Director 
MakeMyTrip India Pvt. Ltd 
1. Mr. Deep Kalra, Group Chairman and Chief Mentor 
2. Mr. Rajesh Magow, Co-Founder and Group CEO  
3. Mr. Mohit Kabra, Group Chief Financial Officer 
Zomato 
1. Mohit Gupta - Co-Founder & Head of New Businesses 
2. Akshant Goyal - Chief Financial Officer (CFO) 
OYO 
1.  Mr Ritesh Agarwal, Founder and Group CEO 
2.  Mr Abhinav Sinha, Chief Operating Officer and Chief Product Officer 
3.  Mr Rakesh Prusti, General Counsel 
Swiggy 
1. Ms. Avantika Bajaj, Vice President and Group General Counsel  
2. Mr. Amal Sivaji, Director Public Policy  
Flipkart 
1. Shri Kalyan Krishnamurthy, Group CEO; Flipkart Group. 
2. Shri Rajneesh Kumar, Group CCAO (Chief Corporate Affairs Officer), Flipkart Group. 
3. Dr Tafheem Siddiqui, Director (Policy), Flipkart Group. 
All India Gaming Federation (AIGF) 
1. Roland Landers CEO - AIGF 
2. Dhruv Garg Advisor legal & policy - AIGF 
3. Sarvjeet Singh Director & Head Public Policy - Mobile Premier League. 
4. Shri Deepak Upadhyay, Representatives, Delhi Secretariat-AIGF 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big 
Tech Companies’ and the Committee deliberated upon the issues of predatory pricing 
and deep discounting for digital markets/platforms, digital platform neutrality including 
aspects such as favouring certain services over others, creating a level playing field for 
all the partners and ensuring that the pricing is done in a fair way across entire platform; 
ex ante versus ex post regulations, issue of data as a barrier to entry for others to come 
into market place, zero or subsidized pricing, definition of Market and big tech 

61 
 
companies, issue of diluting intellectual property through advertising programmes, 
protection of small shop owners/retailers partner, addiction of e-gaming, difference 
between game of chance and game of skill as a pay to play format,  non functioning of 
mandated panic button in cabs, ride cancellation policies of cab aggregators, poor 
quality control of cabs, proliferation of unregulated and unlicensed drivers, issues 
pertaining to opaque and unfair terms and conditions of e-commerce companies, 
problems of  unregulated online gaming industry, predatory advertising, disclosure 
norms of data including privacy and sharing of data, issue of denial of services to 
customers as well as small partners, regulation of advertising on digital space and 
mandatory billing system in gaming space. 
 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  

62 
 
Appendix-4 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance 
(2021-22) The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28th July, 2022 from 1500hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Shri Manoj Kotak 
6. Shri Pinaki Misra 
7. Shri Gopal Shetty 
8. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki 
9. Shri Manish Tewari 
10. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
12. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
13. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
14. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
PART I  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
1500 hrs – 1600 hrs 
Alliance of Digital India Foundation (ADIF) 
1. Shri  Sijo Kuruvilla, Executive Director, ADIF 

63 
 
2. Dr. Ritesh Malik, Director, ADIF 
3. Shri Jibin Jose VP- Startup Relations, ADIF 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big 
Tech Companies’ and the major issues discussed include the differences between 
digital markets and traditional markets, the network effects of Big Tech Companies and 
their ability to enforce anti-competitive practices, issues of restrictions in contracts with 
developers, effectiveness of gatekeepers and existing legislations and the need for ex 
ante legislation and separate standard of operation etc. 
 
3. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
PART II 
1600 hrs onwards 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
1. Shri Rajesh Verma, Secretary 
2. Shri Manoj Pandey, Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Abhijit Phukon, Director 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
1. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta, Chairperson 
2. Ms. Jyoti Jindgar, Secretary (I/C) 
3. Ms. Payal Malik, Adviser (Eco) 
4. Sh. (Dr.) Kapil Dev Singh, Director (Law) 
5.  After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the Committee took oral 
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Competition 

64 
 
Commission of India on the subject 'Anti-Competitive practices by Big Tech 
Companies’. The major issues discussed include whether digital markets require 
additional laws, whether the laws used around the world including gatekeepers can be 
applicable to India, the need for CCI to evolve to deal with changes in digital markets, 
feasibility of fast track courts or tribunals solely dedicated to anti-competitive practices in 
digital markets etc. 
 
6. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
PART III  
 
7. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

65 
 
Appendix-5 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2021-
22) The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23rd August, 2022 from 1430 hrs. to 1730 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
4. Shri Manoj Kotak 
5. Shri Pinaki Misra 
6. Prof. Sougata Ray 
7. Shri Gopal Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
11. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Amazon India 
1. Mr. Manish Tiwary, Country Manager - India Consumer Business 
2. Mr. Chetan Krishnaswamy, VP, Public Policy 
3. Mr. Rakesh Bakshi, VP, Legal 
4. Ms. Shravani Shekhar, Corporate Counsel, Competition 

66 
 
Apple India 
1. Mr. Virat Bhatia , Managing Director, Strategy & Policy  
2. Ms. Saloni Gupta, Head, Public Policy & Strategy 
3. Mr. Prateek Hiremath, Senior Counsel – India 
Facebook India 
1. Mr. Rajiv Aggarwal, Head of Public Policy 
2. Mr. Shivnath Thukral, Public Policy Director 
3. Ms. Saanjh Purohit, Associate General Counsel 
Google India 
1. Dr Archana G. Gulati, Director, Government Affairs and Public Policy, Google 
 India Pvt Ltd. 
2. Ms Gitanjli Duggal, Director, Legal, Google India Pvt Ltd. 
Netflix India 
1.  Ms. Ambika Khurana, Director & Head of India Public Policy 
2. Mr. Kiran Desai, India General Counsel and Director of Business & Legal Affairs 
Twitter India 
1. Mr. Samiran Gupta, Senior Director, Public Policy and Philanthropy, Twitter 
 Communications India Pvt. Ltd.  
2. Ms. Shagufta Kamran, Director, Public Policy and Philanthropy, Twitter 
 Communications India Pvt. Ltd. 
3. Mr. Kapil Chaudhary, Senior Legal Counsel, Twitter Communications India Pvt. Ltd 
Uber India 
1. Mr. Prabhjeet Singh, President, Uber India & South Asia 
2. Mr. Kanishk, Director Legal, Uber India & South Asia 
3. Mr. Nitish Bhushan, Director Operations, Uber India & South Asia 
4. Ms. Ridhi Darolia, Public Policy Lead, Uber India & South Asia 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big 
Tech Companies’ and the major issues discussed include competitive conduct in digital 
markets; fundamental difference in traditional markets and digital markets; pricing 
power; unfair advantage to Big Techs; use of bundling and trying to gain access to and 
succeed in other markets; mergers and acquisitions to reduce dynamic innovation; 
platform neutrality and self-preferencing; App store policies; need for competition law to 
evolve to address and deal with digital markets; volume of permanent and temporary 

67 
 
jobs in Big Techs; change in behavior through penalties and fines imposed; collection of 
Big Data and data privacy; search and ranking preferencing; advertising policies; billing 
policies; prohibitive barriers to entry for other players and network effects; ill-effects of 
lack of competition; lack of transparency in revenue sharing; need to regulate market 
dominance to allow local players to rise; need to amend various Acts along with 
Competition Commission Act; notion and definition of digital gatekeepers in the Indian 
context and need for ex-ante regulations in the country. 
 
3. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

68 
 
Appendix-6 
 
Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2022-23) 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th December, 2022 from 1500hrs. to 1715 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
7. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
8. Shri Pinaki Misra 
9. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
10. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
11. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
12. Shri Manish Tewari 
13. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
15. Shri Raghav Chadha 
16. Shri P. Chidambaram 
17. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
18. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
19. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
20. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
21. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
  
 

69 
 
PART I  
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
PART II  
 
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report on the subject ‘Anti 
Competitive Practices by Big Tech Companies’ for consideration and adoption. After 
some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report and authorised the 
Chairperson to finalise and present the Report to the Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 