 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Ninth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21)] 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020 /      Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
20 


 
 
  
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Ninth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21)] 
  
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 9 September, 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on _________, 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
September, 2020 /      Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)  


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………  
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......   
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………   
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted   
 by the Government ............................……………     
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
 desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of  
 the Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  
 reply of the Government is still awaited .....................................…  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 8 September, 2020 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the  Ninth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21)’  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
   
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.      Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -          Additional Director  
 4.       Ms. Melody Vungthiansiam             -          Assistant Committee Officer 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twentieth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  Ninth Report of 
the Committee ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 12 March, 2020.  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were received 
from the Government vide their communication dated 11 June, 2020.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
08 September, 2020. 
4. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference , the observations / recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                       SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
 08 September, 2020                       Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on Finance 
  

 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 9th Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2020. 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 5 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4 & 5      
           
                          (Total 5) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
NIL 
       (Total NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
 NIL           
                                                                 (Total 
NIL) 
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
NIL       
(Total - NIL) 
(Chapter- V) 
 

 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the observations/recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with  and comment upon  the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
5. The Committee note that budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs for the fiscal 2020-21 has been enhanced by 28 per cent at Rs. 752.62  crore as 
compared to the previous years' BE allocation of Rs. 586.34 crore. The Ministry cited 
various reasons for seeking higher funds including setting up of new version of MCA21, 
new benches of NCLT,NCLAT and filling up of vacant posts in various offices of 
NCLT,NCLAT,IEPFA,NFRA etc. The Committee also note that the previous years' BE 
allocation of Rs. 586.34 crore was re vised to Rs. 576 crore, out of which the Ministry 
has been able to absorb around 80 per cent till date. The Committee find that even with 
the downward revision in 2019 -20, the Ministry is yet to fully absorb funds as was the 
case in earlier years with surr ender of funds amounting to Rs. 12.42 crore in 2016 -17, 
Rs. 60.37 crore in 2017 -18 and Rs. 19.22 crore in 2018 -19. The Committee hope that 
the Ministry would exercise due diligence in absorbing funds allocated and make 
concerted efforts towards efficacious  utilization of the enhanced funds in 2020 -21. In 
this regard, the Ministry must give priority to filling up vacant posts in bodies like 
NCLT,NCLAT,SFIO etc which are overloaded with cases and are in dire need of 
adequate support staff. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs could increase its spending on 
making its compliance and reporting portals even more user -friendly. The Committee 
notes that the Ministry has made many strides recently in making filing of various forms 
easy and simple. However, they can be improved further to reach world -class levels. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry conduct  regular workshops around the 
country to get structured feedback from stakeholders on filing requirements. This 
feedback could then be used to systematically  upgrade the Ministry’s portals on a 
continuous basis. 

 
 
6. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as 
follows:- 
“(i)With regards to efficacious absorption and utilization of allocated funds, it is 
submitted that during 2 019-20, the B.E. of Rs. 586.34 crore  was reduced to Rs. 
576.00 crore at R.E. stage against which the actual expenditure was Rs.562.11crore 
i.e. 97.59% of the R.E. and the same is given in a table below:- 
          (Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Revised 
Estimates 
Actual 
Expenditure  
2019-20 586.34 576.00 562.11 
(97.59% of RE) 
2020-21 727.62 - - 
 
As per the Expenditure Management Guidelines, dated 8.4.2020 of the Ministry of 
Finance, this Ministry has been restricted to spend only 15% of the Budget during 
the first quarter (i.e. April -June, 2020) of the financial year. However, the Ministry is 
taking steps to spend the entire budget during 2020 -21, and it is closely monitoring 
progress of activities and utilisation of funds by each budgetary u nit/ organisation by 
review meetings/field visits from time to time. Timely re -allocated funds through re -
appropriation from one head to another for accomplishing the tasks will be ensured.  
 
(ii)  With regards to the priority for filling -up vacant posts i n bodies like NCLT,  
NCLAT, SFIO, etc., it is submitted that the Ministry is making concerted efforts to fill-
up all the vacant posts in these organisations.  
(a)  The NCLT (Recruitment, Salary and other Terms and Conditions of Service of 
Officers and other  Employees) Rules, 2020 has been notified on 21.01.2020. 
Recruitment process has already been initiated to fill up vacant posts in NCLT;With 
appointment of all the Members in the Benches of the NCLAT recently, all the 
Benches of the NCLAT are functioning now; 

 
 
(b)In the NCLT, besides the post of President, 62 posts of Members have been 
sanctioned. There are 45 members in position in the NCLT. The process for filling up 
the remaining posts is in advanced stage; 
(c)In the SFIO, the working strength has been in creased from 66 to 83 against the 
sanctioned strength of 133 and filling up of vacant posts on deputation and by Direct 
Recruitment is going on. 
(d)  That the Recruitment Rules of NFRA has been notified vide Gazette Notification 
No. G.S.R. 369(E) dated 16. 5.2019. Recruitment process for direct recruitment has 
been started on  17.02.2020;  
(e)the staff strength in the CCI has, now, improved as selection  for some of the 
posts has recently been made and the over-all staff position is likely to improve once 
the selections are made to all the vacant posts soon through due process; 
(f) regarding the requirement of additional specialised skill manpower in the IEPF 
Authority, a proposal for creation of additional posts with  specialised skills required 
for the work o f IEPF Authority has been prepared and is under consideration of the 
Government. 
(iii)  With respect to  the observation of the Committee that the Ministry could 
increase its spending on making reporting portals for easy compliance and making 
reporting portals even more user- friendly, it is submitted that Rs.37.02 was spent for 
MCA-21 as against B.E. of Rs.36.06 crore  for it during 2019-20 and Rs.125.69 crore 
has been allocated during 2020-21 for implementation of new version of MCA-21 i.e. 
Version 3 that w ill have advanced technology like AI/ML for easy compliance of 
stakeholders and user-friendly.  
(iv) Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that the Ministry to conduct 
regular workshops and to get feedback from the stakeholders for continuous 
upgrading of the Ministry’s portal, it is submitted that when the Bid Document of 
MCA-21 Version - 3 was prepared, industry wide consultations were held with 
various bodies like FICCI, ASSOCHAM, ICSI, ICAI and the feedbacks received 
therefrom are used while maki ng new system MCA21 Version 3. The version 3 of 

 
 
MCA21 also envisages mobile utility for certain services, use of Artificial Intelligence 
and Machine Learning for expeditious processing of name reservation and 
incorporation related forms. Further, version 3  of the MCA-21 will follow the principle 
of “Single Source of Truth ”, in which once an information is sought and provided, 
the same piece of information will not be sought again from the company and the 
information already provided by it will be used to pr efill the form where such 
information is required." 
7.  The Committee note that the Ministry's actual expenditure during 2019 -20 is 
97.59% of their Revised Estimates. The Committee hope that this fiscal discipline  
continues in the ongoing year 2020 -21 as well, with the enhancement in funds 
from    Rs. 576 crore (RE 2019 -20) to Rs . 752.62  crore (BE 2020 -21). The 
Committee would continue to emphasise on the urgent need of filling the wide 
gaps in human capital in various regulatory entities under the Ministry like 
NCLT,NCLAT,SFIO,CCI etc. and expect the Ministry to suitably equip and 
empower them so that they can steer regulation towards making the economy 
robust and smoothly mitigate the economic impact of the ongoing pandemic. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
8. The Committee note that the Competition Commission of India (CCI) has 
completed ten years of its operation in endeavouring to promote free and fair 
competition across different sectors of the economy. The Committee note that the total 
cases pending at the end of the year since its inception still number around 150. The 
Ministry have informed that out of the total sanctioned posts of 195, 73 posts are lying 
vacant and that the mode of recruitment in the office of the Director General (DG),CCI 
is only through deputation, where as many as 23 posts are lying vacant out of the 41 

 
 
sanctioned. The Committee are alarmed to note that an important office like that of the 
DG, CCI is functioning with less than half of the required staff and even the post of DG  
is lying vacant. The Committee hope that the recommendation of the High Level 
Committee on review of Competition Act, 2002 for merger of DG office with CCI as per 
international practice would be implemented soon to get over the vacancy problem and 
thus im prove the overall functioning of the Commission in the face of new 
developments like cross border mergers, sectoral overlaps, new business models and 
monopolistic business trends, e-commerce models etc. 
9. In their action taken reply the Ministry of Corporate Affairs have submitted as follows:-  
 "(i)With regard to implementation of the recommendation of the High Level 
Committee on review of Competition Act, 2002 - for merger of DG office with CCI - 
and thus improve the overall functioning of the Commission, etc., it is submitted 
that subsequent to the presentation of Report of the Competition Law Review 
Committee (CLRC) headed by Secretary, Corporate Affairs, the Ministry is already 
in the process of amending the existing Competition Act.  
4(ii)  The staff strength of DG CCI office has improved as s election has 
recently been made against 3 posts of Additional Director General and 2 posts of 
Joint Director General on deputation basis. Two of them have since joined (1 ADG 
and 1 JD) whereas other thre e persons are likely to join soon; Selection process 
for 14 vacant posts of Deputy Director General scheduled on 20.03.2020, had to 
be postponed due to COVID -19 pandemic. The same shall take place once the 
situation is normalized. Selection against the vac ant post of DG, CCI is already 
under process in the Ministry. The eligibility conditions pertaining to experience for 
selection to the post have been relaxed after repeated attempts to fill up the post 
in recent past could not succeed.  
Besides the above , (a)  Selection against the vacant post of Secretary, CCI is 
under process,  (b) Interview for selection against 10 vacant posts in CCI were 
required to be rescheduled because of COVID -19 pandemic; and  (c)  selection 

 
 
against 15 vacant posts in CCI is under p rocess. The over -all staff position is 
likely to improve once the selections are made through due process" 
10.  The Committee note that subsequent to the presentation of Report of the 
Competition Law Review Committee (CLRC), the Ministry is already in the 
process of amending the existing Competition Act  and that the staff strength of 
DG, CCI office has improved and the over -all staff position is likely to improve 
once selections are made through due process. The Committee are of the view 
that along with the strengthening of manpower, the DG and the Compe tition 
Commission which endeavours to promote free and fair competition should keep 
a close watch on firms during the ongoing pandemic so that they refrain from 
unfair practices such as excessive pricing, limiting production or bundling non -
essential products with essential products etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No.1 
  The Committee note that budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs for the fiscal 2020-21 has been enhanced by 28 per cent at Rs. 752.62  crore as 
compared to the previous years' BE allocation of Rs. 586.34 crore. The Ministry cited 
various reasons for seeking higher funds including setting up of new version of MCA21, 
new benches of NCL T,NCLAT and filling up of vacant posts in various offices of 
NCLT,NCLAT,IEPFA,NFRA etc. The Committee also note that the previous years' BE 
allocation of Rs. 586.34 crore was revised to Rs. 576 crore, out of which the Ministry 
has been able to absorb around 80 per cent till date. The Committee find that even with 
the downward revision in 2019 -20, the Ministry is yet to fully absorb funds as was the 
case in earlier years with surrender of funds amounting to Rs. 12.42 crore in 2016 -17, 
Rs. 60.37 crore in 2017 -18 and Rs. 19.22 crore in 2018 -19. The Committee hope that 
the Ministry would exercise due diligence in absorbing funds allocated and make 
concerted efforts towards efficacious utilization of the enhanced funds in 2020 -21. In 
this regard, the Ministry mus t give priority to filling up vacant posts in bodies like 
NCLT,NCLAT,SFIOetc which are overloaded with cases and are in dire need of 
adequate support staff. The Ministry of Corporate Affairs could increase its spending on 
making its compliance and reportin g portals even more user - friendly. The Committee 
notes that the Ministry has made many strides recently in making filing of various forms 
easy and simple. However, they can be improved further to reach world -class levels. 
The Committee recommends that the  Ministry conduct  regular workshops around the 
country to get structured feedback from stakeholders on filing requirements. This 
feedback could then be used to systematically upgrade the Ministry’s portals on a 
continuous basis. 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government: 
1(i) With regards to efficacious absorption and utilization of allocated funds, it  is 
submitted that during 2019-20, the B.E. of Rs. 586.34 crore  was reduced to Rs. 576.00 
crore at R.E. stage against which the actual expenditure was Rs.562.11crore i.e. 
97.59% of the R.E. and the same is given in a table below:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure  
2019-20 586.34 576.00 562.11 
(97.59% of RE) 
2020-21 727.62 - - 
As per the Expenditure Management Guidelines, dated 8.4.2020 of the Ministry of 
Finance, this Ministry has been restricted to spend only 15% of the Budget during the 
first quarter (i.e. April -June, 2020) of the financial year. However, the Ministry is taking 
steps to spend the entire budget during 2020-21, and it is closely monitoring progress of 
activities and utilisation of funds by each budgetary unit/ organization by review 
meetings/field visits from time to time . Timely re-allocated funds through re-
appropriation from one head to another for accomplishing the tasks will be ensured.  
1(ii) With regards to the  priority for filling -up vacant posts in bodies like 
NCLT,NCLAT,SFIO,etc, it is submitted that  the Ministry is making concerted efforts to 
fill-up all the vacant posts in these organisations.  
 
(a)  The NCLT (Recruitment, Salary and other Terms and Conditions of Service of 
Officers and other Employees) Rules, 2020 has been notifi ed on  21.01.2020. 
Recruitment process has already been initiated to fill up vacant posts in NCLT; With 
appointment of all the Members in the Benches of the NCLAT recently, all the 
Benches of the NCLAT are functioningnow; 

 
 
(b)In the NCLT, besides the post of President, 62 posts of Members have been 
sanctioned. There are 45 members in position in the NCLT. The process for filling up 
the remaining posts is in advanced stage; 
 
(c)In the SFIO, the working strength has been increased from 66 to 83 against the 
sanctioned strength of 133  and filling up of vacant posts on deputation a nd by Direct 
Recruitment is going on. 
 
(d)  That the Recruitment Rules of NFRA has been notified vide Gazette Notification 
No. G.S.R. 369(E) dated 16.5.2019. Recruitment process for direct recruitment has 
been started on  17.02.2020; (e)the staff strength in the CCI has , now, improved as 
selection for some of the posts has recently been made and the over-all staff position 
is likely to improve once the selections are made to all the vacant posts soon through 
due process; (f) regarding the requirement of additional specialised skill manpower in 
the IEPF Authority, a proposal for creation of additional posts withspecialised skills 
required for the work of IEPF Authority has been prepared and is under consideration 
of the Government. 
 
1(iii)  With respect tothe observation of the Committee that the Ministry could increase 
its spending on making reporting portals for easy compliance and making reporting 
portals even more user- friendly, it is submitted that Rs.37.02 was spent for MCA -21 as 
against B.E. of Rs.36 .06 crorefor it during 2019 -20 and Rs.125.69 crore has been 
allocated during 2020 -21 for implementation ofnew version of MCA-21 i.e. Version 3 
that will have advanced technology like AI/ML for easy compliance of stakeholders and 
user-friendly.  
1(iv)   Regarding t he recommendation of the Committee that the Ministry to conduct 
regular workshops and to get feedback from the stakeholders for continuous upgrading 
of the Ministry’s portal, it is submitted that wh en the Bid Document of MCA -21 Version- 
3 was prepared, industry wide consultations were held with various bodies like FICCI, 
ASSOCHAM, ICSI, ICAI and the feedbacks received therefrom are used while making 
new system MCA21 Version 3. The version 3 of MCA21 also envisages mobile utility for 
certain serv ices, use of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for expeditious 

 
 
processing of name reservation and incorporation related forms. Further, version 3 of 
the MCA -21 will follow the principle of “ Single Source of Truth ”, in which once an 
information i s sought and provided, the same piece of information will not be sought 
again from the company and the information already provided by it will be used to prefill 
the form where such information is required. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M No.G-20017/01/2020-BGT,Dated: 11.06.2020] 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No.7 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 The Committee note that against its RE allocation of Rs. 22.05 crore for 2019 -
20, SFIO has utilisedRs. 17.49 crore which is 79.32  per cent till 14.02.2020. A 
cumulative total of 1171 prosecution cases have been filed by SFIO so far, out of which 
456 cases were disposed and conviction has been secured for 325 cases, and 615 
cases are still pending. The Committee find it alarming that  in a key multi -disciplinary 
statutory investigative body like SFIO 37 per cent of posts are lying vacant, with only 84 
out of the total 133 sanctioned posts in place at present. Given the quantum and 
complexity of case load and specialized skills required  to handle the same, the 
Committee find that the vacancy rate is unacceptably high, with obvious consequences 
for the efficiency of the organisation. 
 Keeping in mind the fact that SFIO now has been vested with significant 
powers including that of arrest, the Committee desire that the Ministry should make 
sure that as a credible investigative body, SFIO remains well -equipped with 
professionally trained personnel with proven integrity. The Committee would also 
suggest that instead of relying only on deputati onists, SFIO should also develop and 
nurture their own permanent, trained cadre at least upto middle -levels. SFIO must 
improve its performance standards and level of efficiency. It is also necessary that the 
personnel on the investigation and prosecution s ide are provided comprehensive 
training in all relevant areas/methodologies and are also adequately sensitized to legal 
jurisprudence. 

 
 
 The Committee note that the investigation wing of SFIO should be separated 
from the prosecution wing. For that purpose i t would be prudent to create a separate 
directorate of prosecution, independent of the investigation wing. The Committee also 
suggest that Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) professionals may be brought in to fill in 
the gaps in specialised manpower requirements in SFIO. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2(i) Regarding the observations/recommendations of the Committee to strengthen the 
skilled manpower in the SFIO, it is submitted that keeping in mind the large number of 
cases and the rising workload with greater complexity, all -out efforts are made to 
strengthen the workforce in SFIO. Officers with requisite expertise only are being 
selected, Special Se curity Allowance is now paid to the officers of SFIO which is a 
motivating factor. As on date, working strength has been increased from 66 to 83 as 
against the sanctioned strength of 133.Recently, offer of appointment on deputation 
have been given to 29 pe rsons, out of which 22 persons have joined and remaining are 
likely to join soon. Further, 4 posts of Assistant have been filled up and two persons are 
likely to join in the remaining two vacant posts. The process of filling up of vacant posts 
on deputation (ISTC) and by Direct Recruitment is continuing. 
 
2(ii)  Regarding nurturing of permanent trained cadre at least upto middle -levels in the 
SFIO, it is submitted that for providing career opportunities to middle level officialswho 
are recruited directly, and also to ensure progressive growth of officials in the number of 
‘permanent cadre’, provision of ‘appointment through promotion’ has been made in the 
Recruitment Rules (RRs) of 36 higher grade posts. Thus, strength of permanent cadre 
officials will incre ase gradually. In this reference, recently, 3 officers who were initially 
appointed on direct recruitment, have been promoted to higher grade after completion 
of the mandatory residency period as per the applicable RRs. 
 
2(iii) With regard to providing comprehensive skill training to the manpower in the SFIO, 
it is  submitted that the officers of SFIO are being imparted training in investigation 
process through programmes being conducted by UNODC along with other agencies 

 
 
such as ICAI, IICA etc. Progress of  Investigations is closely monitored and reviewed by 
MCA so as to ensure quality of investigation and timely completion thereof.  
 
2(iv)   With regard to a suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee that the Investigation wing 
in the SFIO should be separated from its prosecutionwing, it is submitted that a 
separate Prosecution Divisionindependent of the Investigation wing , is already 
functioning in the SFIO. It is f urther tosubmit that Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) is a 
professionally qualified and due re cognition of such qualifications is taken at the time of 
recruitment of consultant, etc.  Officers of SFIO are also encouraged to acquire 
additional relevant qualifications including that of CFE.  
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M.No.G-20017/01/2020-BGT, Dated: 11.06.2020] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 The Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) Authority was set up with 
the objective of making refunds of unclaimed amounts to eligible shareholders and 
promote investor education, awareness and protection. Since the Authority has been 
made functional  in 2016, the number of claims have increased manifold from 343 in 
2016-17 to 4026 in 2017 -18, 19188 in 2018 -19 and 13075 in 2019 -20 (till 31.01.2020). 
The total number of claims for which verification report is received in the Authority is 
23,585, out of which only 8028 claims have been settled and as many as 15557 claims 
are still pending. The Committee note that based on the recommendations of R.S. 
Sahoo Committee Report on manpower requirements, the IEPF Authority has 
submitted a proposal for creation o f 33 posts, which is under consideration of the 
Government and that 36 Company Secretaries are engaged on contract basis through 
Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) to assist the Authority in claim 
processing work. The Committee feel that in order to deal with the mounting claims, the 
Authority should strive towards the creation of an adequate and permanent cadre 
equipped with the specialised skills required. The Committee also hope that the 
Authoritywouldfindwaystosimplifytheprocessofsettlingclaimsforinvestorsby making it 

 
 
completely online with step by step instructions involving minimal documentation, 
thereby saving time and effort on both sides (i.e. investors and IEPF Authority) 
 
Reply of the Government: 
3(i)   With reference to the recommendation of the Committee that speedy verification 
and settlement of claims by the IEPF Authority, it is submitted that “The Investor 
Education & Protection Fund (Accounting, Audit, Transfer and Refund) Rules 2016” as 
amended from time to time provides that the claims completed in all respects are 
required to be settled by the IEPF Authority within a period of 60 days. The Rules have 
been further amended vide GSR No.  571(E) dated 14.8.2019 to simplify the process of 
refund of claims filed with the Authority. The amended rules , inter-alia, provide for 
authentication of identity of claimant through online verification of PAN, an e -verification 
of claim by the Nodal Officer of the Company and online processing of claim by the 
IEPF Authority.  
3(ii) Regarding simplification of the process of settling claims through online process, it 
is submitted that the process of claim processing has been made completely online in 
MCA-21 wherein the claimants can file simplified web form IEPF 5. After filing the online 
form, the same is transmitted online to the company for submitting the report before the 
claim is approved in the MCA -21 by the Authority. The documents required to be 
submitted have been specified in the schedules to IEPF Rules and are filed in online 
along with t he claim form thus reducing the delays on account of postal deliveries etc. 
Timelines have been prescribed for submission of verification along with the documents 
by the Company. With the introduction of the online system, the settlement of claims is 
expedited. So far, the authority has approved 8,602 claims and has refunded 64,66,919 
shares (Approx. Rs.350 Cr) and amount of Rs. 9,39,00,162 to the claimants. 
3(iii) With regard to creation of adequate specialised skills permanent cadre  in the 
IEPFA, it is su bmitted that for handling the increased work  load, the proposal for 
creation of additional posts based on the recommendation of R. S. Sahoo Committee 
has been prepared and is under consideration of Government which envisages 
recruitment of persons with specialised skills required for the work of IEPF Authority. 

 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20017/01/2020-BGT, Dated: 11.06.2020] 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 The Committee note that the Competition Commission of India (CCI) has 
completed ten years of its operation in endeavouring to promote free and fair 
competition across different sectors of the economy. The Committee note that the total 
cases pending at the end of the year since its inception still number around 150. The 
Ministry have informed that out of the total sanctioned posts of 195, 73 posts are lying 
vacant and that the mode of recruitment in the office of the Director General (DG),CCI 
is only through  deputation, where as many as 23 posts are lying vacant out of the 41 
sanctioned. The Committee are alarmed to note that an important office like that of the 
DG, CCI is functioning with less than half of the required staff and even the post of DG 
is lying vacant. The Committee hope that the recommendation of the High Level 
Committee on review of Competition Act, 2002 for merger of DG office with CCI as per 
international practice would be implemented soon to get over the vacancy problem and 
thus improve the overall functioning of the Commission in the face of new 
developments like cross border mergers, sectoral overlaps, new business models and 
monopolistic business trends, e-commerce models etc. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
4(i) With regard to implementation of the recommendation of the High Level Committee 
on review of Competition Act, 2002 - for merger of DG office with CCI - and thus 
improve the overall functioning of the Commission, etc., it is submitted that  subsequent 
to the  presentation of Report of the Competition Law Review Committee (CLRC) 
headed by Secretary, Corporate Affairs, the Ministry is already in the process of 
amending the existing Competition Act.  
 
4(ii)  The staff strength of DG CCI office has improved as s election has recently been 
made against 3 posts of Additional Director General and 2 posts of Joint Director 
General on deputation basis. Two of them have since joined (1 ADG and 1 JD) whereas 
other three persons are likely to join soon; Selection process fo r 14 vacant posts of 

 
 
Deputy Director General scheduled on 20.03.2020, had to be postponed due to COVID -
19 pandemic.  The same shall take place once the situation is normalized. Selection 
against the vacant post of DG, CCI is already under process in the Min istry. The 
eligibility conditions pertaining to experience for selection to the post have been relaxed 
after repeated attempts to fill up the post in recent past could not succeed.  
 
Besides the above , (a)  Selection against the vacant post of Secretary, CCI is 
under process, (b) Interview for selection against 10 vacant posts in CCI were required 
to be rescheduled because of COVID-19 pandemic; and (c)  selection against 15 vacant 
posts in CCI is under process. The over -all staff position is likely to impr ove once the 
selections are made through due process.  
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20017/01/2020-BGT,Dated: 11.06.2020] 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No.10 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
The Committee note that  the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) were constituted in 2016 through 
the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 for faster resolution of corporate disputes 
and reducing the multiplicity of agenci es, thereby promoting 'ease of doing business' in 
the country. The Ministry have informed that 5345 pending cases were transferred from 
the Company Law Board (CLB) to NCLT on its formation and as on 31.12.2019, 62,127 
cases have been received by NCLT, out of which a huge pile -up of 20,542 cases are 
still pending. With regard to staffing, the Ministry have informed that 11 members of the 
NCLAT are in position while in NCLT, only 48 members out of the sanctioned strength 
of 63 members are in position right no w, and as far the staff is concerned, only a 
meagre 44 out of the 320 regular sanctioned strength are in position. In view of the fact 
that the Recruitment Rules are now ready, the Committee would expect that the full 
strength of the members as well as reg ular staff would be in position within the next 
Financial Year. The Committee also suggest that the existing threshold of Rs. 1 lakh 

 
 
may be suitably increased so that minor issues can be handled in other fora, which can 
reduce the burgeoning workload of th e NCLT benches to enable them to focus on 
urgent matters and big-ticket insolvency cases. 
Reply of the Government: 
5(i) With regard to disposal of pending cases in the NCLT, it is submitted that disposal 
and pendency of cases in NCLT as on 30.04.2020 was as under:- 
 
Cases received from erstwhile Company Law Board: 5,345 
Cases received on transfer from High Courts upto 30.04.2020: 4,182 
Fresh cases filed with NCLT upto 30.04.2020: 57,420 
Disposal of cases from 01.06.2016 till 30.04.2020: 45,696 
Pendency of cases as on 30.04.2020: 21,251 
 
5(ii)  With regard to strengthening  the NCLAT with manpower,it is submitted that apart 
from the post of Chairperson, 11 posts of Members have been sanctioned. All the 11 
posts of Members (5 Judicial Members + 6 Technical Members) have, now, been filled 
up and all the Benches in the NCLAT are functioning now. As regards Chairperson of 
the NCLAT is concerned, consequent on completion of the term of Office of Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice S.J. Mukhopadhayay as Chairperson, NCLAT on 15.03.2020,  Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice BansiLalBhat, Member (Judicial) is,now, functioning as the Acting Chairperson 
of NCLAT. Search-cum-Selection Committee as provided in Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal 
and other  Authorities (Qualifications, Experience and other Conditions of Service of 
Members) Rules, 2020 has been constituted under the Chairpersonship of Chief Justice 
of India to recommend the name of new Chairperson, NCLAT.  Government has 
sanctioned 59  regular posts of Officers/Staff in the NCLAT. Recruitment Rules in 
respect of these posts have been notified on 21.01.2020.  Necessary action has been 
initiated to fill- up these posts on regular basis as per the notified Recruitment Rules.   
 
5(iii)  With refere nce to strengthening of manpower in the NCLT, it is submitted that 
apart from the post of President, 62 posts of Members have been sanctioned. 
Considering the workload of NCLT and with a view to faster disposal of cases, last year, 
28 new members (11 Judic ial and 17 Technical) were appointed in the NCLT, bringing 

 
 
the total number of members from 24 to 52. After superannuation/resignation of some 
members, presently 45  Members (22 Judicial and 23 Technical)  are in position in the 
NCLT. The process of filling up the remaining posts has already been initiated, which is 
in advanced stage. As regards President of the NCLT is concerned, consequent on 
completion of the term of Office of Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.M. Kumar as President, NCLT, 
Mr. B.S.V.  Prakash Kumar, Member (Judicial) is , now,  functioning as the Acting 
President of NCLT. Chief Justice of India has been requested to recommend the name 
of new President, NCLT as required in Companies Act, 2013. Government has 
sanctioned 320  regular posts of  Officers/Staff in the NCLT. Recruitment Rules in 
respect of these posts have been notified on 21.01.2020.  Necessary action has been 
initiated to fill- up these posts on regular basis as per the notified Recruitment Rules.   
 
5(iv)Prior to notification of  the Recruitment Rules, NCLT and NCLAT have been 
appointing officers/staff on deputation basis on the basis of draft RR. 26 staff working in 
erstwhile CLB have also been transferred to NCLT and NCLAT (22 and 4 respectively).  
38 staff working in COMPAT hav e been transferred to NCLAT. In addition, posts of 13 
Account Officers/Senior Accountants in NCLT and 3 in NCLAT have been encadred. Till 
the regular posts are filled up, approval has been granted to NCLT and NCLAT for 
engaging sufficient officers/staff on  contractual basis to carry on their functions. To 
assist the benches, approval has been granted for engagement of Law Research 
Associates (LRA) in NCLT, which are being engaged progressively upon joining of 
Members. The number of posts on contractual/outs ourced basis has been increased 
from time to time. As of now, approval for 725 posts on contract/outsourcing basis has 
been given to NCLT. In addition approval to engage 3 LRA for one court of two 
members (total 93 for 62 Members) has also been given.  
 
5(v) As regards increas ing the existing threshold limit of Rs. 1 lakh is concerned, this 
Ministry, vide Notification S.O. 1205(E) dated 24.03.2020, has already specified Rs. 
1crore  as the minimum amount of default for the purpose of Section 4 of the Insolve ncy 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.   
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No.G-20017/01/2020-BGT, Dated: 11.06.2020] 

 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  

 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                              SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
8 September 2020                           Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Finance 
 

 
 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expendi ture and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of th e Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of  Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 

 
 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on  the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery 
in the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committe e adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
5  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation at 
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4 & 5) 
 
5 100% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
Nil 0.00 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final r eply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 
 
 