 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2019-20)' ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020/       Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
  
16 


 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2019-20)'  ] 
  
    
 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 9 September, 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ________, 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on __________, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September, 2020 /     Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
  


 
CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….…………           
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......           
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08 September, 2020  
 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the Fourth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2019-20)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
   
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.      Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -          Additional Director  
 4. Ms. Madhumita     -  Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of 
the Committee ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants ( 2019-20) of the 
Ministry of Planning. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 10 December, 2019  .  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were 
received from the Government vide their communication dated 14 February, 2020. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on         
08 September, 2020.        
4. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference , the observations / recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                          SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
08 September, 2020                        Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 4th Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019 -20) of the Ministry of Planning 
which was presented to Lok Sabha / Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 December, 2019.  
 
2. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 4 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3 and 4                      
(Total 04)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue   in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 (Total NIL)                           
(Chapter- III) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
        NIL 
(Total NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
NIL  
(Total - NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2019-20) 
 
5. The Committee noted that the total budgetary allocation of the Ministry of 
Planning for the year 2019 -20 stood at Rs. 583.40 crore. That included Revenue and 
Capital portions of Rs. 582.29 crore and Rs. 1.11 crore, respectively. Similarly for the 
year 2018-19, the Budget Estimates (BE) and the Revised Estimates (RE) stood at Rs. 
339.65 crore and Rs. 486.51 crore respectively, while for the year 2017 -18 the Actuals 
stood at Rs. 258.15 crore. The scrutiny of the Budget of the Ministry of Planning 
revealed that the BE of 2019 -20 had increased by 71.76 per cent and 125.99 per cent 
with respect to the BE of 2018 -19 and Actuals of 2017 -18 respectively. The Committee 
further noted that under the major head 3475 “Ongoing Programme and Schemes 
including liabilities f rom BE 2014-15”, the BE of 2019 -20 and 2018-19 stood at Rs. 185 
crore and Rs. 39.12 crore respectively. That was thus a substantial jump of 372.90 per 
cent in BE of 2019-20 over BE of 2018-19.  
 
The Committee, however, noted that under the major head 5475 “Ongoing 
Programme and Schemes including liabilities from BE 2014 -15 [Strengthening Office 
Processes and Systems (SOPS) & New Programme – Central Plan]”, the BE and 
Actuals of 2018-19 stood at Rs. 68 lakh and Rs. 48.32 lakh respectively. Further, the BE 
of 2019-20 stood at Rs. 1.11 crore, which was a rise of 63.24 per cent. Similarly, for 
DMEO, the BE and Actuals of 2018-19 stood at Rs. 18 crore and Rs. 9.8 crore, while the 
BE of 2019-20 stood at Rs. 11 crore, which was a drop of 38.89 per cent. 
 
The Commit tee were of the view that such persistent under -utilisation of 
budgetary allocation indicated inadequate financial management on the part of the 
Ministry of Planning. The Committee desired that the Ministry and the NITI Aayog as the 
premier think tank of t he Government, should effectively utilize their enhanced 
budgetary allocations in a time bound manner and avoid such divergence between 
allocations and utilization so that the efficacy of the organization was not adversely 
impacted. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
 
“The observation/views made by the Committee have been taken note of by the 
NlTl Aayog and directions have been issued to all the spending authorities of NlTl 
Aayog to effectively utitize the  budgetary allocation, in a time bound manner so as 
to avoid divergence between allocations and utilizations in order not to impact 
adversely the efficacy of the organization. And the matter is monitored.” 
 
 

 
7. The Committee had pointed out the persistent under-utilization of 
budgetary allocation by the Ministry. However, the action taken reply furnished by 
the Ministry in this regard is vague, as no specific detail regarding the manner 
and form to achieve the effective utilization of budgetary allocation h as been 
provided. The Committee, thus, expect the Ministry to be more specific and 
elaborate in their response so that detailed scrutiny can be carried out and 
suggestions be made accordingly. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO)  
 
8. The Committee in their previous reports had flagged the issue of under -utilisation 
of the budgetary allocation by DMEO and had recommended the need for periodical 
appraisal. The Committee noted that the trend still persisted, as o nly Rs. 9.8 crore had 
been utilized in 2018 -19 against the BE of Rs. 18 crore for fiscal year 2018 -19 and the 
reasons for the same included a transfer of large number of Research Officers (ROs) / 
Senior Research Officers (SROs) to other departments during the year 2018-19 and non 
filling up of various posts during the year 2018 -19. The Committee were of the view that 
DMEO should have an effective mechanism during the budget preparation stage itself, 
so that funds were fully utilised for the intended purpose . The Committee were of the 
view that an important task as monitoring and evaluation required competent manpower 
at its disposal with requisite expertise. The Committee expected better monitoring and 
evaluation on the part of DMEO and recommended that the DMEO should provide real -
time monitoring data for all the schemes. 
The Committee while appreciated the DMEO team for carrying out field visits in 
agricultural mandis in about 8 States in March – April, 2018, desired that more of such 
visits be conducted in  other fields like education, health, sanitation, nutrition etc as well, 
while also engaging experts from different fields. If the Ministry did not believe that 
DMEO could provide adequate monitoring and evaluation, then the Ministry should 
consider restructuring the office in a comprehensive manner to either undertake these 
services or else consider alternate mechanisms. The Committee also recommended 
that a credible mechanism should be developed to assess development outcomes in 
States. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning have submitted as follows:- 
 
“The DMEO has fully endorsed the view of the Standing Committee. As pointed out 
in the report issue of filling up the post of ROs/SROs/Directors have been taken up 
with IES cadre. The Di rector General, DMEO has personally taken up the matter 
with the Adviser, IES Cadre, Department of Economic Affairs and impressed him of 
the need of quickly filling the vacant posts. But it could post just two Assistant 

 
Directors (in the rank of Research O fficer) and all the other posts (14 posts of 
Directors and 11 posts of SROs) continue to be vacant.  
 
As pointed out by the Standing Committee, DMEO is fully aware of the fact 
that an important task as monitoring and evaluation requires competent manpower 
at its disposal with requisite expertise. Realizing this urgent need, DMEO has 
attempted a thorough ov erhaul of its Recruitment process and Rules reflecting the 
revised mandate of DMEO, and submitted the revised Recruitment Rules (RR) for 
all its posts viz. Economic lnvestigator/Economic Officer/ Research Officer /Senior 
Research Officer/ Directors etc. to the DOPT.  
 
As pointed out in the Standing Committee report, to strengthen outcome -
based monitoring across the Government of lndia, the DMEO team undertook a 
rigorous process to improve the Output -Outcome Framework (OOMF) in 2018 -19 
and then again for 201 9-2020. The aim of the OOMF exercise has been to 
strengthen the effective management of limited public resources and achieve a 
deeper and broader impact of scheme interventions. The framework put in place 
nearly 5000 output and outcome indicators for aroun d 600 outlays, for Central 
Sector(CS) and Centrally sponsored Schemes(CSS) across Government of lndia. 
This framework was tabled in the Parliament along with the Union Budget 2019 -20. 
CS/CSS schemes form the primary mode of government service delivery to 
beneficiaries, covering Rs.12 lakh crores out of the total budget of Rs.27.9 lakh 
crores in 2019 -20. By juxtaposing this financial outlay with quantitative 
measurements of scheme performance, it is expected that more judicious use and 
greater accountability can be encouraged.  
 
The DMEO worked closely with 68 Ministries and Departments to 
developing a deeper understanding of outputs and outcomes, setting quantitative 
targets for measurable output and outcome indicators, training and troubleshooting 
for operation of the online dashboard, and collecting scheme performance data for 
FY 20. DMEO also worked extensively on the technical capacity of the online 
dashboard, allowing for API linkage with existing online Ministry MlSs, and is in the 
process of completing API linkage for 7 MlSs.  
 
Presently DMEO is in the process of completing the third party Evaluation of 
10 Sectors covering the 28 umbrella schemes. Consultants are already awarded 
the contract and except in one all the remaining 9 sectoral evaluations are  in the 
field.Final report is expected to be submitted shortly by the consultants. Being the 
importanttask DMEO has solicited the services of experts of each sector and seek 
their guidance and inputs in every stage of evaluation.  
 
ln addition DMEO has ini tiated assessment/evaluation studies for Quick 
Assessment of Teacher Education and Technology Up -gradation Fund Scheme 
(TUFS) etc. Other major activities undertaken by DMEO include: a) supporting 
appraisal process of EFC/SFC/PlB/DlB; b) analytical work (ra ilway sector); c) 
supporting ministries/departments conduct evaluation studies; d) organizational 
strengthening; and e) building partnerships with multilaterals/lnstitutions to 
strengthen monitoring the evaluation ecosystem.” 
 
10. The Committee had time an d again pointed out the issue of under -
utilization of  budgetary allocation and huge staff vacancy including the lack of 
competent manpower at the disposal of DMEO, to carry out the important task of 
monitoring and evaluation. The Committee appreciate DMEO  for finally taking up 
the vacancy issue at the highest level and for undertaking a thorough overhaul of 
its Recruitment process and Rules reflecting the revised mandate of DMEO and 

 
submitting the same to DoPT. However, the Committee are not satisfied with  the 
pace of progress in actually filling up these posts, as only two Assistant Directors 
(in the rank of Research Officer) could be filled, with the other posts (14 posts of 
Directors and 11 posts of SROs) still remain vacant. Therefore, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier recommendation of filling up these posts at all levels, at the 
earliest. The Committee acknowledge the steps taken by DMEO so far to 
constantly improve the Output -Outcome Framework to strengthen the effective 
management of limited public resources and achieve a deeper and broader impact 
of scheme interventions. The Committee note the close coordination of DMEO 
with Central Government Ministries and Departments for undertaking evaluation 
of schemes and troubleshooting for operation of th e online dashboard allowing 
for Application Programming Interface (API) linkage with existing online Ministry 
MIS. The Committee expect faster completion of the remaining API linkage with 
Ministry MIS. The Committee desire that more and more field visits b e also carried 
out in the areas of education, health, nutrition etc. They further expect faster 
completion of the ongoing third party evaluation of 10 sectors covering 28 
umbrella schemes and evaluation studies for quick assessment of Teacher 
Education and  Technology Up -gradation Fund Scheme (TUFS). The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the results of these evaluation studies and also the 
current status of DMEO’s other major activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants (2019-20) 
The Committee note that the total budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Planning for the 
year 2019-20 stands at Rs. 583.40 crore. This includes Revenue and Capital portions 
of Rs.582.29 crore and Rs.1.11 crore, respectively. Similarly for the year 2018-19, the 
Budget Estimates (BE) and the Revised Estimates (RE) stood at Rs.339.65 crore and 
Rs.486.51 crore respectively, while for the year 2017-18 the Actuals stood at 
Rs.258.15 crore. The scrutiny of the Budget of the Ministry of Planning reveal that the 
BE of 2019-20 has increased by 71.76 per cent and 125.99 per cent with respect to the 
BE of 2018-19 and Actuals of 2017-18 respectively. The Committee further note that 
under the major head 3475 “Ongoing Programme and Schemes  including liabilities 
from BE 2014-15”, the BE of 2019-20 and 2018-19 stand at Rs.185 crore and Rs.39.12 
crore respectively. This is thus a substantial jump of 372.90 per cent in BE of 2019-20 
over BE of 2018-19. 
The Committee, however, note that under the major head 5475 “Ongoing 
Programme and Schemes including liabilities from BE 2014-15 [Strengthening OZice 
Processes and Systems (SOPS) & New Programme - Central Plan]”, the BE and 
Actuals of 2018-19 stood at Rs. 68 lakh and Rs. 48.32 lakh respectively. Further, the BE 
of 2019-20 stands at Rs. 1.11 crore, which is a rise of 63.24 per cent. Similarly, for 
DMEO, the BE and Actuals of 2018-19 stood at Rs. 18 crore and Rs. 9.8 crore, while the 
BE of 2019-20 stands at Rs. 11 crore, which is a drop of 38.89 per cent. 
The Committee are of the view that such persistent under-utilization of budgetary 
allocation indicates inadequate financial management on the part of the Ministry of 
Planning. The Committee desire that the Ministry and the NITI Aayog as the premier 
think tank of the Government, should effectively utilize their enhanced budgetary 
allocations in a time bound manner and avoid such divergence between allocations and 
utilization so that the efficacy of the organization is not adversely impacted. 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 The observation/views made by the Committee have been taken note of by the NITI 
Aayog and directions have been issued to all the spending authorities of NITI Aayog to 
effectively utilize the budgetary allocation, in a time bound manner so as to avoid 
divergence between allocations and utilizations in order not to impact adversely  the 
efficacy of the organization. And the matter is monitored 
 [Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/07/2019-ParI. dated 14*h February, 2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
“Development Monitoring and Evaluation Ohice (DMEO)” 
 
The Committee in their previous reports had flagged the issue of under-utilization of 
the budgetary  allocation  by DMEO and had recommended  the need for periodical appraisal. 
The Committee note that the trend still persists, as only Rs.9.8 crore has been utilized 
in 2018-19 against the BE of Rs.18 crore for fiscal year 2018-19 and the reasons for the 
same include a transfer of large number of Research Officers (ROs)/ Senior Research 
Officers (SROs) to other departments during the year 2018 -19 and non-filling up of 
various posts during the year 2018-19. The Committee are of the view that DMEO 
should have an elective mechanism during the budget preparation stage itself, so that 
funds are fully utilized for the intended purpose. The Committee are of the view that an 
important task as monitoring and evaluation requires competent manpower at its disposal 
with requisite expertise. The Committee expect better monitoring and evaluation on the 
part of DMEO and recommend that the DMEO should provide real- time monitoring data 
for all the schemes. 
 The Committee while appreciating the DMEO team for carrying out field visits in 
agricultural mandis in about 8 States in March-April, 2018, desire that more of such 
visits be conducted in other fields like education, health, sanitation, nutrition etc as well, 
while also engaging experts from different fields. If the Ministry does not believe that 
DMEO can provide adequate monitoring and evaluation, then the Ministry should 
consider restructuring the office in a comprehensive manner to either undertake these 
services or else consider alternate mechanisms. The Committee also recommend that a 
credible mechanism should be developed to assess development outcomes in States. 
 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
The DMEO has fully endorsed the view of the Standing Committee. As pointed 
out in the report issue of filling up the post of ROs/SROs/Directors have been taken up 
with IES cadre. The Director General, DMEO has personally taken up the matter with the 
Adviser, IES Cadre, Department of Economic Afiairs and impressed him of the need of 
quickly filling the vacant posts. But it could post just two Assistant Directors (in the rank 
of Research Ofiicer) and all the other posts (14 posts of Directors and 11 posts of 
SROs) continue to be vacant. 
As pointed out by the Standing Committee, DMEO is fully aware of the fact that 
an important task as monitoring and evaluation requires competent manpower at its 
disposal with requisite expertise. Realizing this urgent need, DMEO has aRempted a 
thorough overhaul of its Recruitment process and Rules reflecting the revised mandate of 
DMEO, and submitted the revised Recruitment Rules (RR) for all its posts viz. 
Economic Investigator/Economic Officer/ Research Officer /Senior Research Officer/ 
Directors etc. to the DOPT. 
As pointed out in the Standing Committee report, to strengthen outcome-based 
monitoring across the Government of India, the DMEO team undertook a rigorous 
process to improve the Output-Outcome Framework (OOMF) in 2018-19 and then again for 
2019-2020. The aim of the OOMF exercise has been to strengthen the effective 
management of limited public resources and achieve a deeper and broader impact of 
scheme interventions. The framework put in place nearly 5000 output and outcome 
indicators for around 600 outlays, for Central Sector(CS) and Centrally sponsored 
Schemes(CSS) across Government of India. This framework was tabled in the 
Parliament along with the Union Budget 2019-20. CS/CSS schemes form the primary 
mode of government service delivery to beneficiaries, covering Rs.12 lakh crores out of 
the total budget of Rs.27.9 lakh crores in 2019-20. By juxtaposing this financial outlay 
with quantitative measurements of scheme performance, it is expected that more 
judicious use and greater accountability can be encouraged. 
 
The DMEO worked closely with 68 Ministries and Departments to developing a 
deeper understanding of outputs and outcomes, setting quantitative targets for 
measurable output and outcome indicators, training and troubleshooting for operation of 
the online dashboard, and collecting scheme performance data for FY 20. DMEO also 
worked extensively on the technical capacity of the online  dashboard,  allowing  for  
API linkage with existing  online  Ministry  MISs, and is in the process of completing  
API linkage for 7 MISs. 
Presently DMEO is in the process of completing the third party Evaluation of 10 
Sectors covering the 28 umbrella schemes. Consultants are already awarded the 
contract and except in one all the remaining 9 sectoral evaluations are in the field. Final 
report is expected to be submitted shortly by the consultants. Being the important task 

 
DMEO has solicited the services of experts of each sector and seek their guidance and 
inputs in every stage of evaluation. 
In addition DMEO has initiated assessment evaluation studies for Quick 
Assessment of Teacher Education and Technology Up -gradation Fund Scheme 
(TUFS) etc. Other major activities undertaken by DMEO include: a) suppo rting 
appraisal process of EFC/SFC/PlB/DIB; b) analgical work (railway sector); c) 
supporting ministries/departments conduct evaluation studies; d) organizational 
strengthening; and 
e) building partnerships with multilaterals/Institutions to strengthen monitoring the 
evaluation ecosystem. 
 
(Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/07/1019-ParI.dated 14th February, 2020) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) and Self Employment and Talent Utilisation(SETU) 
The Committee note that Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) is one of the main 
scheme operated by NITI with a relatively substantial financial outlay of Rs. 303.74 
crore for the fiscal 2019-20. Further, a provision of Rs. 286 crore as Grants-in-aid was 
made to ‘Not yet identified’ Non-Government bodies for setting up of Atal Tinkering Labs 
(ATL), Atal Incubation Centres (AICs), providing support to Established Incubation 
Centres, Atal Community Innovation Centres and for launching Atal New India 
Challenges and Atal Grand Challenges. The Committee are of the view that the 
identification/ selection of such bodies in the future should be completed before the 
preparation of budgetary estimates so that the allocated budget is utilized in an efficient 
and timely manner. The Committee further desire that funds should be evenly 
distributed so that the educationally backward areas get top priority and also an 
opportunity to innovate and progress side—by-side with the relatively better off areas. 
The Committee appreciate schemes like AIM for designing ‘ATL Community 
Day’ event, wherein the selected schools have been mandated to engage children from all 
walks of life and nearby communities to be introduced to workshops, events, sessions 
and futuristic technologies. The Committee therefore desire that such initiatives and 
challenges may be designed in such a way that they are fully inclusive and cater to 
children/students from all walks of life including the specially- abled children. The 
Committee note with satisfaction that AIM has also engaged with a third party (Quality 
Council of India) for an on-ground review and evaluation of ATLs which shall be 
concluded soon. The Committee expects that all such third party evaluation will be 
completed soon and a report of the results and consequential follow-up action may be 

 
shared with the Committee at the earliest. The Committee are of the view that with 
respect to the ATL Dashboard (My ATL), the schools should be invariably encouraged to 
update their data regularly so that such information becomes available on the dash 
board, on a real-time basis. 
Reply of the Government 
The number of schools, incubators, New India challenges and community 
innovation Centers during a year to be selected for ATL, AICs, ANICs, ACICs 
establishment is based on the discussions and directives of the Cabinet and AIM 
Mission High Level Committee. The actual selection and disbursement of grants for AIM 
initiatives are based on BE and RE budgets for AIM for the year approved by the 
Department of Expenditure. AIM has thus far constantly ensured that the approved 
budgets for the year have been efficiently and fully allocated and utilised during the 
course of any year over the past 2 years. 
The identification/selection of schools/incubation centres is based on an 
extensive application and selection process with high level selection and monitoring 
committees approved by the MHLC. The disbursement of the grants is ensured only 
after the grantees meet all terms and conditions related to compliance as per the 
guidelines. 
Further, the Committee may note that, AIM has recently shortlisted and 
announced 6038 new schools for ATLs, and the grants will be given as soon as the 
budget for the same is approved. The same process is being followed for all other 
programmes of AIM too. 
The suggestion of the Committee regarding evenly or prioritized distribution of 
funds is noted. The AIM tries to ensure that the benefit of its initiatives is experienced 
nationwide particularly in government, governments aided schools, remote and 
Aspirational districts, girls and so-Ed schools, unserved and underserved tier 2 tier 3 
cities and districts of India. With the goal to establish an Atal Tinkering Lab in every 
district across the country, AIM has devised a robust selection process to ensure 
regional distribution of schools. As a result, ATLs are present in more than 662 districts 
out of the 715 districts across the country. 
 
Further, it may be noted that more than 65% of these schools are 
government/government aided. This ensures the diversity in distribution of ATL schools 
across the country, and more than 70% are girls and so-Ed schools. Further, AIM 
envisages to cover all the districts of the country with at least one ATL. 
 
While disbursing grants to schools, AIM has encouraged every ATL school to 
engage with the students from all walks of life in their local community and allow at least 5-
10 schools in their vicinity to access to the labs. Also, the ATLs have been mandated to 
support the students of non-ATL schools too. 
 

 
With the goal to engage with the community children, ATL schools across the 
country celebrate the ATL Community Day, where ATL students engage with non-ATL 
and community children and share their learning and experiences. 
 
The ATL Community Day module has been created by AIM for the ATL schools 
which guides the schools on how to make ATL community day a successful event. The 
module consists of interesting activities for the target audience. Link to the ATL 
Community Day module is: hRps://www.aim.gov.in/pdf/ATL_Community_Day.pdf 
 
The third-party evaluation of AIM initiatives to date, by the Quality Council of 
India (QCI) as well as by the EAC to PM have been completed. Both the reports have 
commended the work done by AIM and have reported positive outcomes and impact 
with suggestions for on-ground execution. The reports furnished by the QCI and  Shri 
Bibek Debroy of EAC to PM are enclosed at Annexure-1 and Annexure-2. 
 
The AIM is in the process of formulating an action plan to improve its current 
processes as per the recommendations provided by the above mentioned third parties. 
The ATL Dashboard has been simplified for the ATL schools to report their 
workshops, events, and day to day ATL operations. Further, tutorial videos for the 
Dashboard up-dation process has been created and shared for ease of access. It is 
mandatory for the schools to update their dashboard before applying for subsequent 
tranches of ATL grant-in-aid. 
To address on ground issues for ATL schools, AIM has created a dedicated 
Query Resolution system. Link to Query Resolution portal is : http://expd.pro/cgrms- 
atl/register/ 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/07/2019-ParI. dated 14'h February, 2020] 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) India Index 
 
The Committee note that the NITI Aayog has come up with the Baseline Report of 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) India Index, which comprehensively 
documents the progress made by India’s States and Union Territories towards 
implementing the 2030 SDG targets. Further, the NITI Aayog have constructed the SDG 
India Index that spans across 13 out of 17 SDGs. The Committee recommend that 
availability of such data should be constantly improved and new estimation techniques be 
regularly employed, to make the SDG India Index more comprehensive and tangible in 
times to come. 
The Committee appreciate the publication of a compendium or leaning from all 
States/UTs on SDG localization, which was launched at the UN High Level Political 
Forum on Sustainable Development in UN Headquarters in New York and was well 

 
received by the international communities and Governments. At the same time, the 
Committee suggest faster completion of local monitoring tools by the States viz. State 
Indicator Framework (SIF), District Indicator Framework (DIF) and SDG monitoring 
dashboards. Further, the Committee desire that the NITI should develop mechanisms to 
assist poor performing States and suggest remedies for them to improve their 
performance and do well in the rankings. 
The Committee suggest that while monitoring the progress of States with 
respect to SDGs, the NITI Aayog should further expand their monitoring and evaluation 
function by including the Human Development Index (HDI) and other such indices  to 
quantify the progress of States. This process of monitoring and the associated inputs 
thereof would help in speedier implementation of various schemes and programmes 
meant to improve the HDls. The Committee are of the view that HDls being closely 
related to SDGs any progress with regard to one would greatly benefit in achieving the 
other goal. Further, when it comes to devising ways to achieve the SDG targets, more 
and more stakeholders, particularly the civil society and domain experts may be 
engaged more extensively. This may be achieved by releasing quarterly progress 
repoLs and placing all the underlying data in the public domain. 
Reply of the Government 
The NITI SDG India Index 2018 was computed using 62 indicators and covered 13 
of the 17 SDGs. The SDG India Index 2019 was the second edition of the Index which 
built upon the first version and was released in December 2019. The index was 
constructed using 100 indicators, covering 54 targets across 16 goals, barring Goal 17, 
which primarily focuses on partnerships (where National Indicators are not available). 
The second iteration of the SDG India Index represents a refinement and addresses 
many of the concerns raised by the development community. Extensive peer-reviews 
were organized to ensure that the selection of indicators was robust. The respective 
ministries/departments and States and UTs were consulted on the usage of the 
indicators and data availability. The SDG India Index 2.0 is more robust than the first 
edition on account of broader coverage of Goals, Targets, and Indicators with greater 
alignment with the NIF. Additionally, this year the SDG India Index Report has a new 
section on Profiles of all 37 States & UTs which will be very useful to analyse the 
performance of the States/UTs on all goals lucidly and in depth. 
 As per the allocation of work pertaining to SDGs, NITI Aayog is responsible 
foroverall supervision, identification and allocation of goals and targets to 
ministries/departments in consultation with Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) and Ministry of External Afiairs (MEA). The Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) is responsible for developing the 
National Indicator Framework (NIF) for SDGs  and all Central Ministrie s have  been 
assigned responsibilities for specific UN SDG targets and national Indicators, based on 
the NIF. The NIF, as prepared by MoSPI, includes 16 Goals, 128 targets and 306 

 
indicators. The NITI SDG India Index 2019 was constructed using 100 indicators of 
which 68 were directly drawn from the NIF, 20 were modified NIF indicators to 
accommodate availability of data across all States and 12 non NIF indicators were 
developed in consultation with the line ministries. 
The Human Development Index HDI, according to the latest Human 
Development Report (HDR) 2019, includes the three dimensions of Health, Education 
and Income and includes the following 4 indicators: 
• Life expectancy at birth (mapped by the HDR 2019 to SDG 3 on Good Health & 
Wellbeing)  
• Expected years of schooling (mapped by the HDR 2019 to SDG 4 on Quality 
Education) 
• Mean years of schooling (mapped by the HDR 2019 to SDG 4 on Quality 
Education) 
 
 
• Gross national income (GNI) per capita (mapped by the HDR 2019 to SDG 8 
Decent Work and Economic Growth) 
 
The indicators in the HDI cover just 3 of 17 Goals; therefore, the Sustainable 
Development Goals framework is a far more comprehensive and holistic articulation of 
goals, targets and indicators pertaining to social, economic and environmental 
dimensions of development and subsumes the HDI dimensions of Health, Education 
and Income. On the dimensions of Health, Education and Income - the NITI SDG India 
Index 2019 and the NIF not only account for the HDI dimensions but also capture 
additional inputs to assess quality of health, quality of education and quality of economic 
participation: 
• Health -MMR, Institutional deliveries, U-5 modality, Immunisation, Critical 
disease incidence, Family planning, Health personnel per 10,000 population 
along with a separate set of indicators on nutrition covered under Goal 2 
Education -Net enrollment ratio, Drop-out rates, Learning outcomes, Gross 
enrollment and Gender parity in higher education, PWDs inclusion in schools, 
Teacher training and Pupil teacher ratio 
• Income -Growth of NDP per capita, Ease of doing business for an enabling 
environment for business and employment, Unemployment rate, Labour force 
participation disaggregated by gender and other enabling factors which impact 
economic participation such as access to banking infrastructure and bank 
accounts. 
Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) are an important follow-up and review 
mechanism which is part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Each year, 
countries present their VNRs where they demonstrate their  progress in achieving the 
SDGs at the High -Level Political Forum under the auspices of ECOSOC. India is 
scheduled to present its second VNR in 2020, having presented in 2017 previously. As 
part of the VNR 2020 preparation process, NITI Aayog, in collaboration with Civil 

 
Society Organization (CSO) partners, has already conducted 14 consultations focusing on 
different groups following principle of “Leaving No One Behind (LNOB) and reaching the 
furthest behind first” - which lies at the core of Agenda 2030. This is also part of NITI 
Aayog’s larger effort of engaging a Whole-of-Society approach along with a Whole-of- 
Government approach towards SDG integration and implementation. 
 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/07/2019-ParI. dated 14'h February, 2020] 

 
CHAPTER - III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL

 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER- V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                              SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
8 September 2020                             Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Finance 
  

 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 

 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the  subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery 

 
in the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  

 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-20) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF PLANNING 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
04  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation at 
Sl.No. 1, 2,3 and 4) 
 
04 100% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies  
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
Nil 0.00 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 