6 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019  
 
(MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS) 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2020 / Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)  


SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019  
 
 
(MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS) 
 
 
             
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4 March, 2020  
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 March 2020 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2020 / Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)


CONTENTS 
Page Nos. 
Composition of the Committee………………………………………. 
 
Introduction……………………………………………………………. 
 
REPORT 
Background 
 
 
Working of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code: Experience So Far  
Clause-by-clause Examination 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
I. Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 15th January, 2020, 11th February, 
2020, 24th February, 2020 and 3rd March, 2020. 
II. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019* 
III. Dissent Notes- Shri T. K. Rangarajan, MP(RS) 
 Shri Manish Tewari, MP(LS)  
 Shri Rajeev Chandrashekhar, MP(RS) 
 
*to be appended at printing stage. 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
 
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
5.  Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
12. Shri Pinaki Misra 
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy 
14. Prof. Saugata Roy 
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki 
17. Shri Manish Tewari 
18. Shri P. Velusamy 
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21 Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan  
24. Shri Praful Patel 
25. Shri Amar Patnaik 
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
28. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
31. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan - Director  
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Yugma Malik   - Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance having been authorised by the 
Committee present this Sixth Report on the Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 2019. 
2. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019, introduced in Lok 
Sabha on 12 December, 2019 was refe rred to the Committee on 23 December, 2019 for 
examination and report thereon, by the Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Co rporate Affairs and 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) at their Sittings held on 15 January, 2020 and 
24 February, 2020. 
4. The Committee at their Sitting held on 11 February, 2020 heard the views of the 
representatives of the Indian Banks' As sociation (IBA) and PRS Legislative Research.  At the 
sitting held on 24 February, 2020 representatives of Forum For People's Collective Efforts 
(FPCE) and Wishtown Homebuyers Welfare Society presented their views before the 
Committee. 
5. The Committee con sidered and adopted this report at their Sitting held on 3rd March, 
2020. 
6. The Committee wish to express their appreciation to the officials of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs concerned with the Bill for their co -operation and all the organisations for their 
valuable suggestions on the Bill.  The Committee would like to also thank Shri Shardul Shroff, 
Executive Chairman, Shardul Amarchand Mangaldas & Co. and CA Subodh Kumar Agarwal for 
their views and suggestions on the Bill. 
7. For facility of referenc e, observation/ recommendations of the Committee have been 
pointed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                    Shri Jayant Sinha 
03 March, 2020                         Chairperson, 
13 Phalguna, 1941(Saka)                     Standing Committee on Finance 
 

Report 
1. Background 
To deal effectively with insolvency and bankruptcy, the  Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code was enacted on May 28, 2016, to consolidate and amend the laws relating to 
reorganization and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, partnership firms and 
individuals in a time bound manner for maximization of value of assets of such persons, 
to prom ote entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests of all the 
stakeholders including alteration in the order of priority of payment of the Government 
dues. 
1.2 The Code envisages a sound insolvency regime for companies and Limited 
Liability Partnerships as well as for individuals and unlimited liability partnership under 
its different parts. The ecosystem for implementation of the provisions of the Code 
consists of four pillars, viz., the Adjudicating Authorities (the National Company La w 
Tribunals and Debts Recovery Tribunals), Insolvency Professional Agencies, Insolvency 
Professionals and Information Utilities, and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of 
India (IBBI) to exercise regulatory oversight over insolvency professional agencies,  
insolvency professionals and information utilities. 
1.3 Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code is a new legislation which is still evolving. As 
and when problems arise in smooth functioning of the Code necessary steps have been 
taken to resolve them including ame ndments to the Code as required to attain the 
objectives of the Code. Till date, t he Code has been amended four times. The brief of 
the amendments to the Code are as following: 
I. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2018  
1.4 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017 sought to replace 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2017, inter alia, 
provided for the following, namely: ― 
a) facilitate phased implementation of the provisions of the Code to corporate 
persons, individuals and partnership firms;  

b) provide clarity as to the persons who can submit a resolution plan  in 
response to an invitation made by the resolution professional (RP);  
c) enable the resolution professional, with the approval of the Committee of 
Creditors (CoC), to specify the eligibility conditions (including such conditions 
as may be specified by the Board) while inviting resolution plans from 
prospective resolution applicants keeping in view the scale and complexity of 
operations of business of the corporat e debtor (CD) to avoid frivolous 
applicants;  
d) provide for making certain persons ineligible for being a resolution applicant;   
e) provide that the Committee of Creditors shall approve the resolution plan by a 
vote of not less than seventy -five per cent of vot ing share of the financial 
creditors (FC) after considering the feasibility and viability of the resolution 
plan in addition to such requirements as may be specified by the Board, 
before according its approval;  
f) disallow the sale of property to a person wh o is ineligible to be a resolution 
applicant in case of liquidation of corporate debtor;  
g) provide punishment for contravention of the provisions where no specific 
penalty or punishment is mentioned;  
h) consequential amendments conferring power upon the Board  to make 
regulations. 
 
II. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Act, 2018  
1.5 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Act, 2018 replace d 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, inter alia, 
provided for the following, namely :- 
 
a) Insertion of Section 240A by which the applicability of section 29A (c) and (h) is 
exempted for the resolution applicants in respect of corporate insolvency 
resolution process (CIRP) of MSMEs. Further, Central Government may in public 
interest direct that MSMEs may be exempted from application of any of the 
provisions of the Code. 

b) Section 29A amended to the extent that clause (c) relating to Non -performing 
Asset (NPA) will not be applicable to pure play financial entities. The  same 
exemption also extended to a resolution applicant who acquired a distressed asset 
with an NPA account under the Code, for a period of three years from the date of 
such acquisition. Disqualifications under Section 29A (d) and (e) of the Code that 
are personal i.e., conviction and disqualification as a director, respectively, shall 
not apply in relation to a “connected person” as defined in the Code.  Further, the 
disqualification relating to conviction shall not be applicable to a person after expiry 
of two years from the date of his release from imprisonment. A carve out also 
given to a person who acquired a corporate debtor under the Code in which 
preferential, undervalued, fraudulent or extortionate credit transactions had taken 
place prior to such a cquisition provided such person has not contributed to such 
violations.  A separate explanation inserted to define financial entity for the 
purpose of Section 29A. 
c) An explanation has been inserted to Section 5 to clarify that home buyers shall be 
treated, as amounts raised under the contracts of homebuyers are a means of 
raising finance and carry the commercial effect of borrowing. Therefore, fall within 
the category of FC.  
d) Section 14 amended to clarify that the moratorium shall not apply to a personal 
guarantor or a corporate guarantor to a corporate debtor. 
e) Voting threshol d for various decisions of the Committee of C reditors (CoC) 
reduced from 75% to 66% for important decisions and from 75% to 51% for routine 
decisions.  
f) Section 12A inserted for permittin g withdrawal of application post admission on an 
application made to National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) by the applicant who 
triggered the CIRP, with the approval of 90 per cent of voting share of CoC in 
manner as may be specified. 
g) In section 31(4) a new  proviso proposed to be added to ensure that th e approval 
for the combinations  be obtained from Competition Commission of India prior to 
the approval of resolution plan by the Committee of Creditors;  

h) For the corporate debtor to initiate CIRP under Section  10 of the Code, it has to 
obtain special resolution of the shareholders or resolution passed by at least three-
fourth of the total number of partners of the corporate debtor, as the case may be.  
i) Section 238 A inserted to clarify that the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to the 
Code. The intention is to not give a new lease of life to debts that are time barred.   
j) Related party in relation to an individual is defined by inserting a new section, 
5(24A).   
k) Section 196 amended to give developmental role to IB BI besides widening its 
scope to levy fee or other charges for carrying out the purposes of the Code. 
l) A new section, Section 25A has been inserted on the rights and duties of 
authorized representative.  This will apply wherever there are a very large numbe r 
of creditors under a particular class such as depositors, homebuyers, etc., and it 
becomes necessary to appoint an authorized representative for which a specific 
provision has been made in Section 21 (6A) and (6B). 
 
III. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019  
1.6 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019 was passed by 
Parliament and came into effect from 16.8.2019. This amendment bill, inter alia,  
provided for the following, namely:- 
a) Clarity on allowing comprehensive corporate restructuring schemes such as 
mergers, demergers, amalgamations etc. as part of the resolution plan.  
b) Greater emphasis on the need for time bound disposal at application stage.  
c) A deadline for completion of CIRP within an overall limit of 330 days, including 
litigation and other judicial processes.  
d) Votes of all financial creditors covered under section 21(6A) to be cast in 
accordance with the decision approved by the highest voting share (more than 
50%) of financial creditors on present and voting basis.  
e) A specific provision that financial creditors who have not voted in favor of the 
resolution plan and operational creditors shall receive at least the amount that 
would have been received by them if the amount to be distributed under the 
resolution plan had been distributed in accordance with section 53 of the Code or 

the amount that would have been received if the liquidation value of the corporate 
debtor had been distributed in accordance with section 53 of the C ode, whichever 
is higher. This to have retrospective effect where the resolution plan has not 
attained finality or has been appealed against. 
f) Inclusion of commercial consideration in the manner of distribution proposed in 
resolution plan, within the powers of the Committee of Creditors.  
g) Clarity that the plan shall be binding on all the stakeholders including the Central 
Government, any State Government or local authority to whom a debt in respect of 
the payment of the dues may be owed.  
h) Clarity that the Co mmittee of Creditors may take the decision to liquidate the 
corporate debtor, any time after constitution of the Committee of Creditors and 
before preparation of Information Memorandum. 
IV. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019  
1.7 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019 was 
promulgated on 28th December, 2019, and inter alia, provides for the following, namely: 
a) clarify that the insolvency commencement  date is the date of admission of an 
application for initiating corporate insolvency resolution process; 
b) give  the Central Government  the power to include other debts within the 
definition of interim finance 
c) specifying a minimum threshold for certain classes of financial creditors for 
initiating insolvency resolution proceedings; 
d) clarify that a corporate debtor should not be prevented from filing an application 
for initiation of corporation insolvency resolution proceedings against other 
corporate debtors; 
e) clarify that the licenses, permits etc. Cannot be terminate d or suspended during 
Moratorium period and ensuring supply of critical services for its continuation  as 
a going concern; 
f) an insolvency resolution profession should be appointed on the date of admission 
of the application for initiation of insolvency resolution process; 

g) enable the resolution professional to manage the affairs of the corporate debtor 
in the interim period between the expiry of corporate insolvency resolution 
process till the appointment of a liquidator; 
h) ring-fencing corporate debtor resolved under the IBC in favour of a successful 
resolution applicant from criminal proceedings against offences committed by 
previous management /promoters. 
1.8 Now to further address the difficulties faced during the course of implementation 
of the Code and to facilitate the ease of doing business, the present Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 has been introduced on 12 th 
December, 2019 and has been referred to the Committee on 23rd December, 2019. The 
amendments proposed are based on the recommendations of the Insolvency Law 
Committee (ILC) under the chairmanship of Secretary (Corporate Affairs) with 
representatives from industries, professional instit utes, law firms, Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI), Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and concerned Ministries.  
1.9 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 seeks to 
amend sect ions 5(12), 5(15), 7, 11, 14, 16(1), 21(2), 23(1), 29A, 227, 239, 240 and 
insert section 32A in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016, in order to remove 
certain difficulties during corporate insolvency resolution process (CIRP) and further to 
strengthen the Code to realise the objectives of the Code. 
1.10 Salient Features of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code ( Second 
Amendment), Bill 2019: 
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 proposes: 
i. to amend section 5 of the Code– 
(a) to omit the proviso to clause 12 so as  to clarify that the insolvency 
commencement date is the date of admission of an application for initiating 
corporate insolvency resolution process; and 
(b) to amend clause 15 in order to give the Central Government the power to 
include other debts within the definition of interim finance;  

ii. to amend section 7 of the Code so as to insert certain provisos specifying a 
minimum threshold for certain classes of financial creditors for initiating 
insolvency resolution proceedings; 
iii. to amend section 11 of the Code so as to insert an Explanation to clarify that a 
corporate debtor should not be prevented from filing an application for initiation of 
corporation insolvency resolution proceedings against other corporate debtors; 
iv. to amend sec tion 14 of the Code to clarify that the licences, permits etc. and 
critical supplies cannot be terminated or suspended during Moratorium period; 
v. to amend section 16 of the Code relating to appointment and tenure of interim 
resolution professional so as to provide that an insolvency resolution profession 
should be appointed on the date of admission of the application for initiation of 
insolvency resolution process and the said amendment is of consequential in 
nature; 
vi. to amend section 23 to enable the resolut ion professional to manage the affairs 
of the corporate debtor in the interim period between the expiry of corporate 
insolvency resolution process till the appointment of a liquidator; 
vii. to insert the new section 32A relating to liability of corporate debtor  for prior 
offences under certain circumstances;  
viii. to amend section 227 of the Code so as to clarify that the insolvency and 
liquidation proceedings for financial service providers may be conducted with 
such modifications to the provisions of the Code and i n such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
ix. other amendments which are of consequential in nature. 
2. The Working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC): Experience So Far 
2.1 IBC is  a transformational piece of legislation. It has brought about a paradigm 
shift in the existing insolvency laws as it moves away from debtor-in-possession to 
creditor-in-possession. It instils a significantly better sense of credit discipline and has 
brought about desired behavioural change in the attitude of both borrowers and 
creditors. The jurisprudence  of the Code has  evolved in a manner that  has made it 
predominantly clear that the objective of the Code is resolution of the corporate debtor 

and to not merely work as a recovery mechanism for creditors. Revival should be the 
preferred route than recovery. Recovery is a one-time affair, after that there is no value 
but rescuing the company will protect employment, provide future cashflows, contribute 
to the economic growth, lead to entrepreneurship by competition, and thus ha ve a long 
term impact.  
 
2.2 The Code has proved to be a game changer in facilitating the revival of failing 
companies and addressing the problem of Non-Performing Assets (NPAs). As per RBI’s 
Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India 2018-19, the gross NPA (GNPA) ratio 
of all Schedule Commercial Banks (SCBs) declined in 2018 -19 after rising for seven 
consecutive years, as recognition of bad loans neared completion. Gross NPA s as per 
cent of Gross Advances for all SCBs declined from 11.2% in 2017 -18 to 9.1% in 2018 -
19. The Report informs that the recovery of stressed assets improved during 2018 -19 
propelled by resolutions under the IBC, which contributed more than half of the total 
amount recovered.  
 
2.3 As per the written post evidence replies submitted by the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, “as on 30 th November 2019 around 13,210 cases have been disposed under 
IBC. Around 190 cases involving claims around ₹3.67 lakh crore we re resolved with a 
realizable amount of around of around ₹1.57 lakh crore. Around 11,366 cases involving 
claims around ₹4.74 lakh crore were disposed prior to admission. The realizable 
amount with respect to ₹4.74 lakh crore is not available but even if we  make a 
conservative estimate it would be around ₹2 lakh crore. In other words, out of claims of 
around ₹8.4 lakh crore (₹4.74 lakh crore + ₹3.67 lakh crore), the realizable amount is 
around ₹3.57 lakh crore (around 43%) ”. Also, the average time take n for resolution has 
now come to about 394 days, closer to the timeline of 330 days prescribed in the Code, 
down from 4.3 years under the previous regime.   
 
2.4 Further, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed that to  bring further 
improvement in the Code, elaborate work has been done in Cross -Border Insolvency. 
ILC was seized of the matter and based on ILC’s report of October , 2018 a draft bill has 
been prepared and would be put up for consideration of the Cabinet.  

2.5 The Committee note that th e Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC) 
was promulgated on concepts such as promoting maximisation of value of 
assets, transparent and predictable insolvency  resolution framework , avoiding 
destruction of value of the debtor , and recognising the differ ence between 
malfeasance and business failure.  The Committee further note that even though 
the IBC has been globally recognized as a paradigm shift in India’s insolvency 
resolution process , many areas have required judicial and legislative 
interventions to enable the process to achieve the desired results. The Committee 
understand that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 
2019 seeks to remove some of these bottlenecks and streamline the corporate 
insolvency resolution process further. 
2.6 While acknowledging the role played by IBC in arresting the growth of 
NPAs, it is expected that effective measures within the ambit of IBC would be 
taken to realize better results from the process. The Committee note that out of 
claims of around Rs 8. 4 lakh crore, the realizable amount is around Rs. 3.57 lakh 
crore i.e. around 43% from the IBC process so far. Also, the average time taken 
for resolution has come down to 394 days. The Committee hope that the recovery 
percentage increases significantly in  the near future and the time taken for 
resolution conforms to the timeline prescribed in the Code. The Committee would 
like to reiterate its recommendation made in previous reports about increasing 
the number of benches in National Company Law Tribunal (N CLT) and 
establishing e -courts for faster disposal of cases and speedy resolution. The 
Committee understand that a draft Bill on Cross Border Insolvency is in the 
pipeline. These types of cases have already resulted in uncertain recoveries for 
creditors. The Committee would like this Bill to be introduced in Parliament as 
soon as possible in order to further strengthen the insolvency framework. 
3. Clause-by-Clause examination of the Bill 
3.1 In view of the detailed examination of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Second) Amendment Bill, 2019 and suggestions received from the stakeholders the 

Committee have commented upon on some of the important clauses of the Bill, which 
are as under:- 
Clause 5 (b) 
3.2 Clause 5(b) reads as under: 
In section 14 of the principal Act,— 
 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
"(2A) The supply of goods or services that the interim resolution professional or 
resolution professional, as the case may be, considers critical to protect and preserve 
the value of the corporate debtor and manage the operations of such corporate 
debtor as a going concern, then the supply of such goods or services shall not be 
terminated, suspended or interrupted during the period of moratorium, except if such 
corporate debtor has not paid dues arising from such supply during the moratorium 
period or in such circumstances as may be specified."; 
 
3.3 The stakeholders on the above clause during th e sitting held on 11 th February, 
2020 stated:- 
“This implies that a supplier may be obliged to provide goods and services even 
when he senses a higher default risk.” 
 
3.4 The stakeholders on the above clause furnished the following suggestion:- 
 
“Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) may require special 
consideration under this provision.  MSMEs are usually the operational creditors to 
large businesses.” 
3.5 The Ministry have furnished their following comments on the above suggestions: 
“While the resolution professional can negotiate the continuation of critical supplies, 
not considered essential supplies under the Code, it is relevant to note that there is a 
risk that suppliers may choose to demand ‘ransom payments’ since their supplies  are 
critical to the corporate debtor….  
…It would not be feasible to exhaustively list all the potential safeguards that may be 
necessary to protect the interests of a critical supplier. Therefore, with a view to 
adequately protect their interests, Sectio n 14(2A) empowers IBBI to specify any 
additional grounds (apart from non -payment of current dues) for termination, 
suspension or interruption of critical supplies during the period of moratorium. 
Further, if a need is felt, specific exemptions may be provi ded for MSME suppliers 
under Section 240A.” 

3.6 The Committee are concerned that the intent behind this proposed 
amendment may turn into a case of over -regulation of supplier s, particularly 
MSME suppliers. The Committee feel that just to make the IBC proce ss smoother 
and in hope of a probable revival, supplier s cannot be burdened with overly 
restrictive conditions.  The Committee recommend that market forces should 
resolve whether a supplier decides to supply to a corporate debtor , as there are 
limited resources available and each supplier has a limited capacity, which needs 
to be channelized and allocated in the best interest of  the economy and not 
directed solely towards keeping the corporate debtor alive. The Committee 
believe that over-legislation through the Bill must be avoided and the process of 
delegated legislation through formulation of rules by Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Board of India (IBBI) be followed to strike a harmonious balance between the 
needs and concerns of stakeholders in question, namely  the corporate debtor/ 
insolvency resolution professional trying to revive the company and the supplier 
of critical/essential goods. In this context, the Committee would like to emphasise 
that the payments due to MSMEs, who are operational creditors not in cluded in 
the Committee of Creditors (CoC), should be ensured on priority in the course of 
the resolution process itself before the liquidation stage kicks in. The Committee 
would therefore recommend that the Clause 5(b) (2A) should accordingly be 
deleted. 
Clause 10 
3.7 Clause 10 reads as under: 
After section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
"32A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code or any 
other law for the time being in force, the li ability of a corporate debtor for an offence 
committed prior to the commencement of the corporate insolvency resolution process 
shall cease, and the corporate debtor shall not be prosecuted for such an offence 
from the date the resolution plan has been app roved by the Adjudicating Authority 
under section 31, if the resolution plan results in the change in the management or 
control of the corporate debtor to a person who was not— 
 
(a) a promoter or in the management or control of the corporate debtor or a related 
party of such a person; or 
 

(b) a person with regard to whom the relevant investigating authority has, on the 
basis of material in its possession, reason to believe that he had abetted or conspired 
for the commission of the offence, and has submitted  or filed a report or a complaint 
to the relevant statutory authority or Court: 
 
Provided that if a prosecution had been instituted during the corporate insolvency 
resolution process against such corporate debtor, it shall stand discharged from the 
date of approval of the resolution plan subject to requirements of this sub -section 
having been fulfilled: 
 
Provided further that every person who was a "designated partner" as defined in 
clause (j) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, an "officer who is 
in default", as defined in clause (60) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, or was 
in any manner incharge of, or responsible to the corporate debtor for the conduct of 
its business or associated with the corporate debtor in any manner and who was 
directly or indirectly involved in the commission of such offence as per the report 
submitted or complaint filed by the investigating authority, shall continue to be liable 
to be prosecuted and punished for such an offence committed by the corporate 
debtor notwithstanding that the corporate debtor's liability has ceased under this sub-
section. 
(2) No action shall be taken against the property of the corporate debtor in relation to 
an offence committed prior to the commencement of the corporate insolvency 
resolution process of the corporate debtor, where such property is covered under a 
resolution plan approved by the Adjudicating Authority under section 31, which 
results in the change in control of the corporate debtor to a person, or sale of 
liquidation assets under the provisions of Chapter III of Part II of this Code to a 
person, who was not— 
(i) a promoter or in the management or control of the corporate debtor or a related 
party of such a person; or 
(ii) a person with regard to whom the rele vant investigating authority has, on the 
basis of material in its possession reason to believe that he had abetted or 
conspired for the commission of the offence, and has submitted or filed a report or 
a complaint to the relevant statutory authority or Court. 
"Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby clarified that,— 
(i) an action against the property of the corporate debtor in relation to an offence 
shall include the attachment, seizure, retention or confiscation of such property 
under such law as may be applicable to the corporate debtor; 
(ii) nothing in this sub -section shall be construed to bar an action against the 
property of any person, other than the corporate debtor or a person who has 
acquired such property through corporate insolvency resolution process or 
liquidation process under this Code and fulfils the requirements specified in this 
section, against whom such an action may be taken under such law as may be 
applicable. 
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), and 
notwithstanding the immunity given in this section, the corporate debtor and any 

person who may be required to provide assistance under such law as may be 
applicable to such corporate debtor or person, shall extend all assistance and co -
operation to any authority investigating an offence committed prior to the 
commencement of the corporate insolvency resolution process.". 
 
3.8 The stakeholders on the above clause furnished the following suggestion:- 
“Though the Bill gives immunity to the  corporate debtor (company as a legal entity) 
from prior offences, the individuals responsible for committing such offences on 
behalf of the debtor will still be held liable.The question is whether the debtor should 
be absolved of all kinds of prior offences with such a blanket immunity.” 
3.9 The Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs during the sitting held on               
15th January, 2020 remarked:- 
 
“If the bidder, who is coming and participating under the court -supervised 
competitive process, does not get security and is not indemnified, there may be a 
problem” 
 
3.10 Further, the Ministry furnished the following comment on the above suggestion: 
“…this provision would only apply where the CIRP culminates in a change in control 
to a completely unconne cted resolution applicant.  As such, a resolution applicant 
has nothing to do with the commission of any pre -CIRP offence whatsoever, and the 
corporate debtor is now fundamentally not the same entity as the one that committed 
the crime.” 
 
3.11 The Committee are in agreement with the intent of this amendment to 
safeguard the position of the Resolution Applicant(s) by ring -fencing them from 
prosecution and liabilities under offences committed by erstwhile promoters etc . 
The Committee understand th e need for treating the company or the Corporate 
Debtor as a cleansed entity for cases which result in change in the management 
or control of the corporate debtor to a person who was not a promotor or in the 
management control of the corporate debtor or re lated party of such person, or 
to a person against whom there are material evidence and pending complaint or 
report by the investigating authority filed in relation to the criminal offence. The 
Committee agree that this provision is essential to provide th e Resolution 
Applicant(s) a fair chance to revive the unit which otherwise would directly go 
into liquidation, which may not be as beneficial to the economy. The Committee 
believe that this ring-fencing is essential to achieve revival or resolution without  

imposing additional liabilities on the Resolution Applicant, arising from malafide 
acts of the previous promoter or management. 
3.12 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code represents a transformational 
framework not only for the resolution of defaulting corpo rate debtors, but more 
importantly in establishing powerful incentives to avoid default altogether. Such 
incentives are already having a salutary impact on ensuring timely payments 
across the economic system, thus lowering risk, and eventually the cost of credit 
for all stakeholders. This is certainly very positive for economic growth. 
Nonetheless, a much more strategic approach to strengthening the insolvency 
framework is required. Developing such a strategic approach requires detailed 
analysis along three  dimensions. First, empirical evidence should be collected 
on the performance of the insolvency framework to date. This should include 
inter alia  cases admitted across various benches, cases by industry/sector, 
experiences of various stakeholders, time for  resolution, type of resolution, 
eventual recovery by resolution type, and impact on employment and other 
output indicators. This empirical evidence should be updated every quarter and 
published in the public domain. Second, the Indian insolvency framework  should 
now be carefully benchmarked against other jurisdictions to evaluate outcomes 
and assess resolution efficiency against competitor nations. Empirical evidence 
and benchmarking analysis should identify which major gaps still need to be 
addressed and the extent to which Indian case law needs to be further refined. 
Finally, the interdependent roles of legislation, rule -making, adjudication, and 
informal norms need to be evaluated to close these identified gaps. The 
Committee notes that there is consider able ambiguity on which policy lever is 
most appropriate to address which issue. Further legislation needs to be 
informed by such comprehensive analysis. Accordingly, the Committee intends 
to conduct further hearings on this matter so that a more strategic  approach can 
be evolved to strengthen the insolvency framework for India. 

3.13 The Committee thus endorse the proposed amendments in the Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 with the modifications 
suggested above. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi           Shri Jayant Sinha 
03 March 2020              Chairperson 
13 Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Finance 
  

Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20)  
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 15 January, 2020 from 1330 hrs. to 1515 
hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
   
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
6. Shri Pinaki Misra 
7. Prof. Saugata Roy 
8. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
9.  Shri Manish Tewari 
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
14. Smt. Ambika Soni 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen   - Under Secretary 
 5. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
  

WITNESSES 
 
 Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
  
    
1. Shri Injeti Srinivas, Secretary 
2. Shri Gyaneshwar Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary   
 
 Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) 
 
1. Dr. Mukulita Vijayawargiya, Whole Time Member  
2. Shri Sudhakar Shukla, Whole Time Member 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs made a 
power point presentation highlighting key amendments to be made through the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019. The major issues 
discussed during the sitting included the evolution of the Code in the last three years, 
distinguishing features of the Code such as the primacy of revival over  recovery and 
possession remaining with creditor instead of debtor, the importance of evaluation of the 
Code, its efficacy, its impact on different players in the financial sector and business 
community including small and medium enterprises, the process o f disposal and 
settlement of cases including the total number of cases and time taken for resolution, its 
impact on reducing NPAs, the importance of a comprehensive study including global 
best practices for bringing in amendments etc. The witnesses responded to the queries 
raised by the Members on the subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish 
written replies to the queries which could not be readily replied by them during the 
sitting.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20)  
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 February, 2020 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
   
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
9. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
10. Shri Pinaki Misra 
11. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
12. Shri Manish Tewari 
13. Shri P. Velusamy 
14.  Shri Rajesh Verma 
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
15. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
16. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
17. Shri Amar Patnaik 
18. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
19. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
20. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
21. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen   - Under Secretary 
  
  

WITNESSES 
 Indian Banks’ Association 
  
1. C.S. Setty, Managing Director, State Bank of India 
2. Rajeev Dewal, Senior Advisor- Legal, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) 
3. Atul Gautam, Senior Advisor- Delhi, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) 
4. Shri Sunil Mehta, Chief Executive, Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) 
5. Shri Sandeep Batra, President – Corporate Centre, ICICI Bank 
6. Sanjay Nambiar, General Counsel, Yes Bank 
7. Ashish Singh, Senior Vice President (Head Structured Assets), Axis Bank 
 
PRS Legislative Research 
  
1. Dr. M.R. Madhavan, President 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairman initiated the discussion on the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 2 019. The major issues discussed include the practicality and 
rationale behind initiation of resolution process by certain class of creditors (like 
homebuyers), only if either 100 of them or 10% of the total number of allottees, 
whichever is less jointly fi le an application; provision of immunity and whitewashing to a 
corporate debtor for offences committed before the commencement of the insolvency 
process; obligation on the supplier to provide goods and services during the moratorium 
period even when he sen ses a higher default risk and its impact on MSMEs; the need 
for defining various classes of creditors; making the liquidator accountable to the 
Committee of Creditors with regard to valuation decisions of assets being disposed so 
as to achieve a higher recovery; ambit of rule making and the general role and impact of 
IBC on the economy. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members 
on the subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the 
queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept 
The Committee then adjourned. 

Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20)  
The Committee sat on Monday, the 24 February, 2020 from 1130 hrs. to 1545 hrs 
in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
  
 LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
 4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
 5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
 6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
 7. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
 8. Prof. Saugata Roy 
 9. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
 10. Shri Manish Tewari 
 11. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
 12. Shri Rajesh Verma 
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
 13. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
 14. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
 15. Shri Praful Patel 
 16. Shri Amar Patnaik 
 17. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
 18. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
 19. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
 20. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
 21. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen   - Under Secretary 

 
PART I  
(1130 hrs - 1230 hrs) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 Forum For People's Collective Efforts 
1.   Mr Abhay Upadhyay, President 
 
 Wishtown Homebuyers Welfare Society 
 
1.  Sqn Ldr. S.D. Mitroo (Retd), Vice-President 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second 
Amendment) Bill, 2019 focusing primarily on Clause 3 i.e amendment in section 7 of the 
Code to insert certain provisions specifying a minimum threshold for certain classes o f 
financial creditors for initiating insolvency resolution proceedings. The major issues 
discussed include proposal for dropping of Clause 3 by the stakeholders, differentiation 
between speculative investor and genuine buyer, making the homebuyer a primary  
secured creditor, bringing the homebuyers at par with all financial creditors in the 
waterfall of liquidation, impact of initiating insolvency by single homebuyer when no 
other financial creditor desires so, need for strengthening RERA Act and Consumer 
Protection Act enabling them to be efficient medium for the homebuyer to address their 
issues instead of taking recourse in IBC. The witnesses responded to the queries raised 
by the Members on the subject. The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish writ ten 
replies to the queries which could not be readily replied by them during the sitting.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART II  
(1230 hrs – 1400 hrs) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
1.  Shri Injeti Srinivas, Secretary 
2.  Smt. Anjali Bhawra, Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri Rajesh Aggarwal, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor 
4.  Shri K.V.R. Murty, Joint Secretary 
 
 Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) 
 
1. Dr. M.S. Sahoo, Chairperson 
2. Dr. Mukulita Vijayawargiya, Whole Time Member  
3. Shri Navrang Saini, Whole Time Member 
4. Shri Ritesh Kavdia, Executive Director 
5. Smt. Geeta Singh Rathore, DDG 
 Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) 
1. Shri Amardeep Singh Bhatia, Director 
 
 Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
1. Shri K.P. Singh, Secretary 
 
 Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority (IEPFA) 
1. Shri Navneet Chauhan, G.M 
 Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA) 
1. Shri Sunil Sahu, CFO 
 
 National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA) 
1. Shri Vivek Narayan, Secretary 
 
 National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) 
1. Shri Shiv Ram Bairwa, Registrar 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took concluding evidence of the representatives of 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) on the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019. The major issues 
discussed during the sitting included the rationale behind introduction of Clause 3 in the 
Bill i.e amendment in Section 7 of the Code to insert certain provisions specifying a 

minimum threshold for certain classes of financial creditors for initiating insolvency 
resolution proceedings, reason for suppliers of essential and critical goods to supply 
during the moratorium period despite disrupting market functioning, rationale behind  
mandating the continuation of licences, permits etc by government authorities like in 
case of Jet Airways during the moratorium period, parallel working of RERA Act and 
IBC and the need to strengthen the former. 
 
The Committee then adjourned for Lunch 
 
PART III  
(1430 hrs - 1545 hrs) 
 
 
4. After lunch the Committee reassembled and took oral evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs in connection with the examination of 
Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the Ministry and issues connecte d therewith. The 
major issues discussed included non -operational status of GST Assistant sector under 
the Champion sector scheme, huge case load on Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
(SFIO) and its high vacancy rate, the draft Amendment Bill on the Competi tion Act and 
functioning of Competition Commission of India (CCI), staffing and disposal of case in 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) etc. The witnesses responded to the queries 
raised by the Members on the subjects. The Committee directed the witnesses  to 
furnish written replies to the queries which could not be readily replied by them during 
the sitting.   
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 

Minutes  of  the  Eleventh sitting  of  the  Standing  Committee on Finance (2019-
20)The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 3rd March, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1830 hrs 
in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4.  Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
5. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
9. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
10. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
11. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
12. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki 
13. Shri Manish Tewari 
14. Shri P. Velusamy 
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
16. Shri Rajesh Verma 
  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
18. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan  
19. Shri Praful Patel 
20. Shri Amar Patnaik 
21. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
22. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
23. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
24. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
25. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen   - Under Secretary 
5. Kh. Ginlal Chung    - Under Secretary 

WITNESSES 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft Report on 'Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 ' for consideration and adoption. After 
some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Report with some 
modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to 
Parliament. The Chairperson observed that in case some Members desire to submit a 
dissent note he or she may do so and the same will be appended to the Report. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 