i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2022-23) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Fifty 
Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)'] 
 
 
 
 
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
62 


ii 
 
 
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2022-2023) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained in 
Fifty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2023-
2024) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)'] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 July, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 July, 2023 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
     NEW DELHI 
 
 
              July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I Report          1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
12 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
25 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
26 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited 
 
 
27 
 ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 20 July, 
2023 
28 
                           APPENDIX  
 Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations   15 contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)’ 
 
31 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2022-23) 
 
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
9. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
10. Shri Pinaki Misra 
11. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
13. Shri Nama Nageshwara Rao 
14. Prof. Sougata Ray 
15. Shri P.V. Midhun Reddy 
16. Shri Gopal Chinayya  Shetty 
17. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh  
18. Dr. (Prof) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
19. Shri Manish Tewari 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri P. Chidambaram 
25. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
26. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
27. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
28. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
29. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
30. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari* 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan                                -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan                 -    Director  
3. Shri Puneet Bhatia                                        -    Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Manish Kumar                                       -    Committee Officer 
 
____________________________________ 
 
* Vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II no. 63014 dated 13.03.2023, Shri Pramod Tiwari was nominated to the 
Standing Committee on Finance (2022-23) on 13th March, 2023 vice Dr. Manmohan Singh, who resigned from 
the Committee w.e.f. 9th February, 2023. 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixty-Second Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report 
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
  
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 23 March, 2023. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Government vide their 
communication dated 6 June, 2023.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
20 July, 2023. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 55th Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue).  
 
2. The 55th Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha on                    
23rd March, 2023 and was laid in Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Report contained 
7 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action-taken replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 55th Report were received on 6th June, 2023. These have been 
categorized as follows: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Serial Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6, and 7             
Total - 7 
                         Chapter-II 
                                                         
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
- Nil   -          Total - 00 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
     -     Nil   -     Total– 00                                                                                
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which the final reply of the 
Government is still awaited:  
- Nil -  
                                 Total - 00 
Chapter-V 
 
 

2 
 
4. The Committee desire that action taken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of its presentation. 
 
5. Although all the Committee’s recommendations have been accepted in principle 
for compliance, some of the observations/recommendations and the action taken 
thereupon may be commented upon as follows:   
 
 
(Recommendation S.No.3) 
Goods and Service Tax 
6. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note with concern that with respect to Audit in GST, large 
number of documents are being sought from tax-payers for conducting an 
audit.  Besides, the assessees are also being called to the GST offices for 
physical appearance, which consumes lot of time of not only the assessees 
but also the officials of the Department.  The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to look into 
the feasibility of developing a mechanism for online audit in GST, which can 
make the process more efficient and less intrusive.  In this regard, the 
Committee urge the Department of Revenue to prepare a white list of 
documents that would be necessarily required for conducting an audit and 
would thus become a guidance note for the officers as well as the assessee.” 
 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“CBIC has published GST Audit Manual (GSTAM) which inter-alia provides 
for list of documents required to conduct audit, timelines for audit and other 
standard formats in the form of Annexure to the Manual such as Annexure I 
(registered person’s master file), Annexure III (documents required for Desk 
Review), and Annexure IX (verification of records/registers during audit) etc. 
Further, existing procedure of audit requires minimal interface between the 
officers and the taxpayers. The copies of documents/books of accounts and 
records etc. required to be submitted for conducting audit may be submitted 
through e-mail. Subsequently, if any clarification/explanation is sought from 
the taxpayer, may also be submitted through e-mail. From the systems 
perspective, the current audit functionality developed under ACES-GST 
application provides the feasibility for conducting the audit online wherein the 
required documents can be uploaded by tax payer as well as tax officer for 
further examination. However, recommendation of the Fifty- Fifth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Finance regarding feasibility of developing mechanism for online 
GST audit is noted for examination.” 
 

3 
 
8. The Committee express satisfaction that the Ministry have accepted their 
recommendation concerning the establishment of an online audit mechanism. 
The Committee would expect the Ministry to earnestly pursue this issue with the 
objective of further streamlining the GST audit process. Furthermore, the 
Committee desire to be apprised of the results of this undertaking at the time of 
furnishing the Final Action Taken Statement.   
 
(Recommendation S.No.5) 
Search, Seizure and Survey 
9. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“Keeping in view possible harassment from intrusive operations such as 
search seizure etc, the Committee desire that these operations should be 
handled judiciously with adequate caution. It is expected that due-diligence is 
fully carried out before undertaking these enforcement operations, so as to 
pre-empt legitimate complaints and to ensure due realization of tax therefrom. 
The Committee are of the view that while stepping up enforcement action 
against wilful or chronic evaders, honest taxpayers should not be alienated.” 
 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“Direct Taxes: 
Search & Seizure/Survey action by the Income Tax Department (ITD) is 
one of the potent tools to take appropriate action, as per law, against tax 
evader and also to spread deterrence against tax evasion. These actions are 
initiated only after thorough preliminary investigations and gathering credible 
information regarding tax evasion and undisclosed income & assets of an 
assessee/group. 
In order to make the search & seizure/survey actions an effective tool 
for detection of concealment of income without harassment of the taxpayers, 
proper procedures have been prescribed in the Act and Income Tax Rules, 
1962 (“the Rules"). A number of instructions and guidelines have also been 
issued from time to time by Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) for 
compliance by the search/survey teams during such actions for this purpose. 
These also cover the manner of proficiently handling any complaints of 
harassment. 
The power to issue warrant of authorization for carrying out a search 
under the Act is entrusted to a senior rank officer of ITD, not below the rank of 
Principal Commissioner or Principal Director of Income Tax. Further, the 
issuing authority has to record its “reason to believe” in writing, based upon 
information in his possession, before issuing the warrant of authorisation. 
Similarly, the authorization for survey action is issued only after the 
satisfaction of an officer of the rank of Principal Chief Commissioner of Income 

4 
 
Tax or the Director General or the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax, based 
on information regarding tax evasion and/or non-compliance by a taxpayer.  
The search/survey team is usually headed by an officer of the level of 
Deputy Director of Income Tax/ Assistant Director of Income Tax / Income Tax 
Officer. The size of search/survey team may be expanded considering the 
requirements of the premises. Further, such actions are under constant 
supervision of an officer of higher seniority of the level of Additional Director of 
Income Tax / Joint Director of Income Tax. A Control Room is set up during 
every search and seizure/survey action to have an effective monitoring of the 
premises under search/survey action and to make coordination with the 
authorized officers.  
Instructions/ guidelines have been issued by CBDT from time to time 
not to take admission of undisclosed income under coercion/pressure during 
search/survey. ‘The Taxpayers Charter’ indicating the Rights and Duties of the 
Taxpayers, issued by CBDT is usually handed over to person being 
searched/surveyed, at its commencement.  
Since a search action can also cover residential premises where there 
is likelihood of presence of women and children, the concerned search team 
includes at least one lady member. The children are permitted to go to school, 
after the examination of their bags. The entire search operation from the 
beginning till the end is carried out in presence of two independent witnesses. 
The key findings of entire proceedings are recorded in the Panchnama which 
is also signed by the witnesses, a copy of which is also given to the person 
being searched.  
Similarly, in a survey action, a record of survey proceedings is required 
to be prepared at the time of conclusion of survey, along with an inventory of 
books of account/documents being impounded.   
In spite of the above, in case of any wrongdoings or harassment during 
the course of search/survey action, the concerned tax payer can always make 
a complaint at any level. He may even request to keep the complaint 
confidential. Whenever, such complaint of any wrongdoing, harassment, 
violation of the procedures laid down, seeking of illegal gratification, etc. are 
received or brought to the knowledge of higher authorities, appropriate action 
is taken against officers and officials concerned, if the allegations are proved. 
  
Indirect Taxes: 
The Government fully agrees with the concern and desire of the 
Committee that in view of perceived harassment from such intrusive 
operations, these operations should be handled with adequate caution. In 
respect of Indirect Taxes (GST), Government (CBIC) had earlier issued 
elaborate Guidelines about the procedure to be followed while carrying out 
search proceedings under Section 67 of the CGST Act, 2017. These 
instructions, inter-alia, provide that in case of search of a residence, a lady 
officer shall necessarily be part of the search team; while conducting search, 
the officers must be sensitive towards the assessee/party and the officers 
should leave the premises immediately after completion of Panchnama 
proceedings. Further, social and religious sentiments of the person(s) under 
search and of all the person(s) present, shall be respected at all times 
with Special care/ attention to elderly, women and children present in the 

5 
 
premises under search. Instructions also provide that a woman occupying any 
premises, to be searched, has the right to withdraw before the search party 
enters, if according to the customs, she does not appear in public. 
Furthermore, keeping in mind the ease of doing business and in order 
to maintain the uniformity of practice and to sensitize field officers about 
judicious use of power to issue summons and make arrests, CBIC has issued 
guidelines under CGST Act, 2017 for ‘Arrests and Bail’ and ‘Summons’. The 
salient features include that since arrest impinges on the personal liberty of an 
individual, the power to arrest must be exercised carefully. The arrest should 
not be made in routine and mechanical manner. Apart from fulfilling legal 
requirements, approval to arrest should be based on credible material and on 
reasonable grounds recorded in writing and should be granted only where the 
intent to evade tax etc. is evident and element of mens rea / guilty mind is 
palpable. Arrest should not be resorted to in cases of technical nature like 
difference in interpretation of law. Illustrations have been given to provide 
guidance if the alleged offender is co-operating in the investigation or not, 
viz. compliance to summons, furnishing of documents called for, not giving 
evasive replies, voluntary payment of tax etc. 
Instructions on Summons provide, inter alia that power to issue 
summons needs to be exercised judiciously with the prior approval of DC/AC 
and should not be used for calling statutory documents available online. 
Officers are being advised to explore instances when instead of resorting to 
summons, a letter for requisition of information may suffice. Senior 
management officials such as CMD/ MD/ CEO/ CFO/ similar officers of any 
company or a PSU should not generally be issued summons unless there are 
clear indications of their involvement in the decision making process leading to 
loss of revenue.  
The Custom field formations and the Directorate of Revenue 
Intelligence (DRI) under the Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs 
(CBIC) take adequate caution while conducting Searches & Seizures. Due 
Diligence is carried out and only upon reasonable belief that violation of 
Customs Act, 1962 and the Allied Acts has been taken, are such operations 
carried out. 
CBIC also from time to time sensitizes field formations to ensure that 
honest tax payers are not harassed. A System of document Identification 
number (DIN) has been introduced to bring in authenticity while 
communicating with taxpayers by the Department Officials. 
CBIC has also instructed to install CCTV Cameras in the interrogation 
rooms. Accordingly, CCTVs have been installed in DRI headquarters and its 
Zonal units. The procurement of CCTVs for Custom Field Formations under 
CBIC is being undertaken by Directorate of Logistics (DoL) wherein tender for 
procurement has already been floated through GeM Portal and technical 
evaluation of the Bids is being undertaken.   
These instructions are also placed in the website of CBIC for the 
knowledge of general public.” 
  
11. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government has fully agreed 
with the concern of the Committee that in view of perceived harassment from 

6 
 
intrusive operations, these should be handled with adequate caution. The 
Committee appreciate the Ministry for instructing CBIC to install CCTV Cameras 
in the interrogation rooms as this step will further help in making the system 
transparent and fair. Also, the Ministry has enumerated other measures taken as 
well as existing provisions that can prevent harassment of honest taxpayers. The 
Committee, however, are of the view that these provisions/measures should also 
be stringently complied with by the agencies/officers concerned.   
 
(Recommendation S.No.6) 
 
Simplification of process of filing of Income Tax Returns 
12. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee observe that with the passage of time the process of filing 
income tax return has no doubt undergone changes but it still remains rather 
complex for an ordinary taxpayer. Any person with income from various 
sources, viz. salary income, rental income, business income etc. cannot file 
his return by his own and has to seek advice of either a Chartered Accountant 
or a person having adequate knowledge and expertise in filing income tax 
return. The Committee would thus urge the Department to make the process 
simpler and more taxpayer friendly.” 
 
13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“It is the endeavor of the ITD to constantly improve ease of doing business 
and make tax administration citizen friendly. As a step in this direction, in order 
to make tax compliance more convenient, pre-filled Income tax Returns (ITR) 
have been provided to individual taxpayers.  The ITR form now contains pre-
filled details of certain incomes such as salary income. The scope of 
information for pre-filing is being further expanded by including information 
such as house property income, bank interest, dividends etc. 
Further, it is proposed to introduce a common ITR form in tandem with 
international best practices, by merging all existing forms except ITR 7.  The 
proposed ITR form aims to bring ease of filing returns to individuals and non-
business-type taxpayers considerably.  As a result of this new form, the time 
and energy of the taxpayer will be saved and he will be relieved of the 
additional burden of going through all the parts of the ITR as is the 
requirement under the existing ITRs. This will increase ease of compliance. 
The common ITR form was placed on public domain on 1st November, 2022 
seeking comments and suggestions from stakeholders and the public at 
large.” 
 

7 
 
14. In reply to the recommendation of the Committee to make filing of returns 
simpler and tax payer friendly, the Ministry has stated that it is proposed to 
introduce a common ITR form in tandem with international best practices, by 
merging all existing forms except ITR-7. It is expected that the proposed ITR form 
brings ease of filing returns to individuals and non-business-type taxpayers 
considerably. The Committee, therefore, would expect the Ministry to expedite the 
process and introduce the new format at the earliest.  
 
 
(Recommendation S.No.7) 
Tax Litigation 
15. The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Revenue is trapped in litigation and 
appeals at various tribunals and courts. 
The Committee would therefore like the Department to ensure that appeals are 
filed judiciously after close scrutiny and not in a routine manner. Further, all the 
pending cases in different fora should be critically reviewed at the highest level, 
say by an empowered Committee of officers so that litigation is minimised. The 
Committee also desire that all tax arrears, wherever collectible, should be 
realized expeditiously on a mission-mode. 
The Committee are also concerned about various contentious issues arising out 
of GST and, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) to set up GST Tribunal for settlement of 
disputes pertaining to GST.” 
 
16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under: 
 
“Direct Taxes: 
In order to reduce litigation at all levels the prescribed monetary limits 
with exceptions have been revised from time to time. Appeals falling below the 
relevant monetary thresholds are withdrawn from the appropriate fora 
immediately after each revision of monetary limits. The extant monetary limits 
for filing appeals at various judicial fora are as below: 
 
Forum Tax Effect more than Rupees 
ITAT 50 Lakhs 
High Court 1 Crore 
Supreme 
Court 
2 Crore 
  
2.        In respect of the monetary limits mentioned above, it is submitted that 
Circular No. 3/2018 on this subject stipulates that, “It is clarified that an appeal 
should not be filed merely because the tax effect in a case exceeds the 

8 
 
monetary limits prescribed above. Filing of appeal in such cases is to be 
decided on merits of the case.” 
 
3.        To ensure that ‘appeals are filed judiciously after close scrutiny and not 
in routine manner’ there exists an elaborate mechanism by which senior 
officers exercise a qualitative oversight over process of filing appeal at next 
higher appellate level when a decision at a particular appellate level is not 
acceptable to the Department on merits. This is achieved by means of scrutiny 
reports which are prepared by the Assessing Officers and appeals are filed in 
a case only if the scrutiny report of that case is approved by the officer of 
seniority of Pr. CIT or above. For example, appeals against assessment 
orders passed by Assessing Officers are filed with the CIT (Appeals/ Appeal 
Unit) [CITs (A/AU)] by the assessees. If the decision of the CITs (A/AU) is not 
acceptable and Department prefers an appeal in ITAT the Scrutiny Reports 
need to be mandatorily approved by the jurisdictional Pr. CIT. In case an 
appeal is being contemplated in High Court then same after being approved 
by the jurisdictional Pr. CIT needs further approval of a collegium of CCITs 
before the appeal is filed in High Court. The collegium takes a considered view 
only after considering the relevant judicial precedents. Finally, if appeal is 
contemplated at Supreme Court, then after approval of jurisdictional Pr. CIT 
and CCIT the proposal is vetted in the Directorate of Legal and Research, 
which functions under Member (A&J), CBDT. It may be noted that appeals to 
High Courts and Supreme Courts are filed only on ‘Substantial Questions of 
Law’ and not on ‘Questions of fact’. Law officers of the Govt. of India are 
consulted in appropriate cases before filing Special Leave Petitions (SLPs). 
SLP proposals are analyzed in the Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry 
of Law and Justice and the Law Officer there provides opinion for filing 
appeals. Various relevant aspects have been reiterated by Instruction No. 
2/2022 dated 15.12.2022 issued by CBDT. 
 
4.        Finance Act, 2022 inserted a new section 158AB in the Act to avoid 
repetitive appeals by the Department. The section provides that, if a question 
of law in the case of an assessee is identical to a question of law which is 
pending in appeal before the jurisdictional High Court or the Supreme Court in 
any case, the filing of further appeal, in the case of this assessee by the 
department, shall be deferred till such question of law is decided by the 
jurisdictional High Court or the Supreme Court. To operationalize this section a 
system of collegiums, to be constituted by the concerned Pr. CCITs, (apex 
grade officers of the Income Tax Department) has been put in place vide 
Order F.No. 370133/13/2022-TPL dated 28.09.2022. This measure would 
provide a mechanism of continuous critical review at the highest level to 
minimize litigation as decisions of Courts would be dynamically considered for 
deferring/ filing appeals in ITAT/ jurisdictional High Courts/ Supreme Court. 
 
5.        The CBDT issued the Annual Central Action Plan for FY 2022-23(CAP), 
wherein time bound targets for achievement of Key Result Areas for recovery 
of arrear demand have been fixed. A multipronged strategy has been 
formulated to tackle this issue of arrear demand, with focus on addressing the 
issue in the following ways: 

9 
 
  
(i) reduction of arrear demand by way of statutory actions, cleaning up 
of demand, etc.,  
(ii) efforts for recovery and cash collection out of arrear demand and 
demand difficult to recover' 
(iii) writing off of irrecoverable demand  
(iv) early disposal of appeals 
(v) monitoring of high arrear demand cases by CBDT 
  
The progress on above action plan is monitored by CBDT by holding 
regular meetings/video conferences and through reports. 
(i)        Reduction of arrear demand: The target for reduction in arrear 
demand has been fixed and to achieve this target, critical tasks like 
reconciliation of arrear demand on CPC portal, issuance of appeal effect 
orders, rectification orders have been identified for completion in a time 
bound manner. 
As submitted in earlier Action taken Report, the Finance Act, 2022 
has amended Section 156A of the Act for cases of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016(IBC), or cases which are subject matter of revision 
of demand pursuant to order of NCLAT/Supreme Court, w.e.f. 01.04.2022. 
Identification of cases where demand is locked up under the ‘Difficult to 
Recover’ category due to pending NCLT proceedings etc. has been made a 
key result area of performance of the Assessing Officers. Directions have 
been issued for time bound necessary revisions and modification of demand 
notices to be carried out in accordance with the provisions of section 156A of 
the Act. This is expected to reduce the ‘Difficult to recover’ demand in future. 
(ii)        Ensuring recovery of taxes through cash collection: Specific 
targets in this key result area have been laid down. 
(a)      Efforts to recover tax in ‘demand difficult to recover’ cases: 
CBDT has fixed targets for ensuring due efforts from field formation 
towards realization of demand categorized as ‘Difficult to recover’ for each 
of the components of the demand difficult to recover. These components 
are demand stayed by Courts/ ITAT, demand stayed by Income Tax 
Authorities, demand covered by instalments, demand the recovery of which 
is not being pursued on account of assessee's stay petition pending 
consideration by the Income Tax Authorities, demand difficult to recover on 
account of no/inadequate assets, assessees not traceable and demand 
difficult to recover for any other reason. 
(b)      Special monitoring of stay granted matters have been included in 
the Central Action Plan in cases where recovery of demand has been 
stayed by Courts/ITAT or by Income Tax Authorities. The Central Action 
Plan has specified that all the stay granted matters may be identified, 
action plan may be formulated by Pr. CITs for vacation of stay and early 
disposal of appeals and remand reports including in stay granted matters 
should be sent timely. 
(iii)      Writing-off of irrecoverable demand: The Pr. CCITs have been 
advised to monitor the write off proceedings after issue of Irrecoverable 
Certificates (ICs) by the Tax Recovery Officers (TROs) in a time bound 
manner. Directions have been issued to the Pr. CCITs/CCITs concerned to 

10 
 
conduct meetings for regular review of unrealizable demand and decisions 
on write off proposals. The action in this regard is to be monitored through 
the Pr. DGIT (Admin. & TPS) by CBDT. 
(iv)      Early disposal of appeals: CBDT has issued directions to Pr. 
CCITs/National Faceless Appellate Centre (NFAC) that appeals in high 
demand cases should be taken up for disposal by the CIT (Appeals) on 
priority basis. Targets have been fixed for time bound disposal of such 
appeals, where recovery is impacted in high demand cases due to pendency 
of appeals. 
(v)      Monitoring of high arrear demand cases by CBDT: CBDT has set 
up a monitoring mechanism for dossier demand cases to monitor the 
progress of recovery. 
  
Indirect Taxes: 
The Standing Committee’s observations/recommendations, in respect 
of Point No.7- tax Litigations; have been forwarded to field formations for 
necessary action and strict compliance. 
Further, all Special Leave Petition (SLP) proposals submitted by CBIC 
field formations are critically reviewed and examined by the Board and only if 
the said SLP proposal satisfies the contours for filing SLP under Article 136 of 
Constitution of India, the SLP is proposed to be filed. In fact, in the F.Y. 2022-
2023, the Board decided not to file SLP in many cases, which were forwarded 
by the field formations. Further, CBIC conducted SAFAL 'Sensitisation cum 
Awareness programme for fast tracking and. managing litigation in CBIC' 
seminars on litigation Management highlighting the role of Revenue as a 
responsible litigant and requisites required to achieve the same."  
Further all Civil Appeals (CA) proposals submitted by CBIC field 
formations are critically reviewed and examined by the Board and only if the 
said CA proposal satisfies the contours for filing CA under Section 130E of the 
Customs Act, 1962 and Section 35L of the Central Excise Act, 1944. In the 
F.Y. 2022-2023, the Board decided not to file CA in many cases, which were 
forwarded by the field formations. 
Further, CBIC vide Circular dated 22.08.2019 enhanced the monetary 
limit substantially which resulted in reduction of litigation in various legal forum. 
It is also informed that the Department of Revenue is in the process of 
framing Rules for GST Tribunal under provisions of the Central Goods and 
Service Tax Act.” 
 
17. The Ministry have stated that they have forwarded the 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee in respect of tax 
litigation to field formations for necessary action and strict compliance. This is a 
positive step, as it is evident that the Ministry is taking the issue of tax litigation 
seriously. The Committee had also recommended that a GST Tribunal be set up 
to settle disputes pertaining to GST. The Department of Revenue is in the process 
of framing Rules for the GST Tribunal under provisions of the Central Goods and 

11 
 
Services Tax Act. This is also a welcome step, as it will help to ensure that GST 
disputes are resolved in a timely and efficient manner. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the further developments in this regard at the stage of 
furnishing the Final Action Taken Statement. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
Analysis of expenditure trend in Grant No. 36- Direct Tax 
The Committee's analysis of Grant No. 36 pertaining to Direct Taxes reveals 
some variations at different stages i.e. BE, RE and the Actuals. While 96.22% of RE 
was utilized during the FY 2020-21, during FY 2021-22 the actual expenditure came 
down to 90.49%. For FY 2022-23, expenditure incurred upto 31 December, 2022 is only 
65.78% of RE of Rs. 9431.15 crores, (which was upwardly revised from BE of Rs. 
9308.80 crores) implying that the remaining budgeted amount would have to be spent in 
the remaining 3 months only. The Committee would thus expect the Ministry to show 
greater financial discipline. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee regarding 
observation of greater financial discipline has been noted for compliance. 
Department is monitoring expenditure booked under various object heads on 
monthly/quarterly basis. Further, regular Web based meetings are being held with the 
Head Quarters and Drawing & Disbursing Officers (DDOs) of various Budget Controlling 
Authorities (BCAs) to give them a proper perspective of realistic budget formulation and 
projection. 
The Heads of Administration of the various Budget Controlling Authorities have 
been sensitized regarding realistic budget formulation and optimal utilization of funds to 
ensure better administrative control and management of the grant at their level. 
Separate letters were also sent to all the BCAs to whom allocation under Capital section 
and Minor Works was made and they were asked to monitor the progress of Capital 
projects and Minor Works and follow up with Executive Agencies for booking of 
expenditure. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
Demand for Grant No 37 (Indirect Taxes) Budgetary Allocations and Utilization 
The Committee also note a similar expenditure pattern of the Ministry with 
respect to the Indirect Taxes. In the FY 2020-21, 97.39% of the RE was utilized, while 
during the FY 2021-22 the expenditure came down to 76.85% of RE and in 2022-23 

13 
 
only 67.11% of the budgeted funds has been utilized up to December, 2022 which 
means that almost 33% of the allocated funds has been utilized in the last quarter, and 
if unutilized a substantial amount will have to be ‘surrendered’. As far as the 
‘surrendered’ amount is concerned, Rs.762.11 crore has been shown as surrendered 
amount during the Financial Year 2020-21 and for the FY 2021-22, Rs. 17152.89 crore 
has been declared as ‘surrendered’. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry for 
close monitoring of fund utilization pattern of the Ministry so that the actual expenditure 
does not recurrently fall on the lower side of the budgeted allocations. 
Reply of the Government 
The reason for low utilization of budget in FY 2021-22 was that for the first time 
amount involved in various duty credit schemes was provisioned through expenditure 
budget effective from FY 2021-22. However, all data for issuing of sanction order was 
received in the last quarter of FY21-22 as a result 74.59 % of expenditure could be 
booked under Scrip based schemes and this dragged the overall percentage of 
utilization of budget to 76.85% which otherwise would have been 93.79% (excluding 
expenditure on scrip-based schemes). As regard to FY-2022-23, 67.11% of the 
budgeted funds were utilized upto Dec, 2022. However, actual expenditure upto to 
31.03.2023 was Rs. 33991.82 crore against budgeted funds of Rs. 36687.94 crore i.e 
92.65% of RE was utilized. 
As regards to the surrender of Rs. 762.11 crore it is stated that the main reasons 
of surrender was compulsory cut in Budget (BE) by Rs. 676.03 crore in RE 2020-21 
vide Ministry’s letter dated 21.12.2020, and had to be surrendered, while in the FY 
2021-22 Rs. 17152.89 crore was surrendered mainly due to surrender of funds under 
Scrip Based Schemes. Rs. 16799.17 crore was surrendered out of the total surrender of 
Rs. 17152.89 crore due to non-scrolling of some of the shipping bills filed during the 
year, there were certain exporters who did not file their claims online, as the claim 
process was IT driven, technical transmission issues, incorrect Scheme codes at the 
time of filing SB were also factors for non-filing of claims, in the absence of e- Bank 
Realisation Certificates/ lack of awareness regarding claims procedure and due to any 
other reason, applications could not be filed by exporters and the funds could not be 
utilized, non-submission of mandatory "No dues certificate" by many firms, applications 
were not complete, non-submission claims before deadline, resulting in un-utilized funds 
under the Schemes. 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. For close 
monitoring and optimal utilization of funds, CBIC has developed BEAMS application 
(Budget Estimation, Allocation & Monitoring System) and which is also now being 
integrated with PFMS so that real time data on expenditure is available for proper 
monitoring of expenditure vis-à-vis budgeted funds. Special efforts were also made for 
education of field formations on budgeting and financial discipline by conducting 
webinar on 29.08.2022, 30.08.2022 & 31.08.2022 and field formations are being 

14 
 
sensitized about sending accurate estimates of funds. Also, Adversaries were issued on 
15.12.2022 and 03.03.2023 to ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
Goods and Service Tax 
The Committee note with concern that with respect to Audit in GST, large 
number of documents are being sought from tax-payers for conducting an audit.  
Besides, the assessees are also being called to the GST offices for physical 
appearance, which consumes lot of time of not only the assessees but also the officials 
of the Department.  The Committee would, therefore, recommend to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) to look into the feasibility of developing a mechanism 
for online audit in GST, which can make the process more efficient and less intrusive.  
In this regard, the Committee urge the Department of Revenue to prepare a white list of 
documents that would be necessarily required for conducting an audit and would thus 
become a guidance note for the officers as well as the assessee. 
Reply of the Government 
CBIC has published GST Audit Manual (GSTAM) which inter-alia provides for list 
of documents required to conduct audit, timelines for audit and other standard formats 
in the form of Annexure to the Manual such as Annexure I (registered person’s master 
file), Annexure III (documents required for Desk Review), and Annexure IX (verification 
of records/registers during audit) etc. Further, existing procedure of audit requires 
minimal interface between the officers and the taxpayers. The copies of 
documents/books of accounts and records etc. required to be submitted for conducting 
audit may be submitted through e-mail. Subsequently, if any clarification/explanation is 
sought from the taxpayer, may also be submitted through e-mail. From the systems 
perspective, the current audit functionality developed under ACES-GST application 
provides the feasibility for conducting the audit online wherein the required documents 
can be uploaded by tax payer as well as tax officer for further examination. However, 
recommendation of the Fifty- Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance regarding feasibility of 
developing mechanism for online GST audit is noted for examination. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 

15 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
Widening the ambit of TDS/TCS 
Tax Deducted at Source (TDS)/ Tax Collected at Source (TCS) and Advance Tax 
comprise 90% of tax revenue and these are non-intrusive, non-adversarial, system-
based approach. These are efficient tools for direct tax collection, leaving behind audit 
trail and acting as deterrence to tax evasion. The Committee note that for widening the 
net of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) and Tax Collection at Source (TCS) several new 
transactions were brought into its ambit, including huge cash withdrawals, foreign 
remittance, purchase of luxury car, e-commerce participants, sale of goods, acquisition 
of immovable property, virtual digital assets etc. The Committee further note that 
Finance Bill, 2023 has proposed to provide for TDS on winning from online games and 
interest on listed debentures paid to a resident. The Committee believe that TDS/TCS 
method has over the years proved to be not only efficient and revenue buoyant but also 
non-intrusive in nature, which minimizes discretion and promotes better tax compliance. 
While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Ministry thus far, the Committee 
recommends that TDS/TCS coverage should be further expanded so as to cover more 
transactions involving large amount of cash. 
Reply of the Government 
The Finance Act, 2023 has a number of measures in order to widen the net of 
TDS/TCS, some of which are listed as below: 
i.        The Finance Act, 2023 has amended Section 194B of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
(“the Act”) relating to winnings from lottery or crossword puzzle etc. and Section 
194BB of the Act relating to winnings from horse race to provide that deduction of 
tax under the aforesaid sections shall be on the amount or aggregate of the 
amounts exceeding Rs. 10,000/- during the financial year.  Earlier the TDS was 
mandated only for threshold above Rs. 10,000/-. This will help to widen the ambit 
of TDS. 
ii.      Vide Finance Act 2023, online games have been removed from the purview of 
Section 194B of the Act and Section 194BA has been inserted in the Act with 
effect from 1st April 2023, to provide for TDS at the rate of 30% on “net winnings” 
from online games. This will help to widen the ambit of TDS. 
iii.   The Finance Act, 2023 has increased the rate of TCS on certain foreign 
remittances and on sale of overseas tour packages through an amendment in 
sub-section (1G) of Section 206C of the Act with effect from 1st July 2023. The 
following table summarizes the same: 
  

16 
 
S. 
No. 
Type of remittance Present rate/ proposed 
(i) For the purpose of any education, if the 
amount being remitted out is a loan 
obtained from any financial institution as 
defined in Section 80E of the Act. 
0.5% of the amount or the 
aggregate of the amounts in 
excess of Rs. 7 lakh. 
  
-No change 
(ii) For the purpose of education, other than 
(i) or for the purpose of medical 
treatment. 
5% of the amount or the aggregate 
of the amounts in excess of Rs. 7 
lakh. 
  
-No change 
(iii) Overseas tour package Increased from 5% to 20% without 
any threshold limit vide Finance 
Act 2023 (w.e.f. 1.7.2023). 
(iv) Any other case Increased from 5% to 20% without 
any threshold limit vide Finance 
Act 2023 (w.e.f 1.7.2023). 
* In the table above, the present TCS rate is on the amount or the aggregate of the 
amounts being remitted by the buyer in a financial year. 
iv.  The Finance Act 2023 has substituted clause (ix) of Section 193 of the Act to limit 
the exemption from deduction of TDS in respect of payment of interest on certain 
securities. Hence, with effect from 1st April, 2023, TDS will be deducted in the case 
of any interest payable on any security issued by a company, where such security 
is in dematerialized form and is listed on a recognized stock exchange in India 
except in the case where the interest in respect of any securities is payable to a 
business trust, by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), which otherwise is not taxable 
in the hands of the business trust. This will also help to widen the ambit of 
deduction of tax at source. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
Search, Seizure and Survey 
Keeping in view possible harassment from intrusive operations such as search 
seizure etc, the Committee desire that these operations should be handled judiciously 
with adequate caution. It is expected that due-diligence is fully carried out before 
undertaking these enforcement operations, so as to pre-empt legitimate complaints and 
to ensure due realization of tax therefrom. The Committee are of the view that while 

17 
 
stepping up enforcement action against wilful or chronic evaders, honest taxpayers 
should not be alienated. 
Reply of the Government 
Direct Taxes: 
Search & Seizure/Survey action by the Income Tax Department (ITD) is one of 
the potent tools to take appropriate action, as per law, against tax evader and also to 
spread deterrence against tax evasion. These actions are initiated only after thorough 
preliminary investigations and gathering credible information regarding tax evasion and 
undisclosed income & assets of an assessee/group. 
In order to make the search & seizure/survey actions an effective tool for 
detection of concealment of income without harassment of the taxpayers, proper 
procedures have been prescribed in the Act and Income Tax Rules, 1962 (“the Rules"). 
A number of instructions and guidelines have also been issued from time to time by 
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) for compliance by the search/survey teams 
during such actions for this purpose. These also cover the manner of proficiently 
handling any complaints of harassment. 
The power to issue warrant of authorization for carrying out a search under the 
Act is entrusted to a senior rank officer of ITD, not below the rank of Principal 
Commissioner or Principal Director of Income Tax. Further, the issuing authority has to 
record its “reason to believe” in writing, based upon information in his possession, 
before issuing the warrant of authorisation. Similarly, the authorization for survey action 
is issued only after the satisfaction of an officer of the rank of Principal Chief 
Commissioner of Income Tax or the Director General or the Chief Commissioner of 
Income Tax, based on information regarding tax evasion and/or non-compliance by a 
taxpayer.  
The search/survey team is usually headed by an officer of the level of Deputy 
Director of Income Tax/ Assistant Director of Income Tax / Income Tax Officer. The size 
of search/survey team may be expanded considering the requirements of the premises. 
Further, such actions are under constant supervision of an officer of higher seniority of 
the level of Additional Director of Income Tax / Joint Director of Income Tax. A Control 
Room is set up during every search and seizure/survey action to have an effective 
monitoring of the premises under search/survey action and to make coordination with 
the authorized officers.  
Instructions/ guidelines have been issued by CBDT from time to time not to take 
admission of undisclosed income under coercion/pressure during search/survey. ‘The 
Taxpayers Charter’ indicating the Rights and Duties of the Taxpayers, issued by CBDT 
is usually handed over to person being searched/surveyed, at its commencement.  

18 
 
Since a search action can also cover residential premises where there is 
likelihood of presence of women and children, the concerned search team includes at 
least one lady member. The children are permitted to go to school, after the 
examination of their bags. The entire search operation from the beginning till the end is 
carried out in presence of two independent witnesses. The key findings of entire 
proceedings are recorded in the Panchnama which is also signed by the witnesses, a 
copy of which is also given to the person being searched.  
Similarly, in a survey action, a record of survey proceedings is required to be 
prepared at the time of conclusion of survey, along with an inventory of books of 
account/documents being impounded.   
In spite of the above, in case of any wrongdoings or harassment during the 
course of search/survey action, the concerned tax payer can always make a complaint 
at any level. He may even request to keep the complaint confidential. Whenever, such 
complaint of any wrongdoing, harassment, violation of the procedures laid down, 
seeking of illegal gratification, etc. are received or brought to the knowledge of higher 
authorities, appropriate action is taken against officers and officials concerned, if the 
allegations are proved. 
  
Indirect Taxes: 
The Government fully agrees with the concern and desire of the Committee that 
in view of perceived harassment from such intrusive operations, these operations 
should be handled with adequate caution. In respect of Indirect Taxes (GST), 
Government (CBIC) had earlier issued elaborate Guidelines about the procedure to be 
followed while carrying out search proceedings under Section 67 of the CGST Act, 
2017. These instructions, inter-alia, provide that in case of search of a residence, a lady 
officer shall necessarily be part of the search team; while conducting search, the officers 
must be sensitive towards the assessee/party and the officers should leave the 
premises immediately after completion of Panchnama proceedings. Further, social and 
religious sentiments of the person(s) under search and of all the person(s) present, shall 
be respected at all times with Special care/ attention to elderly, women and children 
present in the premises under search. Instructions also provide that a woman occupying 
any premises, to be searched, has the right to withdraw before the search party enters, 
if according to the customs, she does not appear in public. 
Furthermore, keeping in mind the ease of doing business and in order to 
maintain the uniformity of practice and to sensitize field officers about judicious use of 
power to issue summons and make arrests, CBIC has issued guidelines under CGST 
Act, 2017 for ‘Arrests and Bail’ and ‘Summons’. The salient features include that since 
arrest impinges on the personal liberty of an individual, the power to arrest must be 
exercised carefully. The arrest should not be made in routine and mechanical manner. 
Apart from fulfilling legal requirements, approval to arrest should be based on credible 
material and on reasonable grounds recorded in writing and should be granted only 

19 
 
where the intent to evade tax etc. is evident and element of mens rea / guilty mind is 
palpable. Arrest should not be resorted to in cases of technical nature like difference in 
interpretation of law. Illustrations have been given to provide guidance if the alleged 
offender is co-operating in the investigation or not, viz. compliance to summons, 
furnishing of documents called for, not giving evasive replies, voluntary payment of 
tax etc. 
Instructions on Summons provide, inter alia that power to issue summons needs 
to be exercised judiciously with the prior approval of DC/AC and should not be used for 
calling statutory documents available online. Officers are being advised to explore 
instances when instead of resorting to summons, a letter for requisition of information 
may suffice. Senior management officials such as CMD/ MD/ CEO/ CFO/ similar officers 
of any company or a PSU should not generally be issued summons unless there are 
clear indications of their involvement in the decision making process leading to loss of 
revenue.  
The Custom field formations and the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) 
under the Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC) take adequate caution 
while conducting Searches & Seizures. Due Diligence is carried out and only upon 
reasonable belief that violation of Customs Act, 1962 and the Allied Acts has been 
taken, are such operations carried out. 
CBIC also from time to time sensitizes field formations to ensure that honest tax 
payers are not harassed. A System of document Identification number ( DIN) has been 
introduced to bring in authenticity while communicating with taxpayers by the 
Department Officials. 
CBIC has also instructed to install CCTV Cameras in the interrogation rooms. 
Accordingly, CCTVs have been installed in DRI headquarters and its Zonal units. The 
procurement of CCTVs for Custom Field Formations under CBIC is being undertaken by 
Directorate of Logistics ( DoL) wherein tender for procurement has already been floated  
through GeM Portal and technical evaluation of the Bids is being undertaken.                 
These instructions are also placed in the website of CBIC for the knowledge of general 
public. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
Simplification of process of filing of Income Tax Returns 
The Committee observe that with the passage of time the process of filing 
income tax return has no doubt undergone changes but it still remains rather complex 

20 
 
for an ordinary taxpayer. Any person with income from various sources, viz. salary 
income, rental income, business income etc. cannot file his return by his own and has to 
seek advice of either a Chartered Accountant or a person having adequate knowledge 
and expertise in filing income tax return. The Committee would thus urge the 
Department to make the process simpler and more taxpayer friendly. 
Reply of the Government 
It is the endeavor of the ITD to constantly improve ease of doing business and 
make tax administration citizen friendly. As a step in this direction, in order to make tax 
compliance more convenient, pre-filled Income tax Returns (ITR) have been provided to 
individual taxpayers.  The ITR form now contains pre-filled details of certain incomes 
such as salary income. The scope of information for pre-filing is being further expanded 
by including information such as house property income, bank interest, dividends etc. 
Further, it is proposed to introduce a common ITR form in tandem with 
international best practices, by merging all existing forms except ITR 7.  The proposed 
ITR form aims to bring ease of filing returns to individuals and non-business-type 
taxpayers considerably.  As a result of this new form, the time and energy of the 
taxpayer will be saved and he will be relieved of the additional burden of going through 
all the parts of the ITR as is the requirement under the existing ITRs. This will increase 
ease of compliance. The common ITR form was placed on public domain on 1st 
November, 2022 seeking comments and suggestions from stakeholders and the public 
at large. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
Tax Litigation 
The Committee note that the Department of Revenue is trapped in litigation 
and appeals at various tribunals and courts. 
The Committee would therefore like the Department to ensure that appeals are 
filed judiciously after close scrutiny and not in a routine manner. Further, all the pending 
cases in different fora should be critically reviewed at the highest level, say by an 
empowered Committee of officers so that litigation is minimised. The Committee also 
desire that all tax arrears, wherever collectible, should be realized expeditiously on a 
mission-mode. 

21 
 
The Committee are also concerned about various contentious issues arising out 
of GST and, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue) to set up GST Tribunal for settlement of disputes pertaining to 
GST. 
Reply of the Government 
Direct Taxes: 
In order to reduce litigation at all levels the prescribed monetary limits with 
exceptions have been revised from time to time. Appeals falling below the relevant 
monetary thresholds are withdrawn from the appropriate fora immediately after each 
revision of monetary limits. The extant monetary limits for filing appeals at various 
judicial fora are as below: 
Forum Tax Effect more than Rupees 
ITAT 50 Lakhs 
High Court 1 Crore 
Supreme Court 2 Crore 
  
2.        In respect of the monetary limits mentioned above, it is submitted that Circular 
No. 3/2018 on this subject stipulates that, “It is clarified that an appeal should not be 
filed merely because the tax effect in a case exceeds the monetary limits prescribed 
above. Filing of appeal in such cases is to be decided on merits of the case.” 
3.        To ensure that ‘appeals are filed judiciously after close scrutiny and not in routine 
manner’ there exists an elaborate mechanism by which senior officers exercise a 
qualitative oversight over process of filing appeal at next higher appellate level when a 
decision at a particular appellate level is not acceptable to the Department on merits. 
This is achieved by means of scrutiny reports which are prepared by the Assessing 
Officers and appeals are filed in a case only if the scrutiny report of that case is 
approved by the officer of seniority of Pr. CIT or above. For example, appeals against 
assessment orders passed by Assessing Officers are filed with the CIT (Appeals/ 
Appeal Unit) [CITs (A/AU)] by the assessees. If the decision of the CITs (A/AU) is not 
acceptable and Department prefers an appeal in ITAT the Scrutiny Reports need to be 
mandatorily approved by the jurisdictional Pr. CIT. In case an appeal is being 
contemplated in High Court then same after being approved by the jurisdictional Pr. CIT 
needs further approval of a collegium of CCITs before the appeal is filed in High Court. 
The collegium takes a considered view only after considering the relevant judicial 
precedents. Finally, if appeal is contemplated at Supreme Court, then after approval of 
jurisdictional Pr. CIT and CCIT the proposal is vetted in the Directorate of Legal and 
Research, which functions under Member (A&J), CBDT. It may be noted that appeals to 

22 
 
High Courts and Supreme Courts are filed only on ‘Substantial Questions of Law’ and 
not on ‘Questions of fact’. Law officers of the Govt. of India are consulted in appropriate 
cases before filing Special Leave Petitions (SLPs). SLP proposals are analyzed in the 
Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Law Officer there 
provides opinion for filing appeals. Various relevant aspects have been reiterated by 
Instruction No. 2/2022 dated 15.12.2022 issued by CBDT. 
4.        Finance Act, 2022 inserted a new section 158AB in the Act to avoid repetitive 
appeals by the Department. The section provides that, if a question of law in the case of 
an assessee is identical to a question of law which is pending in appeal before the 
jurisdictional High Court or the Supreme Court in any case, the filing of further appeal, in 
the case of this assessee by the department, shall be deferred till such question of law 
is decided by the jurisdictional High Court or the Supreme Court. To operationalize this 
section a system of collegiums, to be constituted by the concerned Pr. CCITs, (apex 
grade officers of the Income Tax Department) has been put in place vide Order F.No. 
370133/13/2022-TPL dated 28.09.2022. This measure would provide a mechanism of 
continuous critical review at the highest level to minimize litigation as decisions of 
Courts would be dynamically considered for deferring/ filing appeals in ITAT/ 
jurisdictional High Courts/ Supreme Court. 
5.        The CBDT issued the Annual Central Action Plan for FY 2022-23(CAP), wherein 
time bound targets for achievement of Key Result Areas for recovery of arrear demand 
have been fixed. A multipronged strategy has been formulated to tackle this issue of 
arrear demand, with focus on addressing the issue in the following ways: 
  
(i) reduction of arrear demand by way of statutory actions, cleaning up of 
demand, etc.,  
(ii) efforts for recovery and cash collection out of arrear demand and demand 
difficult to recover' 
(iii) writing off of irrecoverable demand  
(iv) early disposal of appeals 
(v) monitoring of high arrear demand cases by CBDT 
  
The progress on above action plan is monitored by CBDT by holding regular 
meetings/video conferences and through reports. 
(i)        Reduction of arrear demand: The target for reduction in arrear demand has 
been fixed and to achieve this target, critical tasks like reconciliation of arrear demand 
on CPC portal, issuance of appeal effect orders, rectification orders have been identified 
for completion in a time bound manner. 
As submitted in earlier Action taken Report, the Finance Act, 2022 has amended 
Section 156A of the Act for cases of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016(IBC), or 

23 
 
cases which are subject matter of revision of demand pursuant to order of 
NCLAT/Supreme Court, w.e.f. 01.04.2022. Identification of cases where demand is 
locked up under the ‘Difficult to Recover’ category due to pending NCLT proceedings 
etc. has been made a key result area of performance of the Assessing Officers. 
Directions have been issued for time bound necessary revisions and modification of 
demand notices to be carried out in accordance with the provisions of section 156A of 
the Act. This is expected to reduce the ‘Difficult to recover’ demand in future. 
(ii)        Ensuring recovery of taxes through cash collection: Specific targets in this 
key result area have been laid down. 
(a)      Efforts to recover tax in ‘demand difficult to recover’ cases: CBDT has fixed 
targets for ensuring due efforts from field formation towards realization of demand 
categorized as ‘Difficult to recover’ for each of the components of the demand difficult to 
recover. These components are demand stayed by Courts/ ITAT, demand stayed by 
Income Tax Authorities, demand covered by instalments, demand the recovery of which 
is not being pursued on account of assessee's stay petition pending consideration by 
the Income Tax Authorities, demand difficult to recover on account of no/inadequate 
assets, assessees not traceable and demand difficult to recover for any other reason. 
(b)      Special monitoring of stay granted matters have been included in the Central 
Action Plan in cases where recovery of demand has been stayed by Courts/ITAT or by 
Income Tax Authorities. The Central Action Plan has specified that all the stay granted 
matters may be identified, action plan may be formulated by Pr. CITs for vacation of 
stay and early disposal of appeals and remand reports including in stay granted matters 
should be sent timely. 
(iii)      Writing-off of irrecoverable demand: The Pr. CCITs have been advised to 
monitor the write off proceedings after issue of Irrecoverable Certificates (ICs) by the 
Tax Recovery Officers (TROs) in a time bound manner. Directions have been issued to 
the Pr. CCITs/CCITs concerned to conduct meetings for regular review of unrealizable 
demand and decisions on write off proposals. The action in this regard is to be 
monitored through the Pr. DGIT (Admin. & TPS) by CBDT. 
(iv)      Early disposal of appeals: CBDT has issued directions to Pr. CCITs/National 
Faceless Appellate Centre (NFAC) that appeals in high demand cases should be taken 
up for disposal by the CIT (Appeals) on priority basis. Targets have been fixed for time 
bound disposal of such appeals, where recovery is impacted in high demand cases due 
to pendency of appeals. 
(v)      Monitoring of high arrear demand cases by CBDT: CBDT has set up a 
monitoring mechanism for dossier demand cases to monitor the progress of recovery. 
  
 

24 
 
Indirect Taxes: 
The Standing Committee’s observations/recommendations, in respect of Point 
No.7- tax Litigations; have been forwarded to field formations for necessary action and 
strict compliance. 
Further, all Special Leave Petition (SLP) proposals submitted by CBIC field 
formations are critically reviewed and examined by the Board and only if the said SLP 
proposal satisfies the contours for filing SLP under Article 136 of Constitution of India, 
the SLP is proposed to be filed. In fact, in the F.Y. 2022-2023, the Board decided not to 
file SLP in many cases, which were forwarded by the field formations. Further, CBIC 
conducted SAFAL 'Sensitisation cum Awareness programme for fast tracking and. 
managing litigation in CBIC' seminars on litigation Management highlighting the role of 
Revenue as a responsible litigant and requisites required to achieve the same."  
Further all Civil Appeals (CA) proposals submitted by CBIC field formations are 
critically reviewed and examined by the Board and only if the said CA proposal satisfies 
the contours for filing CA under Section 130E of the Customs Act, 1962 and Section 
35L of the Central Excise Act, 1944. In the F.Y. 2022-2023, the Board decided not to file 
CA in many cases, which were forwarded by the field formations. 
Further, CBIC vide Circular dated 22.08.2019 enhanced the monetary limit 
substantially which resulted in reduction of litigation in various legal forum. 
It is also informed that the Department of Revenue is in the process of framing 
Rules for GST Tribunal under provisions of the Central Goods and Service Tax Act. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/03/2023-Parl., dated 06.06.2023] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 
  

28 
 
Annexure 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2022-
23) The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th July, 2023 from 1500hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘2’, Parliament House Annexe Extension Block A, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
8. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
9. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
12. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
14. Shri Manish Tewari 
15. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
17. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
19. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
20. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
21. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Puneet Bhatia    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

29 
 
 
PART I 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
 
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Cyber security and rising incidence of 
cyber/white collar crimes’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services), Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Third Report on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big-Tech 
Companies’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Investment & Public Asset Management and Public Enterprises).  
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 

30 
 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
The Chairperson also appreciated the Committee Secretariat for putting their sincere 
efforts in drafting comprehensive reports within a short span of time. The Committee 
also decided to undertake a Study Tour during the third or fourth week of August, 2023. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 55th REPORT (17th 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
7  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
at Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6 & 7) 
 
7 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
 
Nil 0.00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 