 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS AND FINANCIAL SERVICES) AND MINISTRY OF 
CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Seventy-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Strengthening of the 
Credit Rating Framework in the Country'] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2021 /       Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
31 


 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2020-2021) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
AND FINANCIAL SERVICES) AND MINISTRY OF CORPORATE 
AFFAIRS 
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
Seventy-Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Strengthening of 
the Credit Rating Framework in the Country'] 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 March, 2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 March, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2021 /       Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….……… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................…………………......  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………   
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V* Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of 
the Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
Annexure I  : Discussion on the Resolution Framework 
Annexure II : Summary of Debt Profile of the IL&FS Group. 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 10 March, 2021. 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations Contained in the Seventy-Second Rep ort 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Strengthening the Credit Rating Framework in the country'.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2020-2021) 
   
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
6. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
7. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
8. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
9. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
10. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
11. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
12. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
13. Shri Pinaki Misra 
14. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy 
15. Prof. Saugata Roy 
16. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
17. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki 
18. Shri Manish Tewari 
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan  
24. Shri Praful Patel 
25. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan 
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
31. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi                          -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan               -    Director  
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                        -    Additional Director 
4. Ms. Yugma Malik                                        -    Committee Officer 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-First Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Seventy-
Second Report of the Committee ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Strengthening of the 
Credit Rating Framework in the country’. 
  
2. The Seventy-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table 
of Rajya Sabha on  13 February, 2019.  The updated Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations were received from the Government vide their communication 
dated 28 December, 2020.  
3. The Committee considered and adopte d this Report at their sitting held on           
10 March, 2021.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventy-Second Report of the Committee is given in the 
Appendix. 
5. For facility of referenc e, the observations / recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                   SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
10   March, 2021                               Chairperson, 
19 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 
Seventy-second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Strengthening of the Credit 
Rating Framework in the country' pertaining to the Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Economic Affairs and Financial Services) and Ministry of Corporate Affairs which 
was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 February, 2019.  
2.  The updated Action Taken Notes have been receiv ed from the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 28th December, 2020 in respect of 
all the seven recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
analyzed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3 and 7  
       (Total: 02) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 6 
                  (Total: 04) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation No.  5 
       (Total : 01)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations i n respect of which final replies by 
the Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No.  Nil                  
(Total: 0)  
(Chapter- V) 

 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on  
their recommendations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee observe that in the international context, a few years back 
certain CRAs were stated to hav e been forced to downgrade their own prior credit 
ratings on complex mortgage backed securities in the USA, when doyens of the 
financial markets like Lehman Bros. collapsed and many others were in serious 
threat of liquidation, which also raised questions on the level of due diligence on 
the part of the CRAs. More recently, in the Indian context, the credibility of credit 
rating action has come into sharp question in the crisis involving the Infrastructure 
Leasing and Financial Services Limited (IL&FS), a m ajor infrastructure 
development and finance company of systemic importance, which functioned as a 
holding company involved in investing and lending to its subsidiaries, associates 
and group entities. As 'rating' of an instrument or entity is being increasi ngly relied 
upon by capital markets, bankers and investors and since it constitutes a key input 
for financial decision-making of far-reaching magnitude, the Committee desire that 
it should be ensured that the credit rating process becomes absolutely 
professional, objective and credible. The Committee would therefore expect the 
key regulator, namely SEBI as well as the RBI to review their Regulations 
comprehensively, particularly in the face of the serious IL&FS default crisis 
mentioned above. The regulators  should also remain alert and pro -active when it 
comes to strict enforcement of the Regulations, particularly the punitive provisions, 
as otherwise, the entire object and process of regulation will be rendered 
meaningless. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs and Department of Financial Services) should 
seek a factual report from the concerned regulators regarding the enforcement of 
the CRA Regulations, particularly the action taken by them against th e CRAs who 
had been giving "stable" ratings to IL&FS prior to the default crisis. The Committee 
believe that the Regulations should be suitably modified/tightened, benchmarking 
them on greater objectivity, transparency and credibility in the whole credit r ating 

 
 
framework and process. In the view of the Committee, time has now thus come for 
a fresh evaluation of the credit rating framework in the country with a view to 
restoring public confidence and ensuring the accountability of the CRAs to the 
various stakeholders and the financial system as a whole. The Committee would 
recommend that the disclosures being made by the CRAs should henceforth 
include important determinants such as, extent of promoter support, linkages with 
subsidiaries, liquidity position fo r meeting near -term payment obligations etc. The 
Committee desire that the general investors should also be able to get a coherent 
"big picture" about the entity and its associates/subsidiaries from credit rating. 
6. The Ministry  of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  in their action 
taken reply stated as under:- 
 "SEBI Regulations provide for a disclosure-based regulatory regime for 
Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs), wherein CRAs are required to devise 
and disclose their rating criteria, methodology/process on their 
respective websites. Accordingly,  each CRA has its own rating models 
and methodologies which are available on CRAs’ website. 
  
The CRA Regulations have been amended from time to time, keeping in 
mind the dynamic natur e of the market, so as to meet the market 
requirements and to achieve objectivity, transparency and credibility in 
the credit rating process. 
  
After the default of  financial instruments of IL&FS, SEBI CRA 
Regulations were reviewed  and SEBI vide circular d ated November 
13, 2018 further standardised the template of the Press Release used by 
CRAs while communicating rating actions   to disclose additional 
information viz. disclosure on  support from the Parent/ Group/ 
Government, if factored into a rating, list  of all subsidiary/ group 
companies consolidated to arrive at a rating, along with the extent (e.g. 
full, proportionate or moderate) and rationale of consolidation, specific 
section on “Liquidity”, highlighting parameters like liquid investments or 
cash balances, access to unutilised credit lines, liquidity coverage ratio, 
adequacy of cash flows for servicing maturing debt obligation, etc. 
  
Through the same circular, SEBI has also mandatedthe disclosure 
ofaverage one -year rating transition rates for long -term instruments for 
the last 5 -financial year period on CRAs’ websites and Disclosure of 
sharp rating actions in investment grade rating category by each CRA on 
the Stock Exchange and Depository websites.   CRAs shall treat sharp 
deviations in bond spreads of debt instruments vis -à-vis relevant 
benchmark yield as a material event. 
  

 
 
As far as banks are concerned, RBI accredits CRAs for the limited 
purpose of computation of capital for various bank exposures under the 
Standardized Approach of Basel II norms. Credit ratings are therefore 
not the chief drivers of credit decisions by banks. Credit decisions are 
based on banks’ own appraisal and the bank loan ratings by CRAs are 
used by the banks only to compute the capital. The banks in India 
compute capital on t he basis of norms prescribed by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), wherein the risk weights 
assigned are on the basis of ratings provided by the external rating 
agencies. In this regard, while the risk weights assigned to a given rating 
grade under the BCBS norms and RBI regulations are same, the 
reported Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDRs) of Indian CRAs are much 
higher than the threshold prescribed under the Basel norms. Therefore, 
the minimum capital -to-risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) f or banks in 
India has been kept higher at 9% as compared to the Basel requirement 
of 8%, precisely in view of the understated probability of default implicit 
in the ratings given by CRAs in India. RBI can consider prescribing 
higher risk weights to further  mitigate the risk of high default areas on 
served in respect of ratings given by CRAs and even de -accrediting a 
CRA if warranted. However, it may not be appropriate to implement such 
measures based on an isolated incident. RBI shall closely monitor the 
evolving situation and take necessary action. 
  
Further, as part of the supervisory process, RBI independently assesses 
the capital requirements of banks and can require banks to hold 
additional capital as part of Pillar -2 requirements under the Basel 
framework based on these assessments. 
  
As far as their investments are concerned, banks have been advised to 
make their own internal credit analysis and rating on investment 
proposals and not to entirely rely on the ratings of external agencies. 
 
DEA has sought the factual reports from SEBI and RBI regarding the 
enforcement of the CRA Regulations, particularly any action taken by 
them against the CRAs who had been giving "stable" ratings to IL&FS 
prior to the default crisis. 
  
SEBI has informed DEA that ac tions have been initiated against the 3 
CRAs who rated the non -convertible debentures  (NCDs) of 
IL&FS.Further, adjudication proceedings against the CRAs, viz. ICRA 
Limited, CARE Ratings Limited and India Ratings and Research Private 
Limited, have been init iated by SEBI under Section 15HB of SEBI Act, 
1992, for failure to exercise proper skill, care and due diligence while 
rating the securities of IL&FS, which is in violation of Regulation 24(7) 
and Clauses 4 and 8 of Code of Conduct for CRAs read with Regul ation 
13 of SEBI (Credit Rating Agencies) Regulations, 1999. 
  
RBI has informed DEA that the concerns emanating from the recent IL & 
FS episode relate largely to the use of ratings of debt instruments issued 

 
 
by the borrower entities, specifically with regard to the entity referred 
to.In terms of the RBI Directions, IL&FS Financial Services (IFIN) was 
disallowed to raise any additional funding from the Commercial 
Paper (CP) market for six months after a default was reported in August, 
2018. 
 
Through its circular dated November 13, 2018, SEBI has mandated 
disclosure of the said determinants, viz. extent of promoter/ Group/ 
Government support, linkages with subsidiaries, list of group companies 
consolidated to arrive at a rating, liquidity position, etc., i n the press 
release regarding rating actions by CRA. 
  
Considering the Committee’s recommendation on disclosures, RBI is of 
the view that as per the extant SEBI  instructions, in order to enable 
investors to understand underlying rating drives better, CRAs are 
required to specifically disclose the following: 
  
i. When a rating factors in support from a Parent/Group/Government, with 
an expectation of infusion of funds towards timely debt servicing, the 
name of such entities, along with rationale for such expecta tion, may be 
provided. 
ii. When subsidiaries or Group companies are consolidated to arrive at a 
rating, list of all such companies, along with the extent (e.g. full, 
proportionate or moderate) and rationale of consolidation may be 
provided. 
iii. The Press Release s hall include a specific section on “Liquidity” which 
shall highlight parameters like liquid investments or cash balances, 
access to unutilised credit lines, adequacy of cash flows for servicing 
maturing debt obligation, etc. CRAs shall also disclose any li nkage to 
external support for meeting near term maturing obligations. 
To address the concern of the Committee on providing a bird’s -eye view 
about the entity and its associates/subsidiaries/structure, to the 
investors,SEBI has issued a circular dated Novem ber 13, 2018, 
mandating disclosure linkages with subsidiaries, list of group companies 
consolidated to arrive at a rating, etc., in the press release regarding 
rating actions by CRA. 
  
Further, as prudent measure RBI has also  advised CRAs to obtain and 
analyse bank account statements from the rated entities. This will 
facilitate early recognition of stress in the financials of the rated entity. 
  
Further, a joint inspection of CRAs by SEBI and RBI has been initiated 
recently, with the role of RBI specifical ly focused on bank loan ratings 
assigned by the concerned CRA.Through the course of these 
inspections, various aspects in the functioning of the CRAs including 
their rating methodology are examined and observations are drawn for a 
follow-up with the concerned CRA. 

 
 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
The desired policy changes have been carried out by SEBI in this regard 
in consultation with RBI and the regulations are amended as and when 
the market requirements warrants the same.  CRAs are jointly inspected 
by SEBI and RBI. Through the course of these inspections, various 
aspects in the functioning of the CRAs including their rating methodology 
are examined for further modification in the policy regime. 
With regards to action  taken against CRAs, SEBI has probed the role of 
CRAs in the matter of rating of IL&FS and passed an Order dated 
September 22, 2020 against CARE Ratings limited, ICRA Limited and 
India Ratings and Research Pvt. Ltd. Imposing a penalty of Rs. 1 crore 
each (maximum permissible under Section 15HB of the SEBI Act 1992) 
for failure in exercising due diligence while assigning ratings to IL&FS. 
Action has already been taken by SEBI in consultation with RBI as 
indicated by SEBI in the earlier response.  
    The desired policy changes have been carried out by SEBI in this regard. 
w.e.f. January 2020, SEBI has made it mandatory for listed companies 
to disclose their default on bank loans if the default continues beyond 30 
days.  This benefits all investors as well as CRAs and acts as an early 
warning. 
 
7. The Ministry informed t he Committee  in their reply that the C redit 
Rating Agency Regulations have been amended from time to time keeping in 
mind the dynamic nature of the market, so as to meet the market 
requirements and to achieve  objectivity, transparency and credibility in the 
rating process.  Also, the functioning of the CRAs including their rating 
methodology are examined for further modification in the policy regime.  T he 
Committee were further informed that a circular was issued by Securities 
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) for disclosure of additional information 
in the template of the Press Release used by CRAs and the mandatory 
disclosure of vital information on the stock exchange and depository 
websites subsequent to the review carried out by SEBI on CRA Regulations 
after the collapse of IL&FS .  In the updated replies, it was informed that the 
desired policy changes have been carried out by SEBI in consultation with 
RBI and the regulations are amended as an d when the market requirements 
warrants the same.  The Committee note that RBI and SEBI have started joint 
inspections of CRAs with the role of RBI specifically focussed on bank loan 

 
 
ratings assigned by CRAs.   The Committee feel that no room should be left  
for complacency in this matter.  T he Committee thus, would like to reiterate 
that the regulators remain alert and pro -active to ensure strict enforcement 
of the regulations.  In the same vein , the Committee would like to re -stress 
on the need for fresh evaluation of the credit rating framework  in the country 
as per the recommendations of the Committee in their original report on this 
subject with a view to re -inforcing public confidence in the entire process of 
credit rating. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
8. Similarly, the Committee would also suggest to the Ministry/Regulator to 
explore the mandatory rotation of rating agencies along the lines of statutory 
auditors to avoid the pitfalls of long association between the issuer and the CRA 
and particularly consi dering the recent instances of failure of CRAs in sensing 
simmering 'trouble' in their client -entities. This may also help eliminate element of 
complacency in the credit rating industry and bring fresh perspectives on table. In 
the same vein, the Ministry may also evaluate the suggestion to have rating 
compulsorily carried out by more than one agency (dual or multiple), particularly in 
respect of debt instruments/bank credit involving large amounts say, more than 
Rs.100 crore. This will help the investors t o access different positions/viewpoints 
for an informed decision. On the same premise, the Committee would also suggest 
that the existing threshold for registration of CRAs may also be suitably 
lowered/modified with a view to encouraging more entities, par ticularly start -ups 
with the requisite capability and expertise to become part of the industry. 
9. The Ministry  of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply stated as under:- 
 
 "It is felt that the exercise of “auditing” and “rating” cannot be compared 
since auditors work on past data, whereas CRAs are required to offer 
forward-looking views on the debt -servicing ability of an issuer. Further, 
while statutory audit is conducted for a company by an auditor, ratings 
are assigned to various instruments of a company/ issuer. Accordingly, 
various instruments issued by a company, having different maturities, 
may have ratings assigned by multiple CRAs. As a result, the same 
issuer would be examined by more than one CRA, in respect of rating of 
different instruments, unlike the examination of the accounts of a 
company by the same auditor. 

 
 
Further, as regards the recommendation of the Committee on mandatory 
rotation of CRAs within the tenure of the instrument, such an exercise 
may have the following implications: 
  
i. It may result in each CRA taking a short -term view (till the time that CRA 
is required to rate the instrument) on the creditworthiness of the issuer, 
instead of a longer -term perspective spanning the entire tenure of an 
instrument. 
ii. While there are stringent conditions for withdrawal of rating from a CRA 
at present, mandatory rotation of CRAs, may pose the problem of rating 
shopping as the issuer on rotation may approach a CRA promising a 
higher rating. 
iii. Since CRAs would assign r atings for a fixed period, the rating transition/ 
default statistics of each CRA, as required to be disclosed by each CRA 
on its website, shall not be reliable indicators of the performance of the 
CRA and rating transition of any instrument through its com plete tenure 
would not be captured. 
  
As regards the suggestion of ratings being compulsorily carried out by 
more than one agency (dual or multiple), particularly in respect of debt 
instrument/bank credit involving large amounts say, more than Rs. 100 
Crore, the following may be noted: 
  
Mandatory requirement of dual rating for debt securities would increase 
the cost of debt issuance and, therefore, adversely impact the interests 
of corporate bond issuers and hamper the growth of corporate bond 
market. In practice, many issuers obtain ratings from two or more CRAs 
upon the insistence of investors. Further, there is no requirement of 
mandatory dual/ multiple rating in any major global jurisdiction. It is 
understood that the European Securities and Markets Aut hority 
mandates the use of ratings by two or more CRAs only in case of 
structured finance instruments, and not for debentures/ loans. Even in 
cases of banks,  the credit ratings are not the chief drivers of    credit 
decisions by banks. Credit decisions are based on banks' own appraisal 
mechanism and the ratings are used for the limited purpose of capital 
computation. It is left to the borrowers to avail the external ratings from 
one or more CRAs. As regards commercial papers (CPs), in terms of the 
lowered/modified with a view to extant RBI directions, eligible 
encouraging more entities, issuers, whose total CP issuance particularly 
start-ups with the during a calendar year is 1000 crore or more, shall 
obtain credit rating for issuance of CPs from at least two  CRAs 
registered with SEBI and should adopt the lower of the two ratings.   
Where both ratings are the same, the issuance shall be for the lower of 
the two amounts for which ratings are obtained. 
  
Further , in terms of the revised framework on resolution o f stressed 
assets,Resolution Plans involving restructuring /change in ownership in 
respect of ‘large’ accounts (i.e. accounts where the aggregate exposure 
of lenders is Rs 1 billion and above), shall require independent credit 

 
 
evaluation (ICE) of the resid ual debt by CRAs. While accounts with 
aggregate exposure of Rs 5 billion and above shall require two such 
ICEs, others shall require one ICE. Only such RPs which receives as 
credit opinion of RPs or better (indicating moderate degree of safety 
regarding ti mely servicing of financial obligations) for the residual debt 
from one to two CRAs, as the case may be, shall be considered for 
implementation. 
 
Given the importance of CRAs, it is imperative to ensure that entities 
granted registration as CRAs are promot ed by entities having high 
credibility, good track record and adequate financial capabilities, and are 
fit and proper, so as to enable them to invest in building intellectual 
capital, developing efficient systems and infrastructure and adopting 
better technology. Maintenance of such high standards is essential for a 
CRA to function efficiently, professionally and independently, which may 
not be feasible for a start-up. 
  
Having regard to the significant role played by CRAs in the market, it is 
felt that the  extant eligibility requirements for registration as a CRA, viz. 
networth requirements, promoter eligibility requirement, “fit and proper 
person” criteria, etc., are reasonable/ appropriate." 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
As regards mandatory rotation, as stated earlier, the rating assessment of a 
CRA has to be forward looking unlike auditing.  Further, mandatory rotation  
would be a disincentive to good and quality CRAs.  It will also ensure 
business for less effective CRAs.  Hence, it is better to leave it to the market 
to discriminate between CRAs based on their performance.   
 
As regards the issue of multiple ratings, the views remain the same. 
 
RBI has further stated that in terms of the Prudential framework on resolution 
of stressed assets dated June 7, 2019,  Resolution Plans involving 
restructuring / change in ownership in respect of “large” accounts (i.e. 
accounts  w here the aggregate exposure of lenders is  ₹ 1 billion and 
above), shall require independent credit evaluation (ICE) of the residual debt 
by CRAs.  While accounts with aggregate exposure of ₹ 5 billion and above 
shall require two such ICEs, others shall re quire one ICE.  Only such RPs 
which receive a credit opinion of RP4 or better (indicating moderate degree  
of  safety  regarding  timely servicing of financial obligations) for the residual 
debt from one or two CRAs, as the case may be, shall be considered  for 
implementation. 
 
Having regard to the significant role played by CRAs in the market, it is felt 
that the extant eligibility requirements for registration asa CRA, viz. networth 
requirements, promoter  eligibility requirement, “fit and proper person” 
criteria, etc., are reasonable/appropriate. 
 

 
 
10. The Committee understand  the importance of maintaining high 
standards for a CRA to function efficiently, professionally and 
independently, but at the same time the Committee wish  to reiterate that 
encouragement be given to more entities, particularly start -ups with the 
requisite capability and expertise to become part of th e industry , as that 
might aid in fostering healthy competition ensuring a level -playing field and 
also eliminating complacency in the cred it rating industry.  The Committee 
feel that high standards should be maintained by CRAs in terms of their 
integrity, professional ethics along with strict diligence in abiding by the 
guidelines issued by the regulators.  The Committee further recommend th e 
watchdogs to be more alert and prudent in their enforcement of regulations 
instead of curbing the growth of credible start-ups in the industry.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 
11.  As regards the matter of IL&FS crisis, wherein the Government has since 
intervened and re-constituted the Board (the matter being under National Company 
Law Tribunal), the Committee would recommend a comprehensive commission of 
enquiry into the whole gamut of the episode, which will inter -alia probe the role of 
CRAs that had over-rated the entities sometime before the crisis and the role of the 
largest institutional stakeholder in IL&FS, namely the LIC of India as well as other 
institutional stakeholders. The governance failures and indecision/indiscretion on 
the part of the IL &FS Board should also be thoroughly probed. The Committee 
desire that urgent measures should be initiated to resurrect IL&FS, as it is the only 
major institution funding the infrastructure projects in the country. 
12. The Ministry  of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  in their action 
taken reply stated as under:-  
In the opinion of DEA, however, there is no need to set up any 
Commission of Enquiry in this matter  as the role of Directors of IL&FS 
Board is already being enquire d/ investigated by Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs. SEBI & RBI 
are also looking into the system/procedure of the CRAs. Hence, it is felt 
that a separate Commission of Enquiry is not warranted at this stage. 
 

 
 
Due t o continuous failure of the Infrastructure Leasing and Financial 
Services Ltd. (IL&FS) to service its debt and imminent possibility of 
contagion effect in the financial market, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
at the request of Department of Economic Aff airs, moved an application 
under Sections 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 before the 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), Mumbai Bench for taking 
management control. The NCLT, Mumbai Bench vide its order dated 
01/10/2018 approved the application fi led in this regard, by suspending 
the erstwhile board of directors of IL&FS and appointed government 
nominees as directors, who have been tasked with the orderly resolution 
of the IL&FS and its group companies. The entire process is being 
carried out under  the supervision of the NCLT. Being cognizant of the 
fact that the mismanagement existed across the Respondent No.1 
Group, on an application by the Petitioner, this Hon’ble Tribunal, by an 
Order dated 09/10/2018, permitted the newly appointed Directors to 
appoint themselves as Directors on the group/subsidiary/associate/jointly 
controlled entities or operations of IL&FS. 
  
Further, in order to ensure period of calm during the resolution process, 
a moratorium was sought against the creditors, which has been granted 
on interim basis by the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal 
(NCLAT) until further orders, vide its orders dated 15/10/2018. The 
matter is sub-judice. 
  
The NCLT, Mumbai Bench vide its orders dated 01/10/2018 had also 
directed filing of progress  reports till resolution, which is a continuous 
process. As such, till date Ministry of Corporate Affairs has filed first 
report on 31/10/2018, the second report on 03/12/2018, the third report, 
its addendum and the fourth report, collectively, on 16/01/2019. 
  
Initially there were 11 Respondents in the original petition moved by 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs before the NCLT, Mumbai Bench. However, 
the NCLT, vide its order dated 31/10/2018 directed Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs to implead all the group comp anies of IL&FS as Respondents. In 
compliance of the said order, this Ministry filed an affidavit dated 
03/12/2018 arraying the group companies of IL&FS as Respondents, as 
per information provided by the company. 
  
Simultaneously, vide order dated 30/09/201 8, in exercise of powers 
under Section 212(1)(a) & (c) of the Companies Act, 2013, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs has ordered investigation into the affairs of IL&FS and 
its subsidiary companies to be carried out by the Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (S FIO). The SFIO has submitted an interim report 
dated 30/11/2018. On the basis of said interim report, this Ministry vide 
its aforementioned affidavit dated 03/12/2018, also sought impleadment 
of further persons as Respondents in the original petition filed  under 
Section 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013. Additionally, 
application was also filed by Ministry of Corporate Affairs for seeking 
orders, qua the additional respondents, to restrain them from mortgaging 

 
 
or creating charge or lien or creating thi rd party interest or in any way 
alienating, the movable or immovable properties owned by them, 
including jointly held properties. The NCLT was pleased to grant relief to 
this Ministry, vide orders dated 03/12/2018, which are still in operation. 
As such, th ere are a total of 318 Respondents in petition before the 
NCLT. 
  
Simultaneously, in view of the negative impact that the IL&FS Group had 
on the financial markets at large and that there was considerable 
allegations in respect of the financial statements o f the said Companies, 
the Disciplinary Directorate of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India (ICAI), in the interest of the profession, suomoto sought to consider 
the performance of the statutory auditors of the said Companies. 
Pursuant to an enqu iry conducted in respect of the statutory auditors of 
the said Group Companies, the ICAI found that there were key lapses, 
shortcomings and manipulations on the financial statements by the 
statutory auditors of the said Companies. Most significantly, it wa s noted 
that the condition of the said Companies as a result of mismanagement 
reflects upon the statutory auditors of the said Companies. The ICAI has 
held the statutory auditors of the said Companies prima facie guilty of 
professional misconduct. As such,  in view of the prima facie findings of 
ICAI and the interim report dated 30/11/2018 submitted by SFIO, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs filed a petition before the NCLT, Mumbai 
Bench on 21/12/2018 under Section 130 of the Companies Act, 2013 
seeking reopenin g of the books of account of IL&FS, IL&FS Financial 
Services Ltd. (IFIN) and IL&FS Transportation Networks Ltd. (ITNL) for 
the last 5 (five) years, and for recasting the financial statements of the 
said companies, which has been allowed by the NCLT, Mumbai  Bench 
vide its judgment dated 01/01/2019. 
  
In addition to the above, the IL&FS Group of companies have been 
classified into three categories – Green, Red and Amber – on the basis 
of 12 -month cash flow based solvency test, which classification has 
been co mmunicated to NCLAT vide affidavit dated 25/01/2019. Vide 
subsequent affidavits dated 11/02/2019 and 23/03/2019 filed before the 
NCLAT, detailed information regarding number of companies falling 
under each category has been brought to the knowledge of the Appellate 
Tribunal.The categorization is as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
Category Domestic Entity 
Count 
Domestic IL&FS Group External 
Fund Based  Debt (as of October 
8, 2018) (INR Cr) 
Green 
Entities which can reply all financial 
debt obligations as and when due no 
default subsists 
50 5,596.6 
Amber 
Entities which are not able to meet 
ALL obligations (financial and 
operational), but can meet operational 
and senior secured financial debt 
13 16,372.6 
Red 
Entities which CANNOT fully repay 
even senior secured financial debt 
obligations as when due 
80 61, 375.6 
Entities for which classification is still 
underway 
18 5895.9 
Entities which are undergoing 
liquidation proceedings, winding up 
and/or insolvency resolution 
proceedings. 
8 5.7 
Total 169 89,246.4 
  
Vide orders dated 11/02/2019, the Hon’ble NCLAT has directed for 
exclusion of ‘133 Offshore Group Entities’ incorporated out of India, from 
the purview of the Hon’ble NCLAT’s order dated 15/10/2018 i.e. order for 
moratorium. However, the Appellate Tribunal directed th at resolution for 
such ‘Offshore Group Entities’ may be taken up by the Board of Directors 
of ‘IL&FS’ under the supervision of the Hon’ble Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain, 
who has been engaged to supervise the operation of the ‘Resolution 
Process’ of the ‘IL&FS Group Companies’, as per the directions of the 
Hon’ble NCLAT. 
  
Further, vide the aforementioned orders dated 11/02/2019, the Hon’ble 
NCLAT also directed that all “Green Entities” are permitted to service 
their debt obligations as per scheduled repayment, which should be 
within the ‘Resolution Framework’ and subject to the supervision of the 
Hon’ble Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain. 
  
Furthermore, upon an application filed by PTC India Financial Services 
Ltd., the Hon’ble NCLAT has without going into the rival con tention of the 
parties, vide its order dated 25/02/2019, made it clear that due to non -
payment of dues by the ‘Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services 
Limited’ or its entities including the ‘Amber Companies’, no financial 
institution will declare the a ccounts of ‘Infrastructure Leasing & Financial 
Services Limited’ or its entities as ‘NPA’ without prior permission of the 
NCLAT. However, the Reserve Bank of India has filed an intervenor 
application before the Hon’ble NCLAT seeking stay on aforesaid part of 
the order dated 25/02/2019 and the matter is still sub-judice. 

 
 
  
It has also come to the knowledge of Ministry of Corporate Affairs that 
IL&FS had availed loans from ADB and KfW, which are backed by 
sovereign guarantee from the Government of India (Depa rtment of 
Economic Affairs) and that the Government of India has made payment 
of USD 2,072,333.99 and EUR 731,954.06 from the Contingency Fund of 
India, on behalf of IL&FS to ADB and KfW respectively, against 
repayment due in December 2018. It further came  to notice that the 
aforementioned loans were taken by IL&FS for on -lending to 
infrastructure projects undertaken by group companies of IL&FS and a 
considerable portion of the said loans are yet to be repaid. In that regard, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs h as referred the matter to Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO), to investigate the aforesaid aspect too in the 
ongoing investigation into the affairs of IL&FS and its subsidiary 
companies, and include the same in its investigation report. 
  
Recently, upon gathering compliance information from various banks, it 
was noticed that one of the respondents, Mr. Ramesh C. Bawa (ex -
Director on the Board of IL&FS) in Company Petition No. 3638/2018, 
pending before the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, has operated his 
individually and jointly held bank accounts and lockers, despite there 
being restraint directions against alienation of moveable and immoveable 
properties by the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, vide its order dated 
03/12/2018. As such, Ministry of Corporate Af fairs has filed a contempt 
petition before the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai arraying Mr. Ramesh C Bawa, 
his wife Mrs.AshaKiranBawa, Axis Bank Ltd. through its MD & CEO and 
Standard Chartered Bank Ltd. through its CEO, as contemnors and has 
sought punishment for th e contemnors as per the provisions of Section 
425 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with the Contempt of Courts Act, 
1971. In addition to the above, Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also 
sought impleadment of Ms.AshaKiranBawa and Ms.AkankshaBawa, wife 
and d aughter of Mr. Ramesh C Bawa, respectively, as additional 
respondents in the main Company Petition No. 3638/2018, pending 
before the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, and also sought extension of 
order dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai 
Bench’s order dated 16/01/2019) to the additional respondents, 
restraining them from alienating their moveable and immoveable 
properties. This step has been taken in light of the fact that 
Ms.AshaKiranBawa and Ms.AkankshaBawa, wife and daughter of Mr. 
Ramesh C Bawa, respectively, have been found to be the beneficiaries of 
the contempt/misfeasance committed by Mr. Ramesh C Bawa. The 
Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, vide its orders dated 26/04/2019 was 
pleased to issue notice to the contemnorrespondents and further pleased 
to array Ms.AshaKiranBawa and Ms.AkankshaBawa, as Respondent No. 
319 and 320 in Company Pet`ition No. 3638/2018, pending before itself. 
The Hon’ble Tribunal was also please to extend the operation of its order 
dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by the H on’ble Tribunal’s further order 
dated 16/01/2019) to the additional Respondent Nos. 319 and 320, 

 
 
restraining them from alienating their moveable and immoveable 
properties. The matter is now listed for hearing on 07/06/2019. 
 
The resolution of IL&FS remains sub-judice before the Hon’ble NCLAT. 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
  
With regards to action taken against CRAs, SEBI has probed the role of 
CRAs in the matter of rating of IL&FS and passed an Order dated 
September 22, 2020 against CARE Ratings limited, ICRA Limited and India 
Ratings and Research Pvt. Ltd. imposing a penalty of Rs.1 crore each 
(maximum permissible under Section 15HB of the SEBI Act 1992) for failure 
in exercising due diligence while assigning ratings to IL&FS. 
 
 
MCA has informed that the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) has 
submitted its Report dated 28/05/2019 titled “Investigation Report of IL&FS 
Financial Services Ltd.” e xtensively detailing the role of the Statutory 
Auditors in the perpetrati on of fraudulent activities by the management of 
IFIN.  In consequence thereof ,this Ministry filed a petition before the NCLT 
under Section 140(5)of the Companies Act, 2013 seeking removal of the 
existing Statutory Auditors of IL&FS Financial Services Ltd .(IFIN) and further 
seeking a ban on appointment of Deloitte Haskins &Sells LLP and BSR & 
Associates LLP, along with their engagement partners for IL&FS, for a 
period of 5 years, in view of extensive findings by the SFIO against the 
Statutory Auditors rela ted to their role in the perpetration of fraudulent      
activities by the management of IFIN.  The challenge by the  Auditors to the 
maintainability of the Ministry’s petition under Section 140(5) was dismissed 
by the NCLT.  However, the concerned Auditors challenged the 
constitutional validity of  Section 140(5) before the Hon’ble Bombay High 
Court by way of writ jurisdiction. The Hon’ ble Bombay High  Court vide its 
judgment dated 21/04/2020 has disposed of the writ petitions filed by the 
auditors, and has  upheld the vires of Section 140(5) of  the Companies Act, 
2013.  However, the Hon’ble High Court quashed the criminal proceedings 
before the Special Court, Mumbai, initiated by SFIO against the auditors, 
and further held that auditors who have resigned or have been rotated out as 
per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 cannot be sought to be 
debarred for a period of 5 years under the second proviso of Section 140(5).  
The MCA has preferred an appeal before the Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
against the Hon’ble Bombay High Court’s order dated 21/04/2020. 
 
Further, on the basis of SFIO’s IFIN Report dated 28/05/2019, MCA sought 
the impleadment of the company’s Statutory Auditors as additional 
respondents in the Company Petition No. 3638/2018 pending before the 
NCLT and also sought extension of order dated 03 /12/2018 (as modified by 
the NCLT’s order dated 16/01/2019) to the additional respondents, 
restraining them from alienating their moveable and immoveable properties.  
Deloitte,  BSR,  their  partners  and certain other individuals named by the 
SFIO in its IFIN Report dated 28/05/2019,were impleaded in CP3638/2018 

 
 
by the NCLT vide its order dated 18/07/2019.  Subsequently, the appeals 
against the NCLT order dated 18/07/2019 have been dismissed by the 
NCLAT vide its common order dated 04/03/2020.  The matter with regard to 
extension of order dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by the NCLT’s order dated 
16/01/2019) to the additional respondents for restraining them from 
alienating their moveable and immoveable properties, is subjudice. 
 
With regard to the resolution of the IL&FS Group, the NCLAT vide its order 
dated12/03/2020, has accepted the suggestion of pro -rata distribution (as 
proposed by the new Board of IL&FS and further suggested by the 
Ministry)and the procedure specified thereof, for the purpose of completi ng 
the resolution process of the group.  Furthermore, the NCLAT has also 
accepted October 15, 2018 as the cut -off date for distribution of the assets, 
because the said date is the date of initiation of the resolution process of the 
companies and also obser ved that the said date should be treated as 
initiation of the resolution process of the IL&FS and Group Companies. The 
NCLAT has directed: “The Union of India, the Board of Directors of IL&FS 
and the ‘Committee of Creditors’ already constituted or which ma y be 
constituted are directed to conclude resolution of all the Entities preferably 
within 90 days.  The development should be brought to the Notice of this 
Appellate Tribunal every month.  The resolution of IL&FS also remains sub -
judice before the NCLAT.  Discussion on the resolution framework is 
attached as Annexure I. 
 
The judgment dated 01/01/2019 was affirmed by the NCLAT vide its orders 
dated 31/01/2019 and subsequently by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
vide its order dated 04/06/2019.  An  updated summary of the debt profile of 
the IL&FS group is at AnnexureII.  Subsequent payments have been made 
by the Government of India as sovereign guarantor of IL&FS, in view  of the 
fact that the IL&FS remains under moratorium and as such, is unable to 
make loan repayments. 
 
13. The Committee note  the various steps taken  so far with regard to 
IL&FS.  The Committee underst and that resolution of IL&FS remains sub -
judice before the NCLAT and feel that delays in the resolution process not 
only brings a steep valu e erosion to the bankers and other creditors but 
more importantly leaves the understanding of the lacunae in the system 
evasive.  It is necessary to plug these loopholes as the defaults jeopardised 
hundreds of investors, banks and mutual funds associated w ith IL&FS and 
several NBFCs also faced default scare , until the government’s timely 
intervention in the matter while taking note of the various investigations 
being undertaken and subsequent penalties being imposed for the failure in 
exercising due diligence, the Committee desire  that a thorough systemic 

 
 
review should be conducted by RBI so that such episodes involving 
‘systemically important entities’ are pre-empted.  
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
             THE GOVERNMENT    
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee observe that in the international context, a few years back 
certain CRAs were stated to have been forced to downgrade their own prior credit 
ratings on complex mortgage backed securities in the USA, when doyens of the 
financial markets like L ehman Bros. collapsed and many others were in serious 
threat of liquidation, which also raised questions on the level of due diligence on 
the part of the CRAs. More recently, in the Indian context, the credibility of credit 
rating action has come into shar p question in the crisis involving the Infrastructure 
Leasing and Financial Services Limited (IL&FS), a major infrastructure 
development and finance company of systemic importance, which functioned as a 
holding company involved in investing and lending to its subsidiaries, associates 
and group entities. As 'rating' of an instrument or entity is being increasingly relied 
upon by capital markets, bankers and investors and since it constitutes a key input 
for financial decision-making of far-reaching magnitude, the Committee desire that 
it should be ensured that the credit rating process becomes absolutely 
professional, objective and credible. The Committee would therefore expect the 
key regulator, namely SEBI as well as the RBI to review their Regulations 
comprehensively, particularly in the face of the serious IL&FS default crisis 
mentioned above. The regulators should also remain alert and pro -active when it 
comes to strict enforcement of the Regulations, particularly the punitive provisions, 
as otherwise, th e entire object and process of regulation will be rendered 
meaningless. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs and Department of Financial Services) should 
seek a factual report from the concerned regu lators regarding the enforcement of 
the CRA Regulations, particularly the action taken by them against the CRAs who 
had been giving "stable" ratings to IL&FS prior to the default crisis. The Committee 
believe that the Regulations should be suitably modifie d/tightened, benchmarking 
them on greater objectivity, transparency and credibility in the whole credit rating 

 
 
framework and process. In the view of the Committee, time has now thus come for 
a fresh evaluation of the credit rating framework in the country with a view to 
restoring public confidence and ensuring the accountability of the CRAs to the 
various stakeholders and the financial system as a whole. The Committee would 
recommend that the disclosures being made by the CRAs should henceforth 
include important determinants such as, extent of promoter support, linkages with 
subsidiaries, liquidity position for meeting near -term payment obligations etc. The 
Committee desire that the general investors should also be able to get a coherent 
"big picture" about the entity and its associates/subsidiaries from credit rating. 
6. The Ministry  of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  in their action 
taken reply stated as under:- 
 "SEBI Regulations provide for a disclosure-based regulatory regime for 
Credit Rating A gencies (CRAs), wherein CRAs are required to devise 
and disclose their rating criteria, methodology/process on their 
respective websites. Accordingly,  each CRA has its own rating models 
and methodologies which are available on CRAs’ website. 
  
The CRA Regulations have been amended from time to time, keeping in 
mind the dynamic nature of the market, so as to meet the market 
requirements and to achieve objectivity, transparency and credibility in 
the credit rating process. 
  
After the default of  financial ins truments of IL&FS, SEBI CRA 
Regulations were reviewed  and SEBI vide circular dated November 
13, 2018 further standardised the template of the Press Release used by 
CRAs while communicating rating actions   to disclose additional 
information viz. disclosure on support from the Parent/ Group/ 
Government, if factored into a rating, list of all subsidiary/ group 
companies consolidated to arrive at a rating, along with the extent (e.g. 
full, proportionate or moderate) and rationale of consolidation, specific 
section on “Liquidity”, highlighting parameters like liquid investments or 
cash balances, access to unutilised credit lines, liquidity coverage ratio, 
adequacy of cash flows for servicing maturing debt obligation, etc. 
  
Through the same circular, SEBI has als o mandatedthe disclosure 
ofaverage one -year rating transition rates for long -term instruments for 
the last 5 -financial year period on CRAs’ websites and Disclosure of 
sharp rating actions in investment grade rating category by each CRA on 
the Stock Exchang e and Depository websites.   CRAs shall treat sharp 
deviations in bond spreads of debt instruments vis -à-vis relevant 
benchmark yield as a material event. 
  

 
 
As far as banks are concerned, RBI accredits CRAs for the limited 
purpose of computation of capital for various bank exposures under the 
Standardized Approach of Basel II norms. Credit ratings are therefore 
not the chief drivers of credit decisions by banks. Credit decisions are 
based on banks’ own appraisal and the bank loan ratings by CRAs are 
used by the banks only to compute the capital. The banks in India 
compute capital on the basis of norms prescribed by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), wherein the risk weights 
assigned are on the basis of ratings provided by the external rating 
agencies. In this regard, while the risk weights assigned to a given rating 
grade under the BCBS norms and RBI regulations are same, the 
reported Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDRs) of Indian CRAs are much 
higher than the threshold prescribed under the Base l norms. Therefore, 
the minimum capital -to-risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) for banks in 
India has been kept higher at 9% as compared to the Basel requirement 
of 8%, precisely in view of the understated probability of default implicit 
in the ratings given  by CRAs in India. RBI can consider prescribing 
higher risk weights to further mitigate the risk of high default areas on 
served in respect of ratings given by CRAs and even de -accrediting a 
CRA if warranted. However, it may not be appropriate to implement such 
measures based on an isolated incident. RBI shall closely monitor the 
evolving situation and take necessary action. 
  
Further, as part of the supervisory process, RBI independently assesses 
the capital requirements of banks and can require banks to hold 
additional capital as part of Pillar -2 requirements under the Basel 
framework based on these assessments. 
  
As far as their investments are concerned, banks have been advised to 
make their own internal credit analysis and rating on investment 
proposals and not to entirely rely on the ratings of external agencies. 
 
DEA has sought the factual reports from SEBI and RBI regarding the 
enforcement of the CRA Regulations, particularly any action taken by 
them against the CRAs who had been giving "stab le" ratings to IL&FS 
prior to the default crisis. 
  
SEBI has informed DEA that actions have been initiated against the 3 
CRAs who rated the non -convertible debentures  (NCDs) of 
IL&FS.Further, adjudication proceedings against the CRAs, viz. ICRA 
Limited, CARE Ratings Limited and India Ratings and Research Private 
Limited, have been initiated by SEBI under Section 15HB of SEBI Act, 
1992, for failure to exercise proper skill, care and due diligence while 
rating the securities of IL&FS, which is in violation of  Regulation 24(7) 
and Clauses 4 and 8 of Code of Conduct for CRAs read with Regulation 
13 of SEBI (Credit Rating Agencies) Regulations, 1999. 
  
RBI has informed DEA that the concerns emanating from the recent IL & 
FS episode relate largely to the use of ratings of debt instruments issued 

 
 
by the borrower entities, specifically with regard to the entity referred 
to.In terms of the RBI Directions, IL&FS Financial Services (IFIN) was 
disallowed to raise any additional funding from the Commercial 
Paper (CP) market for six months after a default was reported in August, 
2018. 
 
Through its circular dated November 13, 2018, SEBI has mandated 
disclosure of the said determinants, viz. extent of promoter/ Group/ 
Government support, linkages with subsidiaries, list of gr oup companies 
consolidated to arrive at a rating, liquidity position, etc., in the press 
release regarding rating actions by CRA. 
  
Considering the Committee’s recommendation on disclosures, RBI is of 
the view that as per the extant SEBI  instructions, in o rder to enable 
investors to understand underlying rating drives better, CRAs are 
required to specifically disclose the following: 
  
i. When a rating factors in support from a Parent/Group/Government, 
with an expectation of infusion of funds towards timely deb t servicing, 
the name of such entities, along with rationale for such expectation, 
may be provided. 
 
ii. When subsidiaries or Group companies are consolidated to arrive at a 
rating, list of all such companies, along with the extent (e.g. full, 
proportionate or  moderate) and rationale of consolidation may be 
provided. 
 
iii. The Press Release shall include a specific section on “Liquidity” which 
shall highlight parameters like liquid investments or cash balances, 
access to unutilised credit lines, adequacy of cash flows for servicing 
maturing debt obligation, etc. CRAs shall also disclose any linkage to 
external support for meeting near term maturing obligations. 
To address the concern of the Committee on providing a bird’s -eye view 
about the entity and its associat es/subsidiaries/structure, to the 
investors,SEBI has issued a circular dated November 13, 2018, 
mandating disclosure linkages with subsidiaries, list of group companies 
consolidated to arrive at a rating, etc., in the press release regarding 
rating actions by CRA. 
  
Further, as prudent measure RBI has also  advised CRAs to obtain and 
analyse bank account statements from the rated entities. This will 
facilitate early recognition of stress in the financials of the rated entity. 
  
Further, a joint inspection of CRAs by SEBI and RBI has been initiated 
recently, with the role of RBI specifically focused on bank loan ratings 
assigned by the concerned CRA.Through the course of these 
inspections, various aspects in the functioning of the  CRAs including 

 
 
their rating methodology are examined and observations are drawn for a 
follow-up with the concerned CRA. 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
The desired policy changes have been carried out by SEBI in this regard 
in consultation with RBI and the regulations are amended as and when 
the market requirements warrants the same.  CRAs are jointly inspected 
by SEBI and RBI. Through the course of these inspections, various 
aspects in the functioning of the CRAs including their rating methodology 
are examined for further modification in the policy regime. 
With regards to action taken against CRAs, SEBI has probed the role of 
CRAs in the matter of rating of IL&FS and passed an Order dated 
September 22, 2020 against CAR E Ratings limited, ICRA Limited and 
India Ratings and Research Pvt. Ltd. Imposing a penalty of Rs. 1 crore 
each (maximum permissible under Section 15HB of the SEBI Act 1992) 
for failure in exercising due diligence while assigning ratings to IL&FS. 
Action h as already been taken by SEBI in consultation with RBI as 
indicated by SEBI in the earlier response.  
    The desired policy changes have been carried out by SEBI in this regard. 
w.e.f. January 2020, SEBI has made it mandatory for listed companies 
to disclose their default on bank loans if the default continues beyond 30 
days.  This benefits all investors as well as CRAs and acts as an early 
warning. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 
 As regards the matter of IL&FS crisis, wherein the Government has since 
intervened and re-constituted the Board (the matter being under National Company 
Law Tribunal), the Committee would recommend a comprehensive commission of 
enquiry into the whole gamut  of the episode, which will inter -alia probe the role of 
CRAs that had over-rated the entities sometime before the crisis and the role of the 
largest institutional stakeholder in IL&FS, namely the LIC of India as well as other 
institutional stakeholders. T he governance failures and indecision/indiscretion on 
the part of the IL&FS Board should also be thoroughly probed. The Committee 

 
 
desire that urgent measures should be initiated to resurrect IL&FS, as it is the only 
major institution funding the infrastructure projects in the country. 
 The Ministry  of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)  in their action 
taken reply stated as under:-  
In the opinion of DEA, however, there is no need to set up any 
Commission of Enquiry in this matter  as the role of Directors of IL&FS 
Board is already being enquired/ investigated by Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO) of Ministry of Corporate Affairs. SEBI & RBI 
are also looking into the system/procedure of the CRAs. Hence, it is felt 
that a separate Commission of Enquiry is not warranted at this stage. 
 
Due to continuous failure of the Infrastructure Leasing and Financial 
Services Ltd. (IL&FS) to service its debt and imminent possibility of 
contagion effect in the financial market, the Ministry of Corporate Affa irs, 
at the request of Department of Economic Affairs, moved an application 
under Sections 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 before the 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), Mumbai Bench for taking 
management control. The NCLT, Mumbai Bench vide its o rder dated 
01/10/2018 approved the application filed in this regard, by suspending 
the erstwhile board of directors of IL&FS and appointed government 
nominees as directors, who have been tasked with the orderly resolution 
of the IL&FS and its group compani es. The entire process is being 
carried out under the supervision of the NCLT. Being cognizant of the 
fact that the mismanagement existed across the Respondent No.1 
Group, on an application by the Petitioner, this Hon’ble Tribunal, by an 
Order dated 09/10/ 2018, permitted the newly appointed Directors to 
appoint themselves as Directors on the group/subsidiary/associate/jointly 
controlled entities or operations of IL&FS. 
  
Further, in order to ensure period of calm during the resolution process, 
a moratorium was sought against the creditors, which has been granted 
on interim basis by the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal 
(NCLAT) until further orders, vide its orders dated 15/10/2018. The 
matter is sub-judice. 
  
The NCLT, Mumbai Bench vide its orders date d 01/10/2018 had also 
directed filing of progress reports till resolution, which is a continuous 
process. As such, till date Ministry of Corporate Affairs has filed first 
report on 31/10/2018, the second report on 03/12/2018, the third report, 
its addendum and the fourth report, collectively, on 16/01/2019. 
  
Initially there were 11 Respondents in the original petition moved by 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs before the NCLT, Mumbai Bench. However, 
the NCLT, vide its order dated 31/10/2018 directed Ministry o f Corporate 
Affairs to implead all the group companies of IL&FS as Respondents. In 

 
 
compliance of the said order, this Ministry filed an affidavit dated 
03/12/2018 arraying the group companies of IL&FS as Respondents, as 
per information provided by the company. 
  
Simultaneously, vide order dated 30/09/2018, in exercise of powers 
under Section 212(1)(a) & (c) of the Companies Act, 2013, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs has ordered investigation into the affairs of IL&FS and 
its subsidiary companies to be carried  out by the Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO). The SFIO has submitted an interim report 
dated 30/11/2018. On the basis of said interim report, this Ministry vide 
its aforementioned affidavit dated 03/12/2018, also sought impleadment 
of further pers ons as Respondents in the original petition filed under 
Section 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013. Additionally, 
application was also filed by Ministry of Corporate Affairs for seeking 
orders, qua the additional respondents, to restrain them from mortgaging 
or creating charge or lien or creating third party interest or in any way 
alienating, the movable or immovable properties owned by them, 
including jointly held properties. The NCLT was pleased to grant relief to 
this Ministry, vide orders dated 03/1 2/2018, which are still in operation. 
As such, there are a total of 318 Respondents in petition before the 
NCLT. 
  
Simultaneously, in view of the negative impact that the IL&FS Group had 
on the financial markets at large and that there was considerable 
allegations in respect of the financial statements of the said Companies, 
the Disciplinary Directorate of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India (ICAI), in the interest of the profession, suomoto sought to consider 
the performance of the statutory au ditors of the said Companies. 
Pursuant to an enquiry conducted in respect of the statutory auditors of 
the said Group Companies, the ICAI found that there were key lapses, 
shortcomings and manipulations on the financial statements by the 
statutory auditors of the said Companies. Most significantly, it was noted 
that the condition of the said Companies as a result of mismanagement 
reflects upon the statutory auditors of the said Companies. The ICAI has 
held the statutory auditors of the said Companies prima facie guilty of 
professional misconduct. As such, in view of the prima facie findings of 
ICAI and the interim report dated 30/11/2018 submitted by SFIO, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs filed a petition before the NCLT, Mumbai 
Bench on 21/12/2018 under Sectio n 130 of the Companies Act, 2013 
seeking reopening of the books of account of IL&FS, IL&FS Financial 
Services Ltd. (IFIN) and IL&FS Transportation Networks Ltd. (ITNL) for 
the last 5 (five) years, and for recasting the financial statements of the 
said companies, which has been allowed by the NCLT, Mumbai Bench 
vide its judgment dated 01/01/2019. 
  
In addition to the above, the IL&FS Group of companies have been 
classified into three categories – Green, Red and Amber – on the basis 
of 12 -month cash flow based solvency test, which classification has 
been communicated to NCLAT vide affidavit dated 25/0 1/2019. Vide 

 
 
subsequent affidavits dated 11/02/2019 and 23/03/2019 filed before the 
NCLAT, detailed information regarding number of companies falling 
under each category has been brought to the knowledge of the Appellate 
Tribunal.The categorization is as under: 
 
 
Category Domestic Entity 
Count 
Domestic IL&FS Group 
External Fund Based  Debt 
(as of October 8, 2018) (INR 
Cr) 
Green 
Entities which can reply all 
financial debt obligations as and 
when due no default subsists 
50 5,596.6 
Amber 
Entities which are not able to meet 
ALL obligations (financial and 
operational), but can meet 
operational and senior secured 
financial debt 
13 16,372.6 
Red 
Entities which CANNOT fully 
repay even senior secured financial 
debt obligations as when due 
80 61, 375.6 
Entities for which classification is 
still underway 
18 5895.9 
Entities which are undergoing 
liquidation proceedings, winding 
up and/or insolvency resolution 
proceedings. 
8 5.7 
Total 169 89,246.4 
  
Vide orders dated 11/02/2019, the Hon’ble NCLAT has directed for 
exclusion of ‘133 Offshore Group Entities’ incorporated out of India, from 
the purview of the Hon’ble NCLAT’s order dated 15/10/2018 i.e. order for 
moratorium. However, the Appellate Tribunal directed that resolution for 
such ‘Offshore Group Entities’ may be taken up by the Board of Directors 
of ‘IL&FS’ under the supervision of the Hon’ble Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain, 
who has been engaged to supervise the operation of the ‘Resolution 
Process’ of the ‘IL&FS Group Companies’, as per the directions of the 
Hon’ble NCLAT. 
  
Further, vide the aforementioned orders dated 11/02/2019, the Hon’ble 
NCLAT also directed that all “Green Entities” are permitted to service 
their debt obligations as per scheduled repayment, which should be 
within the ‘Resolution Framework’ and  subject to the supervision of the 
Hon’ble Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain. 
  
Furthermore, upon an application filed by PTC India Financial Services 
Ltd., the Hon’ble NCLAT has without going into the rival contention of the 

 
 
parties, vide its order dated 25/02/2019, made it clear that due to non -
payment of dues by the ‘Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services 
Limited’ or its entities including the ‘Amber Companies’, no financial 
institution will declare the accounts of ‘Infrastructure Leasing & Financia l 
Services Limited’ or its entities as ‘NPA’ without prior permission of the 
NCLAT. However, the Reserve Bank of India has filed an intervenor 
application before the Hon’ble NCLAT seeking stay on aforesaid part of 
the order dated 25/02/2019 and the matter is still sub-judice. 
  
It has also come to the knowledge of Ministry of Corporate Affairs that 
IL&FS had availed loans from ADB and KfW, which are backed by 
sovereign guarantee from the Government of India (Department of 
Economic Affairs) and that the Gove rnment of India has made payment 
of USD 2,072,333.99 and EUR 731,954.06 from the Contingency Fund of 
India, on behalf of IL&FS to ADB and KfW respectively, against 
repayment due in December 2018. It further came to notice that the 
aforementioned loans were  taken by IL&FS for on -lending to 
infrastructure projects undertaken by group companies of IL&FS and a 
considerable portion of the said loans are yet to be repaid. In that regard, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has referred the matter to Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO), to investigate the aforesaid aspect too in the 
ongoing investigation into the affairs of IL&FS and its subsidiary 
companies, and include the same in its investigation report. 
  
Recently, upon gathering compliance information from va rious banks, it 
was noticed that one of the respondents, Mr. Ramesh C. Bawa (ex -
Director on the Board of IL&FS) in Company Petition No. 3638/2018, 
pending before the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, has operated his 
individually and jointly held bank accounts a nd lockers, despite there 
being restraint directions against alienation of moveable and immoveable 
properties by the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, vide its order dated 
03/12/2018. As such, Ministry of Corporate Affairs has filed a contempt 
petition before the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai arraying Mr. Ramesh C Bawa, 
his wife Mrs. Asha Kiran Bawa, Axis Bank Ltd. through its MD & CEO and 
Standard Chartered Bank Ltd. through its CEO, as contemnors and has 
sought punishment for the contemnors as per the provisions of Sect ion 
425 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with the Contempt of Courts Act, 
1971. In addition to the above, Ministry of Corporate Affairs has also 
sought impleadment of Ms.AshaKiranBawa and Ms.AkankshaBawa, wife 
and daughter of Mr. Ramesh C Bawa, respectively , as additional 
respondents in the main Company Petition No. 3638/2018, pending 
before the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, and also sought extension of 
order dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by the Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai 
Bench’s order dated 16/01/2019) to the addit ional respondents, 
restraining them from alienating their moveable and immoveable 
properties. This step has been taken in light of the fact that 
Ms.AshaKiranBawa and Ms.AkankshaBawa, wife and daughter of Mr. 
Ramesh C Bawa, respectively, have been found to be the beneficiaries of 
the contempt/misfeasance committed by Mr. Ramesh C Bawa. The 

 
 
Hon’ble NCLT, Mumbai Bench, vide its orders dated 26/04/2019 was 
pleased to issue notice to the contemnorrespondents and further pleased 
to array Ms.AshaKiranBawa and Ms.A kankshaBawa, as Respondent No. 
319 and 320 in Company Pet`ition No. 3638/2018, pending before itself. 
The Hon’ble Tribunal was also please to extend the operation of its order 
dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by the Hon’ble Tribunal’s further order 
dated 16/0 1/2019) to the additional Respondent Nos. 319 and 320, 
restraining them from alienating their moveable and immoveable 
properties. The matter is now listed for hearing on 07/06/2019. 
 
The resolution of IL&FS remains sub-judice before the Hon’ble NCLAT. 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
  
With regards to action taken against CRAs, SEBI has probed the role of 
CRAs in the matter of rating of IL&FS and passed an Order dated 
September 22, 2020 against CARE Ratings limited, ICRA Li mited and India 
Ratings and Research Pvt. Ltd. imposing a penalty of Rs.1 crore each 
(maximum permissible under Section 15HB of the SEBI Act 1992) for failure 
in exercising due diligence while assigning ratings to IL&FS. 
 
 
MCA has informed that the Serious  Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) has 
submitted its Report dated 28/05/2019 titled “Investigation Report of IL&FS 
Financial Services Ltd.” e xtensively detailing the role of the Statutory 
Auditors in the perpetration of fraudulent activities by the managem ent of 
IFIN.  In consequence thereof ,this Ministry filed a petition before the NCLT 
under Section 140(5)of the Companies Act, 2013 seeking removal of the 
existing Statutory Auditors of IL&FS Financial Services Ltd.(IFIN) and further 
seeking a ban on appoi ntment of Deloitte Haskins &Sells LLP and BSR & 
Associates LLP, along with their engagement partners for IL&FS, for a 
period of 5 years, in view of extensive findings by the SFIO against the 
Statutory Auditors related to their role in the perpetration of f raudulent      
activities by the management of IFIN.  The challenge by the Auditors to the 
maintainability of the Ministry’s petition under Section  140(5) was dismissed 
by the NCLT.  However, the concerned Auditors challenged the 
constitutional validity of  Section 140(5) before the Hon’ble Bombay High 
Court by way of writ jurisdiction. The Hon’ble Bombay High Court vide its 
judgment dated 21/04/2020 has disposed of the writ petitions filed by the 
auditors, and has upheld the vires of Section 140(5) of the C ompanies Act, 
2013.  However, the Hon’ble High Court quashed the criminal proceedings 
before the Special Court, Mumbai, initiated by SFIO against the auditors, 
and further held that auditors who have resigned or have been rotated out as 
per the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 cannot be sought to be 
debarred for a period of 5 years under the second proviso of Section 140(5).  
The MCA has preferred an appeal before the Hon’ble Supreme Court, 
against the Hon’ble Bombay High Court’s order dated 21/04/2020. 
 
 

 
 
Further, on the basis of SFIO’s IFIN Report dated 28/05/2019, MCA sought 
the impleadment of the company’s Statutory Auditors as additional 
respondents in the Company Petition No. 3638/2018 pending before the 
NCLT and also sought extension of order dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by 
the NCLT’s order dated 16/01/2019) to the additional respondents, 
restraining them from alienating their moveable and immoveable properties.  
Deloitte,  BSR,  their  partners  and certain other individuals named by the 
SFIO in its IFIN Report dated 28/05/2019,were impleaded in CP3638/2018 
by the NCLT vide its order dated 18/07/2019.  Subsequently, the appeals 
against the NCLT order dated 18/07/2019 have been dismissed by the 
NCLAT vide its common order dated 04/03/2020.  The  matter with regard to 
extension of order dated 03/12/2018 (as modified by the NCLT’s order dated 
16/01/2019) to the additional respondents for restraining them from 
alienating their moveable and immoveable properties, is subjudice. 
 
With regard to the resolution of the IL&FS Group, the NCLAT vide its order 
dated12/03/2020, has accepted the suggestion of pro -rata distribution (as 
proposed by the new Board of IL&FS and further suggested by the 
Ministry)and the procedure specified thereof, for the purpose of completing 
the resolution process of the group.  Furthermore, the NCLAT has also 
accepted October 15, 2018 as the cut -off date for distribution of the assets, 
because the said date is the date of initiation of the resolution process of the 
companies and  also observed that the said date should be treated as 
initiation of the resolution process of the IL&FS and Group Companies. The 
NCLAT has directed: “The Union of India, the Board of Directors of IL&FS 
and the ‘Committee of Creditors’ already constituted or which may be 
constituted are directed to conclude resolution of all the Entities preferably 
within 90 days.  The development should be brought to the Notice of this 
Appellate Tribunal every month.  The resolution of IL&FS also remains sub -
judice before the NCLAT.  Discussion on the resolution framework is 
attached as Annexure I. 
 
The judgment dated 01/01/2019 was affirmed by the NCLAT vide its orders 
dated 31/01/2019 and subsequently by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
vide its order dated 04/06/2019.  An updated summary of the debt profile of 
the IL&FS group is at AnnexureII.  Subsequent payments have been made 
by the Government of India as sovereign guarantor of IL&FS, in view  of the 
fact that the IL&FS remains under moratorium and as such, is unable  to 
make loan repayments. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that Credit rating agencies (CRAs) in India since their 
inception in 1987, have progressed from rating simple debt products to complex 
debt structures, covering a wide range of products/services like securities, bank 
loans, commercial papers , fixed deposits etc. The CRAs in our country are 
governed by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) (Credit Rating 
Agencies) Regulations, 1999, which provide detailed requirements that a CRA 
needs to follow/fulfill to be registered with SEBI. T hese regulations have been 
amended from time to time, keeping in mind the dynamics of the market. Section 
11 of the SEBI Act, 1992 empowers SEBI, as the primary regulator, to regulate the 
CRAs operating in India and enforce its regulations for their proper  functioning. 
Certain other regulatory agencies, namely, Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
(IRDA) and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) also 
recognised t he requirements for obtaining and disclosing credit rating by various 
entities under their respective sectoral jurisdiction. The Committee further note that 
the SEBI Regulations provide for a disclosure -based regulatory regime for CRAs, 
wherein they are re quired to disclose on their websites, their rating criteria, 
methodology, default recognition policy, guidelines on dealing with conflict of 
interest etc., The Committee understand that SEBI is among the few regulators 
globally to mandate public disclosure of rating criteria and methodology by CRAs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per RBI, above observations are factual. 
Comments of the Committee 
Nil 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have submitted to 
the Committee that the ratings assigned by CRAs in general, represent their 
opinion about the credit risk associated with repayment of the credit facilities based 
on individual proprietary rating framework of CRAs, which takes into account 
various drivers, namely business risk, industry risk, financial aspects, management 
capability etc. These frameworks are generally a combination of objective 
assessments through model outputs as well as subjective assessments through 
expert opinion of the analysts and rating committee members. The Committee note 
that there are currently seven CRAs registered with SEBI, out of which three are 
listed. Under the Basel II Framework, exposure of banks are assigned risk weights 
based on their credit rating and the capital required t o be maintained is linked to 
the total risk weighted assets of a bank. Accordingly, accreditation of CRAs is 
granted by RBI, which also undertakes an annual review of accreditation. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  As per RBI, above observations are factual. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
NIL 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that under the 'issuer pays model', the entity issuing 
the financial instrument pays the CRAs upfront to rate the underlying securities. 
There is a strong view that such a payment arrangement may lead to a 'conflict of 
interest' and coul d result in compromising the quality of analysis or the objectivity 
of the ratings assigned by the agencies. The Committee would therefore suggest 
that the Ministry/Regulator may consider other options as well, such as "investor 
pays model" or "regulator p ays model" after weighing the relevant pros and cons. 
Alternately, within the existing framework, the appropriate rating fee structure, 

 
 
payable by the issuer may be decided by the Regulator - SEBI - in consultation 
with RBI and the CRAs. 
Reply of the Government 
 In India and globally, issuer pays revenue model is used by CRAs.  The 
pros and cons of Issuer pays model and Investor pays model and Regulator-
Allocated model are as under: 
Issuer pays Model 
Advantages Limitations 
Widespread availability of ratings to all 
investors at no cost.  Enhanced quality 
of ratings since issuer contractually 
bound to provide the CRA access to 
information and regular management 
interactions.  With large and frequent 
issuers of debt, CRAs typically work on 
the basis of f ee cap (negotiated lump -
sum fees as opposed to issue by issue 
or loan by loan pricing).  The same 
keeps the rating fee low and results in 
smaller issuers being, in effect, 
subsidized by larger ones. 
Conflict of interest – CRAs may be 
inclined towards maint aining higher 
ratings since they receive fees from the 
issuer. 
 
Investor pays Model 
Advantages Limitations 
Eliminates the conflict of interest 
prevalent in the issuer pays model.  
Greater responsiveness to investor 
concerns and furtherance of investor 
protection agenda.  An investor paying 
for a specific rating could demand 
customised analysis, attuned to their 
goals/organizational requirements, from 
the CRA. 
Ratings not publicly available only those 
who pay for a rating can access it.  High 
cost of ratin g since only a few investors 
may seek it.  Shifts the source of conflict 
from issuer to investor – Pressures from 
investors to avoid rating downgrades 
would increase since downgrades result 
in mark -to-market losses on rated 
securities.  Or, CRAs may be 
pressurised by investors to give lower 
than warranted ratings to help them 
negotiate higher coupon rates/get a 
higher yield.  Rating being a pre -
requisite for issuance and listing of debt, 
the rating would not be available till the 

 
 
time of placement of issue as the 
investors for a public issue would not be 
known prior to the list ing of securities.  
The original investor may not have any 
incentive to keep the surveillance going 
if the underlying instrument changes 
hands anytime during the tenure of the 
instrument.  
 
Regulator-Allocated Model 
Advantages Limitations 
Eliminates rating shopping prevalent in 
the issuer pays model.  No incentive to 
provide either higher or lower than 
warranted ratings.  Widespread 
availability of ratings to all investors at 
no cost. 
Rating opinions by CRAs may be 
perceived as being endorsed by the 
Regulator.  Devising a fair selection 
model for allocation of issues to CRAs 
and fixation of fees to be paid to CRAs 
may be problematic.  May breed 
complacency amongst CRAs who will 
begin to see it as  a steady assured 
business, and provide little incentive for 
quality and excellence. 
 
The advantages and challenges posed by various alternative models have 
also been examined globally and the issuer pays model has been adopted taking 
into consideration wide spread availability of ratings, cost of ratings for investors, 
access of information from the issuer to the CRA and regulation addressing the 
conflict through disclosure of fees, prohibiting rating shopping, prohibiting 
undertaking other ac tivities, independence of rating committee, disclosure of 
unaccepted ratings, etc. 
 With regard to the regulator deciding the appropriate fee structure, within 
the existing framework, the same may not be feasible for the following reasons: 
 The fees charge s for rating an instrument depends on many other 
determinants like the complexity of the instrument, structure, type of instrument, 
sector, size and borrowing requirement of the company, frequency of borrowing, 

 
 
etc.  Therefore, it will be operationally challenging for the regulator to decide fee for 
every credit. 
 A standard fee structure may disincentivise CRA s from making investments 
in building capability, capacity and innovation.  Such a mechanism and distortion of 
competition may reduce the incentive f or CRAs to innovate and continually 
improve their processes and methodologies. 
 Further, regulator payment model can only be implemented for listed 
securities.  Since the issuer pay s model would continue in case of various other 
instruments of the same entity proposed to be rated, the inherent conflict of interest 
may not be eliminated as the issuer can adjust the fees paid to the CRA for rating 
such other instruments, thereby influencing the overall revenue of the CRA. 
 Further, SEBI does not intervene in fee related/commercial aspects with 
regard to operations of intermediaries. 
 RBI’s view is that the issuer  pays model is not something unique to India.  It 
is noteworthy that the bank loan ratings are generally issued by CRAs upon 
solicitation i.e. based on the request received from the borrowers.  CRAs do not 
issue unsolicited ratings.  Further, there is not specific regulatory prescription of 
compulsory external rating requirement of borrowers.  Borrowers can choose to 
remain unrated and bank’s exposure to unrated borrowers will be assigned risk 
weight applicable to unrated corporates and capital will be maintained by the banks 
accordingly.  As external credit ratings of borrowers are not mandated in terms of 
the prevailing regulatory requirements, the co ncept of the ‘Government or 
Regulator Pays’ may not be as such necessary for bank loan ratings.  Such a 
model may also result in moral hazard because ratings may be wrongly construed 
by investors to be sovereign-backed. 
 Further, in an ‘issuer pays’ model,  the rating action disclosures are publicly 
available to all stake holders viz., banks, investors, regulators, intermediaries, etc. 
at zero cost whereas under the ‘investor pays’ model, only those who pay get to 
the know the rating.  So if an issuance has to be rated at the behest of multiple 
investors, there would be a cost ramification and information asymmetry.   

 
 
 In view of the foregoing, due to lack of a feasible alternative payment model, 
and in accordance with the global practice, the present ‘issuer  pays model’ may 
continue, while addressing the issue of conflict of interest through greater 
transparency and disclosures, and better governance practices to ensure 
independence of CRAs. 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
 
 As represented in the earlier response, due to lack of a feasible alternative 
payment model, and in accordance with the global practice, the present ‘issuer 
pays model’ may continue, while addressing the issue of conflict of interest 
presented by the Model  through greater transparency and disclosures, and better 
governance practices to ensure independence of CRAs. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
NIL 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee would also recommend changes in the regulatory 
framework to avoid situations of 'conflict of interest', such as when the CRA or its 
subsidiaries are also allowed to do advisory/consultancy work besides rating. 
Further, with a view to provide a level playing field and healthy competition among 
CRAs, all the SEBI registere d CRAs may be considered for eligibility to participate 
in the bidding process for large debt issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 To mitigate the conflict of interest posed by CRAs undertaking consultancy/ 
advisory/ other activities, SEBI (CRA) Regulations w ere amended in 2018, 
restricting CRAs from undertaking activities other than rating of securities offered 
by way of public or rights issue, except those undertaken under the respective 
guidelines of financial sector regulators/ other authorities as specified by SEBI. 
  

 
 
RBI is of the view that CRAs including Infomerics Valuation and Ratings 
Private Limited have been accredited to assign bank loan ratings and there is no 
size threshold for this. However, for the purpose of Independent Credit Evaluation 
(ICE) envisaged under RBI’s revised framework on resolution of stressed assets, 
only those CRAs that meet certain conditions which inter alia includes accreditation 
for a minimum period of five years, have been authorised by RBI to undertake the 
ICE. This is because ICE is a more complex exercise as compared to bank loan 
ratings. With a view to avoid any conflict of interest, the following conditions have 
been prescribed in respect of ICE: 
i. The CRA will be eligible to accept ICE mandate for Resolutions Plan (RP) of 
a borrower entity in default if the bank credit facilities of the borrower entity 
carried an investment grade rating ( i.e., BBB- or better) from the concerned 
CRA at any time during the previous one year period. 
ii. The mandate for CRA with regard to ICE shall be restricted to the providing 
the ICE for the residual debt under the resolution plan submitted by the 
bank. The CRA or its group entities shall not take part in the formulation or 
re-formulation of the resolution plan, or any other such advisory roles in this 
context. 
  
Further,  the  performance  of  CRAs will be reviewed by the RBI on an 
yearly basis as at the end of the financial   year with respect to the   failure  rate  of  
the  borrowers subjected  to  ICE.  The   observed failure rate of ICEs performed in 
a financial year is generally not expected   to   be greater than 10 percent. 
 It may be noted that SEBI only  regulates CRAs. It has not prescribed any 
list with regard to eligibility of registered CRAs to participate in bidding processes. 
In other words, all SEBI registered CRAs are eligible to participate in the bidding 
process for large or small debt issues. 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
 
 Vide SEBI circular dated November 4, 2019 on “Enhanced Governance  
Norms for Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs)”, the following has been mandated: 
 MD/CEO of a CRA shall not be a member of rating committees of the CRA. 

 
 
 Rating committees of a CRA shall report to a Chief Ratings Officer (CRO). 
 One third of the board of a CRA sha ll comprise of independent directors, if 
the board is chaired by a non -executive director.  In case the board of the 
CRA is chaired by an executive director, half of the board shall comprise of 
independent directors. 
 The board of a CRA shall constitute Rat ings Sub -Committee and 
Nomination and Remuneration Committee. 
 The CRO shall directly report to the Ratings Sub-Committee of the Board. 
  
 
  
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
 Similarly, the Committee would also suggest to the Ministry/Regulator to 
explore the mandatory rotation of rating agencies along the lines of statutory 
auditors to avoid the pitfalls of long association between the issuer and the CRA 
and particularly considering the recent instances of failure of CRAs in sensing 
simmering 'trouble' in their client -entities. This may also help eliminate element of 
complacency in the credit rating industry and bring fresh p erspectives on table. In 
the same vein, the Ministry may also evaluate the suggestion to have rating 
compulsorily carried out by more than one agency (dual or multiple), particularly in 
respect of debt instruments/bank credit involving large amounts say, m ore than 
Rs.100 crore. This will help the investors to access different positions/viewpoints 
for an informed decision. On the same premise, the Committee would also suggest 
that the existing threshold for registration of CRAs may also be suitably 
lowered/modified with a view to encouraging more entities, particularly start -ups 
with the requisite capability and expertise to become part of the industry. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry  of Finance (Department of  Economic Affairs) in their action 
taken reply stated as under:- 
 
 "It is felt that the exercise of “auditing” and “rating” cannot be compared 
since auditors work on past data, whereas CRAs are required to offer 
forward-looking views on the debt -servicing ability of an issuer. Further, 
while statutory audit is conducted for a company by an auditor, ratings 
are assigned to various instruments of a company/ issuer. Accordingly, 
various instruments issued by a company, having different maturities, 
may have ratings assigned by multiple CRAs. As a result, the same 
issuer would be examined by more than one CRA, in respect of rating of 
different instruments, unlike the examination of the accounts of a 
company by the same auditor. 
Further, as regards the recommendation of the Committee on mandatory 
rotation of CRAs within the tenure of the instrument, such an exercise 
may have the following implications: 
  

 
 
i. It may result in each CRA taking a short -term view (till the time that CRA 
is required to rate the instrument) on the creditworthiness of the issuer,  
instead of a longer -term perspective spanning the entire tenure of an 
instrument. 
ii. While there are stringent conditions for withdrawal of rating from a CRA 
at present, mandatory rotation of CRAs, may pose the problem of rating 
shopping as the issuer on rot ation may approach a CRA promising a 
higher rating. 
iii. Since CRAs would assign ratings for a fixed period, the rating transition/ 
default statistics of each CRA, as required to be disclosed by each CRA 
on its website, shall not be reliable indicators of the p erformance of the 
CRA and rating transition of any instrument through its complete tenure 
would not be captured. 
  
As regards the suggestion of ratings being compulsorily carried out by 
more than one agency (dual or multiple), particularly in respect of de bt 
instrument/bank credit involving large amounts say, more than Rs. 100 
Crore, the following may be noted: 
  
Mandatory requirement of dual rating for debt securities would increase 
the cost of debt issuance and, therefore, adversely impact the interests 
of corporate bond issuers and hamper the growth of corporate bond 
market. In practice, many issuers obtain ratings from two or more CRAs 
upon the insistence of investors. Further, there is no requirement of 
mandatory dual/ multiple rating in any major globa l jurisdiction. It is 
understood that the European Securities and Markets Authority 
mandates the use of ratings by two or more CRAs only in case of 
structured finance instruments, and not for debentures/ loans. Even in 
cases of banks,  the credit ratings ar e not the chief drivers of    credit 
decisions by banks. Credit decisions are based on banks' own appraisal 
mechanism and the ratings are used for the limited purpose of capital 
computation. It is left to the borrowers to avail the external ratings from 
one or more CRAs. As regards commercial papers (CPs), in terms of the 
lowered/modified with a view to extant RBI directions, eligible 
encouraging more entities, issuers, whose total CP issuance particularly 
start-ups with the during a calendar year is 1000 cr ore or more, shall 
obtain credit rating for issuance of CPs from at least two CRAs 
registered with SEBI and should adopt the lower of the two ratings.   
Where both ratings are the same, the issuance shall be for the lower of 
the two amounts for which ratings are obtained. 
  
Further , in terms of the revised framework on resolution of stressed 
assets,Resolution Plans involving restructuring /change in ownership in 
respect of ‘large’ accounts (i.e. accounts where the aggregate exposure 
of lenders is Rs 1 billi on and above), shall require independent credit 
evaluation (ICE) of the residual debt by CRAs. While accounts with 
aggregate exposure of Rs 5 billion and above shall require two such 
ICEs, others shall require one ICE. Only such RPs which receives as 
credit opinion of RPs or better (indicating moderate degree of safety 

 
 
regarding timely servicing of financial obligations) for the residual debt 
from one to two CRAs, as the case may be, shall be considered for 
implementation. 
 
Given the importance of CRAs, it is imperative to ensure that entities 
granted registration as CRAs are promoted by entities having high 
credibility, good track record and adequate financial capabilities, and are 
fit and proper, so as to enable them to invest in building intellectual 
capital, developing efficient systems and infrastructure and adopting 
better technology. Maintenance of such high standards is essential for a 
CRA to function efficiently, professionally and independently, which may 
not be feasible for a start-up. 
  
Having regard to the significant role played by CRAs in the market, it is 
felt that the extant eligibility requirements for registration as a CRA, viz. 
networth requirements, promoter eligibility requirement, “fit and proper 
person” criteria, etc., are reasonable/ appropriate." 
 
The Ministry submitted the updated action taken reply as follows: 
As regards mandatory rotation, as stated earlier, the rating assessment of a 
CRA has to be forward looking unlike auditing.  Further, mandatory rotation 
would be a disincentive to good and quality CRAs.  It will also ensure 
business for less effective CRAs.  Hence, it is better to leave it to the market 
to discriminate between CRAs based on their performance.   
 
As regards the issue of multiple ratings, the views remain the same. 
 
RBI has further stated that in terms of the Prudential framework on resolution 
of stressed assets dated June 7, 2019,  Resolution Plans involving 
restructuring / change in ownership in respect of “large” accounts (i.e. 
accounts  where the aggregate exposure of lenders is  ₹ 1 billion and 
above), shall require independent credit evaluation (ICE) of the residual debt 
by CRAs.  While accounts with aggregate exposure of ₹ 5 billion and above 
shall require two such ICEs, others shall require one ICE.  Only such RPs 
which receive a credit opinion of RP4 or better (indicating moder ate degree  
of  safety  regarding  timely servicing of financial obligations) for the residual 
debt from one or two CRAs, as the case may be, shall be considered for 
implementation. 
 
Having regard to the significant role played by CRAs in the market, it is  felt 
that the extant eligibility requirements for registration asa CRA, viz. networth 
requirements, promoter eligibility requirement, “fit and proper person” 
criteria, etc., are reasonable/appropriate. 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 

 
 
CHAPTER- V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                      SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
10 March, 2021                              Chairperson, 
19 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Finance  
 
 
 
 

  
Annexure-I 
 
DISCUSSION ON THE RESOLUTION FRAMEWORK 
 
1. It is pertinent to understand the evolution of the resolution framework, which led to the NCLAT order dated 12/03/20202, wherein the revised 
framework based on pro -rata distribution was approved. The Resolution Framework sets forth that an “asset by asset‟ solution explored through 
various methods i.e. an “Asset Level Resolution” and in some cases, the sale of the business vertical comprising of a basket of companies is the 
most feasible option for the resolution of IL&FS Group. There solution incorporates all the rigour, fairness and procedural t ransparency which is 
inherent in resolution processes under the IBC, such as: 
 
(a) (in most cases) a public bidding process1; 
(b) Considering eligibility of prospective bidders under Section29A of the IBC; 
(c) obtaining “fair market value‟ and “liquidation value‟ reports which are presented to the members of the relevant Creditors Committee formed in 
respect of each Sale Company (in the manner as contemplated in the Initial Resolution Framework); and 
(d) placing the highest bid value received in respect of the relevant Sale Company pursuant to the ongoing Asset Level Resolution before the relevant 
creditors ‟Committee for its consideration. 
 
 
 
 
1Paragraph 10.2 of the Initial Resolution Framework contemplated that for some companies within the IL&FS Group, the New Board reserves the liberty 
having regard to, amongst others, issues such as: (i) the nature of existing contractual arrangements in place with counterparties; (ii) nature of the business 
and jurisdictional issues; (iii) relevant regulatory r equirements or prohibitions; (iv) cost-benefit analysis related aspects such as expediency, preservation of 
value and such other similar aspects, to also consider and where appropriate, either suitably modify the approach outlined above or to undertake such other 
fair and transparent processes(including ‘Swiss Challenge’)and stipulate such conditions as it may deem fit, in each case being guided By the principles set 
out in paragraph 4.2 of the Initial Resolution Framework   

  
(e) and in doing so, it also pertinent to note that the New Board as part of its resolution efforts for the IL&FS Group already perfo rms a variety of 
functions, which in the context of a corporate debtor undergoing resolution under the IBC, would be within the remit of the committee of creditors. 
 
2. Further features of the Initial Resolution Framework were: 
 
(i) Crystallisation of claims as of “Cut off Date” (i.e. October 15, 2018) :No interest, additional interest, default interest, penal charges or other similar 
charges to accrue after the Cut-Off Date of October 15, 2018. 
(ii) Appointment of valuers for determining the fair value and liquidation value: Two valuers to be appointed to determine the fair value and 
liquidation value in respect of  “Sale Companies” (i.e., entities being monetized as part of the “Asset Level Resolution‟). 
(iii) Categorisation of entities (Category I and Category II) :Based on the H1 bid value received, a Sale Company would either be, a: 
 
(a) Category I Company i.e., where the bidder is willing to assume all liabilities of the Sale Company whether operational or financial 
 
Without compromise of the debt ; or 
(b) Category II Company i.e., where the financial bid amount offered by the applicant is less than all the liabilities of the Sale Company. 
 
(iv) Constitution of a Creditors’ Committee : In respect of the relevant Sale Company, Creditors’ Committee will be constituted (in lieu of individual 
creditor consents, which are to be dispensed with) in the following manner: 
 
(a) For a Category I Company, the Creditors‟ Committee shall constitute all the financial creditors of the IL&FS Group Company 
 
(including IL&FS Group Companies that have provided financial debt to such IL&FS Group Company) which is the “selling 
 
shareholder(s)” of that Sale Company; 
 
(b) For a Category II Company, the Creditors‟ Committee shall constitute all the financial creditors of the Sale Company (including 
 

  
IL&FS Group Companies that have provided financial debt to such IL&FS Group Company). 
 
(c) Each member of each Creditors‟ Committee will have voting rights (by value of the financial debt owed to that member) and will be called upon to 
only consider the highest bid in respect of the Sale Company. Specifically, the Creditors‟ Committee would not 
have the ability to determine distribution of the bid amounts. 
(v) Decision by the New Board: The decision of the Creditors‟ Committee to either approve or reject the highest bid for a Sale Company will be placed 
before the New Board for its consideration. 
(vi) Approval of Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain: If the New Board approves a sale proposal, the same will be placed before Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain (appointed 
by the NCLAT vide order dated February11, 2019) for his approval. 
(vii) Approval of the NCLT: Upon receipt of approval of Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain,the proposal will be placed with the NCLT for its approval.  
 
Upon receipt of approval of the NCLT and payment of consideration by the successful bidder, the shares/ assets of the relevan t Sale Compan y will be 
transferred free and clear of all encumbrances, liens, third party rights to the successful bidder. 
(viii) Distribution of proceeds to creditors: The Initial Resolution Framework contemplated that the financial bid value received for a Sale Company woul d 
be distributed in accordance with Section 53 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 ( IBC) against claims existing as of the Cut-Off Date (i.e., 
October15, 2018). 
3. However, after taking into consideration the complexities and challenges pertaining to the IL&FS Group and due to overwhelming  public interest 
involved in the resolution,  a Revised Framework based on pro -rata distribution on the rationale of “Fair and Equitable‟ distribution to all Creditors 
was proposed by the new Board of IL&FS and further suggested by the Ministry to the NCLAT vide affidavit filed in January 2020. It was submitted before the 
NCLAT that the Revised Framework seeks to balance and address the interest of different classes of creditors across all levels of the IL&FS Group 
and not just the secured creditors of the operating SPVs. The rationale for “Fair and Equitable‟ 
 
distribution to all creditors stated before the NCLAT is: 
(i) As of October 8, 2018, the aggregate principal amounts of the external fund -based debt exposure of the  IL&FS Group was approximately INR 94,000 
crores (in addition to a non fund-based exposure of approximately INR 5,100 crores). These borrowings were availed by the IL&FS Group by accessing 
possibly every source of funding available to corporates in India, including but not limited to banks (including nationalised banks, private banks, foreign 
banks and scheduled co-operative banks) and financial institutions, retail investors (by tapping into the listed bond markets in India and abroad), as well 
as the Public Fund Creditors such as Pension Funds, Provident Funds, Employee Welfare Funds, Gratuity Funds, Superannuation Funds, Army Group 
Insurance Funds; 
(ii) A significant portion of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt has been availed by members of the IL&FS Gro up (and particularly by 4key HoldCos) 

  
from entities such as Pension Funds, Employees Welfare Funds, Army Group Insurance Fund), Provident Funds, Provident Funds, G ratuity Funds, 
Super Annuation Funds (Public Fund Creditors). These Public Fund Creditors whi ch includes the Army Group Insurance Funds comprise of savings 
and funds contributed inter alia by employees, army personnel etc. to provide for retirement benefits and related entitlement s to employees of such 
entities, widows of army personnel etc. 
(iii) The amounts have been invested by the Public Fund Creditors in debt instruments issued by various IL&FS Group Entities particularly at the level of the 
HoldCos, which in turn have granted debt to various other entities of the IL&FS Group. Accordingly, for the P ublic Fund Institutions to be repaid at least 
part of their dues by the HoldCos (and other such members of the IL&FS Group which have availed debt from these Public Fund C reditors), it is critical 
that the IL&FS Group Lenders who have lent amounts (mostly on an unsecured basis) to the IL&FS Group Entities are also able to receive some 
payments from the sale proceeds from the Asset Level Resolution currently underway. 
(iv) The intervention of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs that was necessitated on account of t he public interest aspects relating to the IL&FS Group and to 
avoid the catastrophic effect of the IL&FS defaults on the Indian financial markets (as elaborated in the DEA Report). There placement of the erstwhile 
Board of Directors of IL&FS by the New Boa rd vide the 01/10/2018 Order of the NCLT was on account of the burgeoning debt levels at the IL&FS 
Group and mismanagement of the erstwhile Board of Directors of IL&FS; 
(v) The resolution of the IL&FS Group which comprises of 302 entities (of which 169 are Dom estic Group Entities, and 133 entities are incorporated in 
jurisdictions outside India) is being undertaken under Sections 241/242 of the Companies Act, 2013 (which provides the Tribun al with very wide 
powers to pass orders that are “fair and equitable‟). It is a test case for “group insolvency‟ in India and represents a watershed moment in the 
relatively recent and evolving insolvency and bankruptcy laws of India. It is pertinent to note that currently, no framework exists under Indian law , 
which pertains to or could (in its entirety) apply in a “group insolvency‟ scenario; 
(vi) While the borrowings were availed at the relevant holding company level within the IL&FS Group by leveraging high credit rati ngs and a wider investor 
base, it is pertinent to note that the borrowings at this level (including those availed from investors who subscribed to high rated debt instruments) were 
primarily utilized to provide unsecured financial debt (barring some cases, where the financial facilities are secured) to the operating level entity, to fund 
inter alia cost overruns and working capital funding, which enabled the operating level entities to complete the project, thereby genera ting cash and 
resulted in creation in assets for the IL&FS Group (including those which are currently being monetised) as well as enabling the relevant operating level 
entity to service its secured financial debt. It is also pertinent to note that the bonds issued and loans availed by IL&FS were assigned “AAA” rating until 
almost August 2018, when the  date of first default by IL&FS. was August 25, 2018. IL&FS, on a standalone basis, has availed of financial debt 
aggregating to approximately INR 18,000 crores, which was primarily borrowed by leveraging superior credit ratings. Without this funding by th e 
holding and other IL&FS Group entities, the  
assets  would not have been created at the operating level entity and accordingly, no debt servicing would have happened to the  
operating level entity lenders as well. Accordingly, it is “just and equitable‟ that the interest of the lenders at the holding company levels 
are also considered in the resolution framework for the IL&FS Group; 
(vii) As far as individual creditors (and individual Creditors‟ Committees) are concerned, they would in all likelihood only be concerned with maximizing their 
recovery at an individual entity level without regard to the adverse impact this would have on the creditors across 
different levels of the IL&FS Group, from whom debt has been availed of which a significant portion has been invested in these operating 
assets to make the viable entities; 

  
4. The resolution of the IL&FS Group is being undertaken under Sections 241- 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 and not under the  
provisions  of IBC. An individual Creditors‟ Committee at anSPV level (constituted as contemplated in accordance with the Initial Resolution Framework)  
will not be inclined to consider the interests of any creditor or stakeholder other than their respective exposure to that SPV . The New Board has 
been appointed by the NCLT (in furtherance of the intervention by the Union of India) to ensure a holistic resolution of the IL&FS Group (under the 
supervision of Justice (Retd.) D.K. Jain) and an optimal and fair resolution can be achieved for the IL&FS Group only if the interests  of the creditors across the 
IL&FS Group are considered. 
 
5. The Revised Distribution Framework modifies the existing framework for distribution of financial bid amounts /termination amounts / 
 
Settlement amounts/ foreclosure amounts. The financial bid amounts /termination amounts /settlement amounts /foreclosure amounts 
 
received by the relevant IL&FS Group entity are to be distributed in the following manner: 
(i) first, towards all resolution process costs incurred in the resolution process of the relevant IL&FS Group entity, whether incurred by 
that IL&FS Group entity or on behalf of that IL&FS Group entity (including but not limited to fe es payable to the financial and transaction advisors, legal 
counsels, resolution consultant, claims management consultant, independent valuers, costs for issuing advertisements, conduct ing audits (including 
special or forensic audits) and conducting meetings of  the Creditors‟ Committees etc.) in full; 
(ii) second, towards distribution of the net sale proceeds paid by the H1 bidder/ termination amount /settlement amounts /foreclosure amounts 
upto the average “liquidation value‟ to the creditors of the relevant IL&FS Group company in accordance with Section 53 of the IBC 

  
(which will include all components of Section 53 of the IBC such as unpaid workmen’s dues and unpaid employees dues etc. , as applicable); and 
(iii) third, the remaining sale proceeds /termination amount /settlement amounts /foreclosure amounts to be distributed pro-rata to each class of creditors of 
the relevant IL&FS Group company, adjusted for any recovery made by the relevant creditor on account of distribution 
under Section 53 (of the  IBC), as contemplated above. 
 
6. Each such payment shall be made to a creditor in respect of the admitted claim of the relevant creditor existing as of the Cut-Off Date (i.e. 
 
October15, 2018), as admitted by the Claims Management Consultant and shall be adjusted for any amounts which have been  set-off or 
 
Appropriated by the relevant creditor  in breach  of  the interim  order passed by the NCLAT on October15,  2018. 
 
7. As stated above, the NCLAT vide its order dated 12/03/2020, has accepted the suggestion of revised framewor based on pro-rata distribution and the 
procedure specified thereof, for the purpose of completing the resolution process of the IL&FS Group. 
 
 
 
****** 

  
         Annexure II 
 
SUMMARY OF DEBT PROFILE  OF THE IL&FS  GROUP 
         As set out in the January 2020 Affidavit before the NCLAT, the debt profile of the IL&FS Group is as follows: 
Sr. No. Particulars Approximate Amount (in INR)2 
1. Aggregate external fund based debt of  the IL&FS Group availed from 
 
interalia: 
INR 94,215 crores (“Aggregate External Fund Based Debt”) 
oPension Funds, Provident Funds, Employee Welfare Funds, Gratuity Funds, 
Superannuation Funds, Army Group Insurance Funds, amongst others 
(collectively the “Public Fund Creditors”) 
INR 10,173 crores 
 
(almost 10.79% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt) 
o(Indian) Scheduled Commercial Banks INR 44,075 crores 
 
(almost 47% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt) 
2. Aggregate External Fund Based Debt of the 4 keyholding companies 
 
(“HoldCos”) (i.e.,IL&FS viz. Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services Limited (IL&FS); 
IL&FS Financial Services Limited (IFIN); IL&FS Transportation Networks Limited (ITNL); 
and IL&FS Energy Development Company Limited (IEDCL)). 
INR48,000crores 
(almost 51%of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt of the 
entire IL&FS Group) 
  
 
2All external fund based debt numbers specified here in above are as of October 8, 2018;and all debt numbers  in relation to loans/financial debt provided by IL&FS Group 
entity to another IL&FS Group entity is as of September 30, 2018.  

  
Sr. No. Particulars Approximate Amount (in INR)2 
3. Principal amounts of the (outstanding) loans/ financial debt provided to IL&FS Group 
entities by other IL&FS Group entities 
INR 32,836 crores3 
 
(approximately 35% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt) 
4. Loans/ financial debt provided by the 4 key HoldCos (i.e. ,IL&FS, IFIN, ITNL and 
IEDCL, which account for almost 51% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt) to 
other IL&FS Group entities 
INR 26,154 crores 
 
(approximately 80% of the entire amount lent to the IL&FS Group by 
other IL&FS Group entities) 
5. Loans /financial debt provided by IL&FS to other IL&FS Group entities INR 11,972 crores 
(approximately 66% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt of 
IL&FS) 
 
 Amounts lent(as financial debt) by ITNL to IL&FS Group entities INR 6,994 crores 
 
(approximately 58% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt of 
ITNL) 
 Amounts lent (as financial debt) by IFIN to IL&FS Group entities INR 5,200 crores 
 
(approximately 32% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt of 
IFIN) 
 Amounts lent (as financial debt) by IEDCL to IL&FS Group entities INR 1,988 crores 
 
(approximately 89% of the Aggregate External Fund Based Debt of 
IEDCL) 
 
 
3Amounts as of September 30 ,2018. The gross financial debt lent by the Group Lenders may also include loans that were further on- lent by such Group Lenders to other 
IL&FS Group entities.  Accordingly, the net financial debt provided by the Group Lenders, adjusted for double counting is INR 23, 743crores (as of September 2018).

 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTY-
SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘STRENGTHENING OF 
THE CREDIT RATING FRAMEWORK IN THE COUNTRY’ 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
07  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendations 
at SI. Nos. 3 & 7) 
02 28.57% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies (vide Recommendations at Sl. 
Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 6) 
04 57.14% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not  been accepted 
by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 5)  
 
 
01 14.28% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2020-21) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 10th March, 2021 from 1530hrs. to 1745 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
7. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
8. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy 
9. Shri Manish Tewari 
10. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
12. Shri Praful Patel 
13. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
14. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
15. Shri Bikash Ranjan 
16. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
PART I  
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

 
 
PART II  
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption : 
(i) Twenty-Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry 
of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services and Investment & Public Asset Management).  
(ii) Twenty-Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
(iii) Twenty-Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(iv) Twenty-Eighth Report on Demands fo r Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry of Planning. 
(v) Twenty-Ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
(vi) Thirtieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in Seventy -First Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Central Assistance for Disaster Management 
and Relief’. 
(vii) Thirty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in Seventy -Second Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Strengthening of the Credit Rating Framework 
in the Country’. 
  
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports 
and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 