 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2022-23) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,  
FINANCIAL SERVICES, PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND  
INVESTMENT & PUBLIC ASSET MANAGEMENT) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Fifty-
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management)’] 
 
 
 
 
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
61 


 
 
 
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2022-2023) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, EXPENDITURE,  
FINANCIAL SERVICES, PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND INVESTMENT & PUBLIC 
 ASSET MANAGEMENT) 
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Fifty-
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management)’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.07.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.07.2023 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 July, 2023/ Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I Report 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
13 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
38 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
40 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited 
41 
  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on  
20 July, 2023 
42 
  
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fourth 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises and 
Investment & Public Asset Management)’ 
 
 
45 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2022-23) 
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
4. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
5.  Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
8. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
9. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
10. Shri Pinaki Misra 
11. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
12. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
13. Shri Nama Nageshwara Rao 
14. Prof. Sougata Ray 
15. Shri P.V. Midhun Reddy 
16. Shri Gopal Chinayya  Shetty 
17. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh  
18. Dr. (Prof) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
19. Shri Manish Tewari 
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri P. Chidambaram 
25. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
26. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
27. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
28. Dr.Amar Patnaik 
29. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
30. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari* 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan                                -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan                 -    Director  
3. Shri Puneet Bhatia                                        -    Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Yugma Malik                                          -    Committee Officer 
 
____________________________________ 
 
* Vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II no. 63014 dated 13.03.2023, Shri Pramod Tiwari was nominated to the 
Standing Committee on Finance (2022-23) on 13th March, 2023 vice Dr. Manmohan Singh, who resigned from 
the Committee w.e.f. 9th February, 2023. 
(iii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixty-First Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth 
Report of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of 
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial 
Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management). 
  
2. The Fifty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 23 March, 2023.  The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from Department of Economic Affairs 
on behalf of Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Public 
Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management on 12 June, 2023. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on         
20 July, 2023.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       JAYANT SINHA, 
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                          Standing Committee on Finance 
 
  
 
(iv) 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their 54th Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises 
and Investment & Public Asset Management) which was presented to Lok Sabha / Laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 23rd  March, 2023.  
2.  The Action Taken Notes on behalf of Departments of Economic Affairs, 
Expenditure, Financial Services, Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset 
Management were received from Department of Economic Affairs on 12th June, 2023.  
The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
13 recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12 and 13   
               (Total - 12) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. 3  
 
                         (Total - 01) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
                  (Total NIL) 
 (Chapter- IV) 
 

2 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
                  (Total NIL) 
(Chapter- V) 
3.  The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE (CAPEX) 
4. The Committee note that out of the BE (2022-23) of Rs. 7,50,246 crores as on 
02.02.2023, the actual expenditure has been Rs.5,93,099 crore i.e., a sum of 
Rs.1,35,175 crore remains from the revised estimate (2022-23) of Rs. 7,28,274 crores. 
The budget estimate for the current financial year 2023-24 has been put at 
Rs.10,00,961 crore i.e., an increase of Rs.2,50,715 crore from the previous BE (2022-
23) of Rs.7,50,246 crore which in itself was a sharp jump of 35.4% in capex from its 
previous budget estimate.  
 The Committee is given to understand that a capex thrust in the last two budgets 
of the Government has led to a pick-up in and crowding in of private sector investment 
since FY 2022 as per the Axis Bank capex Report. In this regard, the Committee feel 
that there is a need for historical private sector capex data from official government 
sources and would thus recommend that the Ministry must collate and publish valid 
historical private sector capex data by industry and region on its own for an objective 
analysis. In addition, MoSPI or NITI Aayog should conduct forward-looking surveys on 
private sector capex investment intentions by industry and region to understand future 
trends. These types of surveys will also help various suppliers prepare better for 
equipment, real estate, and workforce requirements associated with private sector 
capex. 

3 
 
 Furthermore, the Committee desire that it should be ensured that the budget 
allocation set aside for capital expenditure is met efficiently by both centre and states, 
as investments in infrastructure and productive capacity have a large multiplier impact 
on growth and employment. The Committee believe that the rise in capital expenditure 
would help achieve the objective of growth, job creation and being a cushion against 
global headwinds as one of the primary engines driving up consumption and leading the 
economy into a virtuous growth cycle.  
5.  In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
 “Capital investment holds the key to sustained economic revival by creating a strong 
multiplier effect, resulting in more employment opportunities, enhanced demand from 
industries, and higher public investments leading to a virtuous cycle of growth. 
According to the Economic Survey of India 2022-23, private capex investments in the 
‘first half’ of FY2022-23 stood at 3.3 lakh cr, witnessing a 27% growth over the last 
financial year during the same period.  
 
As per the mandate of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, MOSPI 
is expected to inter-alia, (i) ‘prepare national account as well as publish annual 
estimates of national product, government and private consumption expenditure, capital 
formation, savings, estimates of capital stock and consumption of fixed capital, as also 
the state level gross capital formation of supra-regional sectors and prepares 
comparable estimates of State domestic product (SDP) at current prices’ and (ii) 
organises and conducts periodic all India Economic Censuses and follow-up enterprise 
surveys, provides an in-house facility to process the data collected through various 
socio-economic surveys and follow up enterprise surveys. 
  
Accordingly, historical private capex data by industry are available with the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) in the statement titled ‘Gross Capital 
Formation by industry of use’ and ‘GFCF by type of asset, by industry - Private 
Corporations’ as part of the National Accounts Statistics Report. However, this annual 
data is published once a year, is historically available till FY 2021-22 and can be 

4 
 
downloaded from the MoSPI website - https://mospi.gov.in/publication/national-
accounts-statistics-2022# 
 
Given that the Economic Survey 2023 was published before the latest annual figures for 
2022-23 were available at MoSPI (it will be available only in February 2024), Axis Bank 
Capex half-yearly estimation of private sector capex spending was leveraged after due 
diligence by the Ministry of Finance. This was based on self-reported numbers of 
around 3,023 surveyed companies by Axis. The data provided by Axis Bank uses a 
consistent set of reporting companies, facilitating comparison over time. 
 
 Axis Bank uses the following methodology:  
(i) This capex is calculated through cash flow statements reported, which are 
released on a half-yearly and annual basis, along with other financial 
statements. 
(ii) The cash flow statements have three components: (i) cash flows from 
operations, (ii) cash flows from investing and (iii) cash flows from financing.  
(iii) In order to calculate capex from the "cash flows from investing" reporting, 
they extract and add (a) net purchase of fixed assets and (b) capital work-in-
progress.  
(iv) Capex = Net Purchase of Fixed Assets (purchase of fixed assets - sale of 
fixed assets) + Capital Work-in-Progress  
(v) The aggregate capex number is thus calculated across sectors to track the 
overall capex by the corporate sector  
The above methodology is clear and based on actual cash flow reporting by companies 
which is more reliable. It is also available twice a year and on a timelier basis.  
It may be noted that for the purpose of capturing private sector capex, MoSPI’s 
aforementioned annual statement can be used. However, the Ministry of Finance 
undertakes a regular review of the Union Government’s capex allocation for expedited 
implementation.  
 
Capital investment outlay has increased to about ₹10 lakh crore in BE 2023-24, which is 
about 33 per cent higher than capital outlay in BE of the previous FY 2022-23.  This is 
around 3.3 per cent of GDP and almost three times the outlay in 2019-20.This 

5 
 
substantial increase in recent years is central to the government’s efforts to enhance 
growth potential and job creation, crowd-in private investments, and provide a cushion 
against global headwinds.  
 
Out of capital outlay of about ₹10 lakh crore in BE 2023-24, allocation of       ₹1.30 lakh 
crore is for providing Special Assistance as Loan to States for Capital Expenditure. This 
is being provided as 50-year interest free loan to state governments to spur investment 
in infrastructure and to incentivize them for complementary policy actions. Approx. 90 
per cent of balance ₹ 8.7 lakh crore is for major key infra and strategic 
Ministries/Departments such as Road Transport and Highways, Railways, Defence, 
Housing (especially for MRTS and Metro Projects.), Telecom, Atomic Energy, Space 
etc.  
 
The entire capital allocation has been provided after due assessment of requirements of 
various sectors in consultation with stakeholder Ministries/Departments. Therefore, it is 
expected that actual capital expenditure will be in line with the allocation. Government 
closely monitors progress of capital expenditure during the year in order to ensure its 
utilisation to the fullest.” 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)F.No.1/2/2021-CBU dated 
20.04.2023 & OM NO. 15(5)-B(R)/2023 dated 19.4.2023] 
6. The Committee would like to emphasize on the need for Government to 
closely monitor progress of capital expenditure to ensure that actual capital 
expenditure is in line with the allocated amount to achieve the desired multiplier 
impact on growth and employment. Further, the Committee understand that 
historical private capex data by industry are available with the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI) as part of the National 
Accounts Statistics Report but the Committee would like to press upon the need 
for forward looking surveys by industry and region being carried out by MOSPI or 
NITI Aayog to understand future trends and thus help various suppliers prepare 
better for equipment, real estate and workforce requirements associated with 
private sector capex.  
 

6 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
CREDIT DEPOSIT RATIO  
7. The Committee observe that the Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) have been 
declining and that a well-capitalized banking system with a low NPA ratio and more 
robust corporate sector fundamentals will continue to enhance the flow of bank credit 
into productive investment opportunities. However, the Committee observe that the 
figures of credit-to-deposit ratio of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) made 
available to the Committee demonstrate uneven credit disbursal across the country, 
with the economically backward and geographically difficult terrain states/regions 
lagging behind in availability and extension of bank credit. The Committee urge that 
strategies and policies for the banking sector should be formulated in a fashion so as to 
address this gap. 
8. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has advised the banks to achieve a Credit Deposit 
Ratio (CD) Ratio of 60% in respect of their rural and semi-urban branches separately 
on all India basis. Banks are also advised to ensure that wide disparity in the ratios 
between different States/Regions is avoided in order to minimise regional imbalance 
in credit deployment and banks may review the performance of their branches in 
such areas and take necessary steps to augment the credit flow. Further, Lead Bank 
of the district may discuss the issue of low CD ratio in all its aspects with the banks 
and also in the District Consultative Committee (DCC) forum. Special Sub-
Committees (SSCs) of the DCC should draw up Monitorable Action Plans to increase 
the CD Ratio in the districts having CD Ratio of less than 40% and to report the 
progress on the implementation of the plan to DCC on a quarterly basis and through 
them to the convenor of the State Level. 
  
As per RBI, to address regional disparities in the flow of priority sector credit at the 
district level under Priority Sector Lending Guidelines, a study of district wise per 

7 
 
capita credit flow to priority sector was undertaken in 2020 and accordingly from FY 
2021-22 an incentive framework was devised. Districts were ranked on the basis of 
per capita credit flow to priority sector and build an incentive framework for districts 
with comparatively lower flow of credit. In terms of Master Directions – Priority Sector 
Lending (PSL) – Targets and Classification dated September 4, 2020, a higher 
weight (125%) has been assigned to the incremental priority sector credit in the 
identified districts where the credit flow is comparatively lower (per capita PSL less 
than ₹6000), and a lower weight (90%) has been assigned for incremental priority 
sector credit in the identified districts where the credit flow is comparatively higher 
(per capita PSL greater than ₹25,000)”. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) OM No.07/07/2023-Parl. 
dated 31.05.2023] 
 
9. The Committee would like to highlight on the importance of banks to pay 
heed to Reserve Bank of India’s advice to achieve  Credit-Deposit (CD) Ratio of 
60% in respect of their rural and semi-urban branches separately on all India 
basis and also address regional disparities in the flow of priority sector credit. 
Further, various measures as advised to banks to minimise regional imbalances 
in credit deployment should be strictly adhered to and continuous efforts should 
be in place to develop strategies and policies for the banking sector to even out 
credit disbursal across the country.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
GIFT CITY 
10. The Committee note that various measures to enhance business activities in 
GIFT IFSC have been undertaken by the Government in recent times. The Committee 
believe that the success of the GIFT City depends upon the Government’s ability to 
create a support environment that attracts businesses and investors. The Committee 

8 
 
feel that in addition to developing world class infrastructure and offering incentives to 
businesses, it is essential to establish regulatory framework which is easy to understand 
and comply with; aggressively market GIFT City to international investors and 
businesses at various international fora; foster a supportive ecosystem and develop a 
local workforce with requisite skills to work in the GIFT city to support its growth. The 
Committee are confident that GIFT City, which holds the potential to become a vibrant 
global financial hub for domestic and international entities, will contribute to our growth 
story in a major way. With the large aircraft orders being undertaken by India’s airlines, 
GIFT City has an excellent opportunity to emerge as India’s aircraft leasing hub.  
 
11. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 
“A.  The International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) was established 
with effect from April 27, 2020 by the Government of India under the IFSCA Act, 2019. 
Subsequently, with effect from 1st Oct 2020, it assumed the powers of four domestic 
regulators namely SEBI, RBI, IRDAI & PFRDA to develop and regulate the financial 
markets in the IFSCs in India. 
 
Over the last three years, IFSCA has endeavored to develop a regulatory architecture 
for IFSCs, which is aligned to international best practices and also has ease of 
understanding for enhanced compliance. IFSCA has since its inception come up with 27 
Regulations to regulate Banking, Capital Markets, Insurance, Bullion, Fund Industry, 
Global In House Centers, Foreign University/foreign institutions etc. within IFSC. IFSCA 
being a unified Authority for IFSCs in India, has undertaken consolidation of domestic 
regulations to a large extent pertaining to Insurance, Fund Industry, Capital Markets 
etc., which is unique in the Indian regulatory architecture. For example, IFSCA has 
carried out a consolidation of almost 40 IRDAI regulations pertaining to domestic 
regulatory set up into a set of 13 regulations for regulating Insurance business at IFSC. 
Similarly IFSCA’s Fund Management Regulations are reflective of a consolidation of 
SEBI’s regulation pertaining to AIFs, Mutual Funds, ReITs, InVITs, PMS etc. 

9 
 
Additionally, IFSCA has also issued Frameworks for Ancillary Services, FinTech Sector, 
Aircraft and Ship Leasing, International Trade Financing Services, Sustainable Finance, 
AML/CFT Guidelines etc. to aid and assist business at India’s maiden IFSC. 
 
B. IFSC Authority has established a Development Department for undertaking 
various outreach and engagement activities with global and domestic financial services 
industry. Additionally, GIFT Co. Ltd., which is the developer of GIFT City including the 
IFSC zone, is also supporting the global outreach and engagement activities.  
 
The outreach and engagement activities include bilateral meetings, road-shows, round 
table interactions, webinars, seminars, conferences, etc. carried out by IFSCA and GIFT 
City Co Ltd.  As part of global outreach to showcase GIFT IFSC opportunities, 
roundtable interactions and seminars have been conducted with financial services 
industry from United States of America, United Kingdom, Singapore, Dubai, Ireland, 
Hong Kong, Japan, Malaysia, etc. with intent to increase awareness about IFSC at 
GIFT City. GIFT IFSC has moved from being an International Contender in (Global 
Financial Centres Index) GFCI 32 Report to an International Specialist in GFCI 33 
Report. GIFT IFSC continues to remain in the list of 15 centers likely to become more 
significant in next 2-3 years. Further, the regulator has been continuously engaging in 
deliberations with a host of globally prominent financial authorities/ standard setting 
bodies for signing of Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) in order to aid mutual 
exchange of information for the development of financial products and services in GIFT-
IFSC.As on date IFSCA has signed Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding 
(MMoUs) with International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 
Additionally, IFSCA has also entered into bilateral MoUs with Dubai Financial Services 
Authority (DFSA), Qatar Financial Services Authority (QFCA), Commission De 
Surveillance Du Secteur Financier (CSSF) Luxembourg, Finansinspektionen (FI) 
Sweden, Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) 
 
C.    GIFT City has tied up with various universities and educational institutions to 
develop relevant skill sets to meet the requirements of business units at GIFT City. 
GIFT City is also working with Asian Development Bank for developing an International 
FinTech Research and Innovation Institute at GIFT City to improve the access of 

10 
 
Fintech education and research in India and provide skilled professionals to this 
emerging sector. Further, foreign universities have been allowed to set up their 
international branch campuses at GIFT City to provide courses, including, research 
programmes in Financial Management, FinTech, Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics (STEM), by the IFSC Authority. These courses are in the nature of 
financial services that are envisaged to assist the design and development of various 
financial products/financial services which will augment the capacity of highly 
specialized human resource for delivery of technology/financial services critical for 
sustaining the financial ecosystem at GIFT IFSC. 
D.  Following steps have been taken to promote GIFT IFSC to emerge as India's 
aircraft leasing hub: 
• Provision of regulatory frameworks and tax structure at par with leading financial 
centres globally have been notified in the Finance Act 2023 
• All custom bounded Airports in India have been notified for import/ export of 
Aircrafts by lessors in IFSC 
• Promotional activities including roundtable interactions, conferences and 
seminars have been held in India and globally to attract leading Aircraft Leasing 
and Financing entities to set up their units in GIFT City 
With the above enablers in place, as of 31st March 2023, twenty entities have 
registered for undertaking aircraft leasing business.”  
 [Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No.3/5/2023-IFSCA dated 
21.4.2023.] 
 
12. The Committee take note of the steps being undertaken as part of the 
global outreach to showcase the opportunities extended by GIFT IFSC and the 
continuous deliberations with globally prominent financial authorities / 
standard setting bodies to aid mutual exchange of information for the 
development of financial products and services in GIFT- IFSC. Also, taken note 
of are the steps taken to promote GIFT City to emerge as India’s aircraft 
leasing hub.  The Committee also observe the tie-ups of GIFT City with various 
universities and educational institutions to develop relevant skill sets to meet 
the requirements of business units at GIFT City alongwith working with Asian 
Development Bank for developing an International Fin-Tech Research and 

11 
 
Innovation Institute at GIFT City among other measures. The Committee desire 
that the GIFT IFSC gains a lot more significance in the coming years as 
expressed in the Global Financial Centers Index (GFCI) 33 Report which moved 
GIFT IFSC from being an ‘International Contender’ in GFCI 32 Report to an 
‘International Specialist’ in GFCI 33 Report. The Committee hope that the 
opportunities offered to GIFT City are tapped and a much more supportive 
ecosystem is fostered to support the growth of GIFT City to become a vibrant 
global financial hub for domestic and international entities alike.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
NATIONAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION REGISTRY (NFIR) 
13. The Committee note that the Budget 2023-24 seeks to set up the National 
Financial Information Registry (NFIR) as a central repository of financial information, 
facilitate the efficient flow of credit, promote financial inclusion and foster financial 
stability in the country. The Committee understand that a comprehensive financial 
information system will remove information asymmetry, reduce the cost of assessing the 
credit worthiness of borrowers and improve access to credit especially to the Micro, 
Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). The Committee have been apprised that the 
existing financial information system is fragmented, incomplete and inefficient and not 
available through a single window and that the establishment of NFIR will improve the 
credit delivery system and result in increased credit flow especially to the MSME sector 
and the underserved population. The Committee desire that the setting up of NFIR be 
expedited, which will thus help consolidate all the financial information, while facilitating 
Government’s push towards financial inclusion and sustenance of the MSME sector in 
the country, taking the Indian economy onto a faster growth trajectory.  
 
14. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance has furnished the following 
written submission: 

12 
 
“A National Financial Information Registry will be set up to serve as the central 
repository of financial information. This will facilitate efficient flow of credit, promote 
financial inclusion, and foster financial stability. A new legislative framework will govern 
this financial information infrastructure, and it will be designed in consultation with all the 
stakeholders including the RBI. The Government is coordinating with all stakeholders to 
finalise the Bill on NFIR for introduction in the Parliament at the earliest. The further 
action to establish and operationalise the NFIR would be taken following the enactment 
of the law by the Parliament.” 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs) O.M. No.18/43/2014-FSDC 
dated 19/04/2023.]  
 
15. The Committee desire that the Bill on National Financial Information 
Registry may be finalized after discussions with all stakeholders and shall be 
introduced in the Parliament at the earliest so that setting up of National Financial  
Information Registry is expedited and thus help in consolidating all financial 
information and facilitate financial inclusion and take the Indian economy onto a 
faster growth trajectory.  
  

13 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
   
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
The Committee upon scrutiny of Demand No. 32 relating to Department of Financial 
Services seeks to co-relate between Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) 
and Actual Expenditure incurred. As against RE (2022-23) of Rs. 6303.42 crore which 
was decreased from BE (2022-23) of Rs, 7174.77 crore, the actual expenditure for 
Financial Year 2022-23 as on 31.01.2023 by the Ministry is just Rs.711.41 crore. 
Further, BE (2023-24) stands at Rs.1374.66 crore i.e., has declined substantially by 
Rs.5800.11 crore from the previous BE (2022-23) of Rs. 7174.77 crore. Some of the 
reasons furnished by the Department for change in RE (2022-23) i.e., a reduction of 
Rs.871.35 crore over BE (2022-23) include reduction in subscription to the share capital 
of NABARD, loans for settlement of claims on invoking guarantee given by Government 
under partial credit guarantee scheme, credit guarantee scheme for Micro Finance 
Institutions etc. Furthermore, some of the reasons for change in BE (2023-24) vis-à-vis 
BE (2022-23) furnished include sufficient funds for subscription to the share capital of 
NABARD, subscription to share capital of Export Import Bank of India, contribution of 
Government’s share for recapitalization of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs), financial 
support to NCGTC for credit guarantee fund etc. The Committee would like to point out 
that the Department still has about Rs. 5592.01 crore i.e., 88.71% of RE (2022-23) as 
on 31.01.2023 which remains unutilized with just two months to go for the financial year. 
The Committee would further urge the Department to ensure allocated amounts to be 
efficiently utilized by institutions such as NABARD, EXIM Bank and that diligent and 
efficient disbursement be undertaken for various schemes under the Department.    
Reply of the Government 
The total Budget Estimate for the year 2022-2023 for the Department was Rs.7,436.92 
crore and Revised Estimate was Rs.6303.42 crore, out of which an amount of 
Rs.3,337.72 crore was spent and the remaining amount has been surrendered. The 
shortfall in expenditure was, inter-alia, under the following heads: - 

14 
 
Based on an assessment of the requirement of capital by the institution, it was decided 
to not release Rs.1500 crore as subscription to the share capital of Exim Bank and 
Rs.1361 crore could not be released in respect of recapitalisation of Regional Rural 
Banks as respective State Governments and sponsor Banks had not contributed their 
share. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) OM No.07/07/2023-Parl. dated 
31.05.2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
The Committee note that out of the BE (2022-23) of Rs. 7,50,246 crores as on 
02.02.2023, the actual expenditure has been Rs.5,93,099 crore i.e., a sum of 
Rs.1,35,175 crore remains from the revised estimate (2022-23) of Rs. 7,28,274 crores. 
The budget estimate for the current financial year 2023-24 has been put at 
Rs.10,00,961 crore i.e., an increase of Rs.2,50,715 crore from the previous BE (2022-
23) of Rs.7,50,246 crore which in itself was a sharp jump of 35.4% in capex from its 
previous budget estimate.  
The Committee is given to understand that a capex thrust in the last two budgets of the 
Government has led to a pick-up in and crowding in of private sector investment since 
FY 2022 as per the Axis Bank Capex Report. In this regard, the Committee feel that 
there is a need for historical private sector capex data from official government sources 
and would thus recommend that the Ministry must collate and publish valid historical 
private sector capex data by industry and region on its own for an objective analysis. In 
addition, MoSPI or NITI Aayog should conduct forward-looking surveys on private 
sector capex investment intentions by industry and region to understand future trends. 
These types of surveys will also help various suppliers prepare better for equipment, 
real estate, and workforce requirements associated with private sector capex. 
Furthermore, the Committee desire that it should be ensured that the budget allocation 
set aside for capital expenditure is met efficiently by both centre and states, as 
investments in infrastructure and productive capacity have a large multiplier impact on 
growth and employment. The Committee believe that the rise in capital expenditure 
would help achieve the objective of growth, job creation and being a cushion against 

15 
 
global headwinds as one of the primary engines driving up consumption and leading the 
economy into a virtuous growth cycle.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Capital investment holds the key to sustained economic revival by creating a 
strong multiplier effect, resulting in more employment opportunities, enhanced 
demand from industries, and higher public investments leading to a virtuous cycle of 
growth. According to the Economic Survey of India 2022-23, private capex 
investments in the ‘first half’ of FY2022-23 stood at 3.3 lakh cr, witnessing a 27% 
growth over the last financial year during the same period.  
As per the mandate of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
MOSPI is expected to inter-alia, (i) ‘prepare national account as well as publish 
annual estimates of national product, government and private consumption 
expenditure, capital formation, savings, estimates of capital stock and consumption 
of fixed capital, as also the state level gross capital formation of supra-regional 
sectors and prepares comparable estimates of State domestic product (SDP) at 
current prices’ and (ii) organises and conducts periodic all India Economic Censuses 
and follow-up enterprise surveys, provides an in-house facility to process the data 
collected through various socio-economic surveys and follow up enterprise surveys  
Accordingly, historical private capex data by industry are available with the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) in the statement titled 
‘Gross Capital Formation by industry of use’ and ‘GFCF by type of asset, by industry 
- Private Corporations’ as part of the National Accounts Statistics Report. However, 
this annual data is published once a year, is historically available till FY 2021-22 and 
can be downloaded from the MoSPI website - https://mospi.gov.in/publication/national-
accounts-statistics-2022# 
Given that the Economic Survey 2023 was published before the latest annual 
figures for 2022-23 were available at MoSPI (it will be available only in February 
2024), Axis Bank Capex half-yearly estimation of private sector capex spending was 
leveraged after due diligence by the Ministry of Finance. This was based on self-
reported numbers of around 3,023 surveyed companies by Axis. The data provided 
by Axis Bank uses a consistent set of reporting companies, facilitating comparison 
over time. 

16 
 
Axis Bank uses the following methodology:  
(i) This capex is calculated through cash flow statements reported, which are 
released on a half-yearly and annual basis, along with other financial 
statements. 
(ii) The cash flow statements have three components: (i) cash flows from 
operations, (ii) cash flows from investing and (iii) cash flows from financing.  
(iii) In order to calculate capex from the "cash flows from investing" reporting, 
they extract and add (a) net purchase of fixed assets and (b) capital work-in-
progress.  
(iv) Capex = Net Purchase of Fixed Assets (purchase of fixed assets - sale of 
fixed assets) + Capital Work-in-Progress  
(v) The aggregate capex number is thus calculated across sectors to track the 
overall capex by the corporate sector  
The above methodology is clear and based on actual cash flow reporting by 
companies which is more reliable. It is also available twice a year and on a timelier 
basis.  
It may be noted that for the purpose of capturing private sector capex, MoSPI’s 
aforementioned annual statement can be used. However, the Ministry of Finance 
undertakes a regular review of the Union Government’s capex allocation for 
expedited implementation.  
Capital investment outlay has increased to about ₹10 lakh crore in BE 2023-24, 
which is about 33 per cent higher than capital outlay in BE of the previous FY 2022-
23.  This is around 3.3 per cent of GDP and almost three times the outlay in 2019-
20.This substantial increase in recent years is central to the government’s efforts to 
enhance growth potential and job creation, crowd-in private investments, and provide 
a cushion against global headwinds.  
Out of capital outlay of about ₹10 lakh crore in BE 2023-24, allocation of  ₹1.30 
lakh crore is for providing Special Assistance as Loan to States for Capital 
Expenditure. This is being provided as 50-year interest free loan to state 
governments to spur investment in infrastructure and to incentivize them for 
complementary policy actions. Approx. 90 per cent of balance ₹ 8.7 lakh crore is for 
major key infra and strategic Ministries/Departments such as Road Transport and 

17 
 
Highways, Railways, Defence, Housing (especially for MRTS and Metro Projects.), 
Telecom, Atomic Energy, Space etc.  
The entire capital allocation has been provided after due assessment of 
requirements of various sectors in consultation with stakeholder 
Ministries/Departments. Therefore, it is expected that actual capital expenditure will 
be in line with the allocation. Government closely monitors progress of capital 
expenditure during the year in order to ensure its utilisation to the fullest. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)F.No.1/2/2021-CBU dated 20.04.2023& 
OM NO. 15(5)-B(R)/2023 dated 19.4.2023]. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
The Committee believe that green climate financing is the need of the hour and clarity 
on taxonomy for green finance should be given priority as ‘green growth’ is a key pillar 
of the Government’s economic vision. The Committee desire that blended finance 
instruments should be deployed by financial institutions in the field of green financing 
and climate investment as blended finance holds the potential to catalyse private 
finance in high risk, long gestation projects. Further, the Committee understand that 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are 
engaging with the International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) for standards to 
be issued on sustainable finance and climate finance. The Committee understand that 
even the Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) have to report for sustainability, 
which might be too much of an obligation on financially fragile MSMEs. The Committee 
therefore desire that RBI and SEBI should pursue the matter with ISSB so that pertinent 
issues of developing economies are flagged and taken into consideration by ISSB while 
formulating the standards for sustainable finance and climate finance.  
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
         The formation of the International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) was 
announced at the COP26 Summit at Glasgow in November 2021 for developing a 
comprehensive global baseline of sustainability disclosures. In this context, on March 
31, 2022 the ISSB came out with Exposure Drafts on two proposed IFRS (International 
Financial Reporting Standards) Sustainability Disclosure Standards, one setting out 
general sustainability-related disclosure requirements (S1) and one setting out specific 
climate-related disclosure requirements (S2). This was an important step towards 
developing global, consistent and comparable sustainability reporting standards. The 
ISSB received wide ranging and exhaustive feedback on the above Exposure Drafts 
with more than 1,400 responses during the comment period which ended in July 2022. 
RBI and SEBI have also furnished their comments on these Exposure Drafts. 
 2.         The aspects relating to applicability of the proposed Standards to MSMEs and 
to emerging markets and developing economies have been a matter of discussion for 
some time now and therefore, it was observed that there was a need for proportional 
reporting requirements and capacity-building support, especially for smaller companies 
and in emerging economies. The ISSB is, accordingly, working with international 
partners to support capacity building and the high-quality, consistent application of the 
ISSB’s Standards globally. On December 9, 2022 the ISSB organized a roundtable with 
a number of jurisdictions representing the Global South, in order to ensure that the IFRS 
Sustainability Disclosure Standards can be adopted and applied effectively around the 
world. The discussion reflected the ISSB’s plans to proportionally build-in reliefs for 
companies that need time to apply the standards effectively. The session also focused 
on ensuring that an effective strategy is in place to build capacity within markets to 
enable the effective disclosure, and use, of sustainability-related information.  The ISSB 
also appointed Mr. Jingdong Hua, former Vice President and Treasurer of the World 
Bank as the Vice-Chair with effect from October 1, 2022 to oversee the development 
and implementation of the ISSB’s strategies to support and include stakeholders in 
emerging and developing economies as well as smaller companies. 
3. The response relating to developing economies with ISSB, is given below: 

19 
 
i. The International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) had published the 
following Exposure Drafts in March 2022 - IFRS S1 General Requirements for 
Disclosure of Sustainability-related Financial Information and IFRS S2 Climate-
related Disclosures.  
ii. SEBI vide letter dated August 04, 2022 had provided its comments on the above 
drafts, highlighting the following issues: 
a. The IFRS Sustainability Standards should incorporate the principles of ‘just 
transition’, so that the Standards are proportional, inclusive and reflective of 
the ground realities in diverse jurisdictions.  
b. The Exposure Drafts seek a significant level of detail in information, which 
could be challenging for companies across geographies to report, given the 
differences in the maturity and progress of sustainability disclosures. This 
may limit the ability of the IFRS Standards to be adopted across all markets 
and serve as a global baseline standard.  
c. ISSB may build adjustments in the IFRS Sustainability Standards from the 
perspective of emerging markets or incorporate flexibilities that allow 
reporting entities to assess the significance and materiality of the disclosure 
based on their jurisdictional context. 
d. The Exposure Drafts sought disclosure of green-house gas emission intensity 
as metric tonnes of CO2 equivalent per unit of physical or economic output. In 
this regard, it was commented that intensity ratios based on economic value 
should either be adjusted for Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), for global 
comparability to be fairer to low cost / emerging markets or should be sought 
only on the basis of physical output. 
e. Since individual jurisdictions are best placed to gauge the readiness of their 
markets to make disclosures as per IFRS Sustainability Standards, flexibility 
should be given to jurisdictions in deciding the effective date of adoption and 
for implementing the standards in a phased or staggered manner. 
iii. It may be mentioned that as per the information available on the website of IFRS 
(ISSB), the final standards on both IFRS S1 and IFRS S2, are expected to be 
issued by ISSB in the second quarter of 2023.   
Further initiatives taken by SEBI are as under : 

20 
 
Green Debt Securities  
To cater to the increasing demand for sustainable finance, SEBI introduced the concept 
of “green debt securities” in 2017.  
In view of multiple events in the sustainable finance space around the world including 
adoption of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris Climate 
Agreement and the increasing interest in sustainable finance in India as well as around 
the globe, SEBI thought fit to update the regulatory framework for green debt securities. 
Accordingly, to keep up with the changing market landscape and demand for 
sustainable finance, SEBI, after extensive public consultation including considering 
views from international bodies like International Capital Market Association (ICMA), 
Climate Bond Initiative, London Stock Exchange etc. revised the green debt securities 
framework. 
With the issue of the new framework, SEBI has aligned the same with the Green Bond 
Principles (GBPs) of the ICMA, which are recognised by IOSCO. The framework also 
introduced the concepts of: 
 blue bonds (related to water management and marine sector),  
 yellow bonds (related to solar energy) and  
 transition bonds (for entities moving from carbon intensive to carbon neutral 
projects) as sub categories of Green debt securities. 
Keeping India’s economic vision to move to a greener economy in focus, ‘Transition 
bonds’ have been included as part of the green debt securities framework to provide 
funding for transitioning to a more sustainable form of operations in line India’s Intended 
Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs)1.  
Regulation 2(1)(q) of Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue and Listing of Non-
Convertible Securities) Regulations, 2021 defines green debt security as under: 
                                                           
1In its INDCs, India has pledged to: 
 improve the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35 per cent by 2030 below 2005 levels.  
 increase the share of non-fossil fuels-based electricity to 40 per cent by 2030.  
 agreed to enhance its forest cover which will absorb 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2, the main gas responsible for global 
warming) by 2030. 
India’s updated NDC also represents the framework for India’s transition to cleaner energy for the period 2021-2030.  

21 
 
“Green debt security” means a debt security issued for raising funds subject to the 
conditions as may be specified by the Board from time to time, to be utilised for 
project(s) and/ or asset(s) falling under any of the following categories: 
i. renewable and sustainable energy including wind, bio-energy, other sources of 
energy which use clean technology, 
ii. clean transportation including mass/public transportation, 
iii. climate change adaptation including efforts to make infrastructure more resilient to 
impacts of climate change and information support systems such as climate 
observation and early warning systems, 
iv. energy efficiency including efficient and green buildings, 
v. sustainable waste management including recycling, waste to energy, efficient 
disposal of wastage, 
vi. sustainable land use including sustainable forestry and agriculture, afforestation, 
vii. biodiversity conservation, 
viii. pollution prevention and control (including reduction of air emissions, greenhouse 
gas control, soil remediation, waste prevention, waste reduction, waste recycling 
and energy efficient or emission efficient waste to energy) and sectors mentioned 
under the India Cooling Action Plan launched by the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, 
ix. circular economy adapted products, production technologies and processes (such 
as the design and introduction of reusable, recyclable and refurbished materials, 
components and products, circular tools and services) and/or eco efficient 
products, 
x. blue bonds which comprise of funds raised for sustainable water management 
including clean water and water recycling, and sustainable maritime sector 
including sustainable shipping, sustainable fishing, fully traceable sustainable 
seafood, ocean energy and ocean mapping, 
xi. yellow bonds which comprise of funds raised for solar energy generation and the 
upstream industries and downstream industries associated with it, 

22 
 
xii. transition bonds which comprise of funds raised for transitioning to a more 
sustainable form of operations, in line with India’s Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions, and 
   Explanation: Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) refer to the 
climate targets determined by India under the Paris Agreement at the Conference 
of Parties 21 in2015, and at the Conference of Parties 26 in 2021, as revised from 
time to time. 
xiii. Any other category, as may be specified by the Board from time to time. 
Disclosure Requirements pertaining to Green Debt Securities:  
The disclosure requirements mandated upon an issuer of green debt security, are 
briefly described as follows: 
Initial disclosure requirements for issue and listing of green debt securities: An 
issuer of green debt security shall make additional disclosures in the offer documents 
including the environmental sustainability objectives of the issue, brief details of the 
decision making process followed for determining the eligibility of the project as one of 
the eligible categories for raising funds through issuance of green debt security  of 
taxonomies, green standards or certifications both Indian and global, if any referenced, 
and the perceived  social  and environmental  risks  and  proposed mitigation plan 
associated with the project(s) proposed to be financed/ refinanced through the proceeds 
from the issue of green debt securities etc. 
Continuous disclosure requirements for listed green debt securities: Issuers in its 
annual report shall disclose the details regarding the utilisation of the proceeds raised 
from the issuance of green debt securities, details of the temporary allocation of the 
unutilised proceeds and the information, on a project-by-project basis, pertaining to 
reporting of the environmental impact of the projects funded by financed by the green 
debt securities etc. 
Issuer shall appoint a third party reviewer/ certifier to verify the post-issue management 
of the use of proceeds, internal tracking and the impact reporting. 

23 
 
Further, Issuers are also mandated to disclose major elements of Business 
Responsibility and Sustainability Reporting (BRSR) limited to the extent of provisions 
pertaining to environment. 
It is pertinent to note that, currently, the requirement regarding appointment of a third 
party reviewer/ certifier is on “comply or explain” basis for a period of two years. Further 
to ensure the optimum disclosure requirements for the issuer of listed green debt, only 
the disclosure of elements of BRSR pertaining to factors affecting the environment are 
mandated. The granular disclosures will facilitate transparency and inculcate good 
governance practices at the issuer level while protecting the interests of the investors. 
It may be noted that while the requirement of disclosing BRSR is currently mandated for 
the top 1000 listed companies (by market capitalization) (refer to the circular 
SEBI/HO/CFD/CMD-2/P/CIR/2021/562 dated May 10, 2021), in order to ensure that 
such disclosure requirements are not burdensome on issuers of green debt securities, 
the disclosure of elements of BRSR pertaining only to factors affecting the environment 
(principle no.6) have been mandated.  
Greenwashing: 
As the interest in the sustainable finance space is increasing and the ambit of green 
debt security was expanded, there was a necessity to address the concerns relating to 
greenwashing and accordingly, SEBI issued a circular prescribing certain dos and 
don’ts that an issuer of green debt security must ensure to avoid the occurrence of 
greenwashing which inter alia includes an issuer shall utilise the funds only for the 
purpose which funds were raised for, issuers shall not cherry pick data while making 
disclosures and use any misleading labels.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) OM No.10/1/2023-UN&SF dated 
20.4.2023 and 9/6/2022-PM dated 21.4.2023.] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
The Committee are concerned about the financial health of General Public Sector 
Insurance Companies, as despite measures such as focusing on pursuing profitable 
business including motor and health portfolio, improving risk management practices, 
monetizing the commercial and residential assets not in use, modernizing and 

24 
 
upgrading IT systems, capital infusion etc., the desired results do not seem to be 
appearing.  The solvency position of three major Public Sector General Insurance 
Companies (PSGICs) namely National Insurance Co. Limited, United India Insurance 
Co. Limited and Oriental Insurance Co. Limited is still strained.    
Reply of the Government 
The public sector general insurance companies have taken various measures to reduce 
their expenses, improve their underwriting practices, diversify their product portfolio, 
rationalise their offices, leverage technology to enhance customer service and 
satisfaction etc. These initiatives, in due course of time, will lead to higher premium 
income, lower operating costs, reduced underwriting losses, and lower net losses.   
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) OM No.07/07/2023-Parl. dated 
31.05.2023] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
The Committee are concerned that with the tweaks in the slabs and rates in the New 
Tax Regime, there might be a decline in life insurance penetration in the country as a 
major chunk of the population invests in life insurance products as tax saving 
instruments, which is also the most important source of loanable / investment fund in 
the economy. The Committee also urge that a comprehensive study be undertaken to 
evaluate the impact of opening up of the insurance sector, so that any changes, if 
needed, can be made to the Act governing the Insurance sector.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Since the opening up of the insurance sector for private and foreign investment in the 
year 2000, the number of participants in the insurance industry has gone up from seven 
to sixty-eight insurers as on March 31, 2021 operating in the life, general, and 
reinsurance segments. Insurance penetration which was 2.71 per cent in 2001 has 
steadily increased to 4.2 per cent and the insurance density in India which was USD 
11.5 in 2001, has reached to USD 91 in 2021. Premium received has been increased 
from Rs.3.94 lakh crore in the financial year 2013-14 to Rs.9.17 lakh crore in the 
financial year 2021-22 in the Indian insurance sector. (Source: IRDAI) 

25 
 
Further, the Government has taken various initiatives to support the growth of the 
insurance sector and enhance insurance coverage, especially for the underserved and 
unserved population of the country, through its flagship social security insurance 
schemes namely, the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) covering 
approximately 16.19 crore lives and the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
(PMSBY) covering approximately 34.18 crore lives for life and accident respectively, as 
on 26.04.2023. In order to bridge the gap in insurance protection and coverage and in 
fulfilment of the Prime Minister’s vision to insure every eligible citizen of the country, 
efforts are being made to maximize the coverage of the eligible population under 
PMJJBY & PMSBY in a mission mode. The insurance regulator IRDAI is also bringing in 
reforms to create a new regulatory architecture to promote ‘Insurance for All’ by 2047, 
which envisions a prosperous and inclusive India with universal insurance coverage. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) OM No.07/07/2023-Parl. dated 
31.05.2023] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
The Committee observe that the Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) have been declining 
and that a well-capitalized banking system with a low NPA ratio and more robust 
corporate sector fundamentals will continue to enhance the flow of bank credit into 
productive investment opportunities. However, the Committee observe that the figures 
of credit-to-deposit ratio of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) made available to the 
Committee demonstrate uneven credit disbursal across the country, with the 
economically backward and geographically difficult terrain states/regions lagging behind 
in availability and extension of bank credit. The Committee urge that strategies and 
policies for the banking sector should be formulated in a fashion so as to address this 
gap. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has advised the banks to achieve a Credit Deposit Ratio 
(CD) Ratio of 60% in respect of their rural and semi-urban branches separately on all 

26 
 
India basis. Banks are also advised to ensure that wide disparity in the ratios between 
different States/Regions is avoided in order to minimise regional imbalance in credit 
deployment and banks may review the performance of their branches in such areas and 
take necessary steps to augment the credit flow. Further, Lead Bank of the district may 
discuss the issue of low CD ratio in all its aspects with the banks and also in the District 
Consultative Committee (DCC) forum. Special Sub-Committees (SSCs) of the DCC 
should draw up Monitorable Action Plans to increase the CD Ratio in the districts having 
CD Ratio of less than 40% and to report the progress on the implementation of the plan 
to DCC on a quarterly basis and through them to the convenor of the State Level. 
  
As per RBI, to address regional disparities in the flow of priority sector credit at the 
district level under Priority Sector Lending Guidelines, a study of district wise per capita 
credit flow to priority sector was undertaken in 2020 and accordingly from FY 2021-22 
an incentive framework was devised. Districts were ranked on the basis of per capita 
credit flow to priority sector and build an incentive framework for districts with 
comparatively lower flow of credit. In terms of Master Directions – Priority Sector 
Lending (PSL) – Targets and Classification dated September 4, 2020, a higher weight 
(125%) has been assigned to the incremental priority sector credit in the identified 
districts where the credit flow is comparatively lower (per capita PSL less than ₹6000), 
and a lower weight (90%) has been assigned for incremental priority sector credit in the 
identified districts where the credit flow is comparatively higher (per capita PSL greater 
than ₹25,000). 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) OM No.07/07/2023-Parl. dated 
31.05.2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
The Committee notice that Central fund transfers for food subsidy in decentralized 
procurement of food grains is a pain point for some states. The Committee desire that 

27 
 
such disbursement issues be resolved so that seamless flow of funds to the states is 
maintained under various central schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
DFPD has continuously released the admissible food subsidy to all DCP states. State 
Government quarterly submits food subsidy claim for distribution of food grains under 
TPDS/OWS schemes. The provisional quarterly claims of State Governments are 
processed keeping in view opening and closing balance of stocks, procurement, 
allocation and distribution of food grains, Food Corporation of India’s reconciliation, 
Utilization Certificates received, Economic Cost of food grains, prevalent guidelines etc., 
among others. This is an ongoing and continuous process and Department of Food & 
Public Distribution, Government of India has been continuously releasing quarterly 
admissible amount of food subsidy to all the DCP States. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) O.M.No.15(5)-B(R)/2023  
dated 19.4.2023.] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
The Committee note the actual receipts of Rs.13,534 crore as against the target 
(Revised Estimates) of Rs.78,000 crore for Financial Year 2021-22 and receipts of just 
Rs.31,107 crore (as on 10.02.2023) against target of Rs.50,000 crore for Financial Year 
2022-23. The Committee are informed that the gap between target and achievement is 
inherent in the nature of disinvestment which is a function of market conditions. The 
Committee take note of the more achievable scaled down targets under volatile market 
conditions. 
Reply of the Government 
Disinvestment is an ongoing process, and execution/completion of specific transactions 
hinges upon market conditions, domestic & global economic outlook, geopolitical 
factors, investor interest and administrative feasibility. A very high target leads to price 
overhang in PSU stocks, therefore, progressively targets have been reduced to more 

28 
 
pragmatic levels, given very volatile market conditions during the last three years. The 
disinvestment receipts of CPSEs for FY 2022-23 stood at Rs. 35,293.52 crore (as on 
31.03.2023) against the target/RE of Rs.50,000 crore.  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Investment &Public Asset Management ) O.M No. 
3/1/2008.DD.II(Vol.IV)-Part (1) dated 28.04.2023]. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
The Committee are informed that a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for monetization of 
fixed assets of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) has been incorporated. The 
Committee desire that an assessment of the market value of land amongst Central 
Public Sector Enterprises under the Special Purpose Vehicle be undertaken. The 
Committee feel that it is essential to have a sense of the value of these significant 
assets of the Government, as they possess major monetization opportunity. The 
Committee suggest selling the land at a higher cost after developing the land, rather 
than just settling for the land value, as the enhanced value holds the potential to aid the 
economy, given the current fiscal situation and the significant land holdings possessed 
by the Government. Further, the Committee desire that amicable solutions be reached 
with the State Governments with regard to conflicted landholdings and the Special 
Purpose Vehicle be utilized in an efficient manner.  
Reply of the Government 
A Web Portal for online land management system was developed in the year 2016 by 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) with the support of MeitY known as 
Government Land Inventory System (GLIS) wherein details/data of land of the all-land-
owning agencies Ministries/Department/CPSUs are uploaded. This mechanism collates 
relevant information on the land holdings possessed by the above-mentioned 
authorities. Further, the Government has set up National Land Monetization Corporation 
(NLMC) in June 2022 as a 100% government-owned company to undertake 
monetization of surplus and underutilized non-core assets of Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs) and other Government agencies. NLMC is required to undertake 
such monetization on the recommendations of the concerned Administrative Ministry 

29 
 
/Department.  Upon recommendation, technical advisors/consultants/experts would 
carry out due diligence of the assets in consultation with various stakeholders including 
the asset owner. Based on the feedback received, nature of land/asset referred, 
appropriate model of monetization and accordingly its valuation would be adopted. 
Finally, Alternative Mechanism (AM) comprising of Union Finance Minister, Minister of 
Road Transport and Highways and Minister of the concerned respective Administrative 
Ministry would decide the appropriate model of monetization and the valuation for its 
monetization. In respect of assets referred to NLMC for monetization, NLMC will closely 
coordinate with all stakeholders including State Governments/agencies as per 
requirement. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Public Enterprises) OM NO.1(1)/2023-Coord. dated 
17.4.2023.] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
The Committee would like to press on the need for sufficient funds for improving social 
sector financing in India.  The Committee are of the view that improving social sector 
financing in India requires a multi-faceted approach that involves government policies, 
private sector engagement, and international cooperation. The Committee feel that by 
adopting strategies such as encouraging impact investing in India’s social sector, 
crowdfunding for social sector initiatives, encouraging more companies to engage in  
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) and working 
with international organizations to secure more aid funding along with enhanced 
Government spending, the country can mobilize more finances for the social sector 
uplifting the lives of our citizens.  
Reply of the Government 
CSR funds for social sector 
a) Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 (‘Act’), Schedule VII of the Act and 
Companies (CSR Policy) Rules, 2014 mandates every company having net worth of 
₹500 crore or more, or turnover of ₹1000 crore or more, or net profit of ₹5 crore or 
more during the immediately preceding financial year, to spend at least two per cent 
of the average net profits of the company made over immediately preceding three 

30 
 
financial years towards eradicating hunger, poverty, and malnutrition, promoting 
health care, education, employment, enhancing vocational skills, etc as per the CSR 
Policy of the Company. 
b) Since legislation mandated CSR w.e.f. April 2014, companies have spent about 
₹1.27 lakh crores on CSR up to 2020-21. The number of companies contributing to 
CSR as well as their annual CSR expenditure has increased during the period 2014-
15 to 2020-21.It has been observed that some companies are making contributions 
in excess of their mandatory two per cent obligation, and have thus taken an active 
part in contributing towards socio-economic development of the country. During 
Covid-19 pandemic period, many companies have generously contributed and 
engaged with the community. 
c) Further the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in order to encourage more companies to 
engage in CSR, and to recognize the corporates’ outstanding CSR initiatives that 
may have positive impacts on both businesses and society, has instituted the 
National Corporate Social Responsibility Awards in 2019 in order to increase 
competition in various categories of companies to infuse excellence in their CSR 
activities so that the benefits of their activities reach the marginalized sections of 
society and in remote areas of the country. Under this scheme, twenty awards 
(Winners and Honourable Mentions) are given to companies in three broad 
categories i.e. Corporate Awards for Excellence in CSR, Corporate Awards in CSR 
in Challenging Circumstances and Corporate Awards based on contribution to 
National Priority Areas such as education, health, women & child development, etc. 
Budgetary allocations for social sector  
d) The Budgetary allocations to various social sector Ministries/Departments are based 
on the detailed discussions on each of their schemes during pre-budget discussions 
with the Ministry of Finance that are held in October-November every year. The 
absorptive capacity of the concerned Ministry/Department and the availability of 
resource with the Government is also taken into account, while allocating budget to 
these Ministries/Departments. The details of allocation to Education, Health, Rural 
Development, Transport and Energy sectors which are key social indicators of 
development over the last five years is given as under: 

31 
 
(in ₹ crores) 
S. 
No Sectors 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1 Education 94854 99312 93224 104278 112899 
2 Energy 44638 42725 42824 49220 94915 
3 Health 64999 67484 74602 86606 88956 
4 Rural 
Development 
140762 144817 194633 206293 238204 
5 Social Welfare 50850 53876 48460 51780 55080 
6 Transport 157437 169637 233083 351851 517034 
7 Urban 
Development 
48032 50040 54581 76549 76432 
Source: Budget Division, DEA, Ministry of Finance 
The details of allocations across different social sectors indicate an increasing trend 
over the last five years, with one or two sectors showing slight decrease in their 
allocation during 2020-21 and 2021-22 due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
e) Measures announced in Budget 2023-24 
 The Budget 2023-24 has “Inclusive Development” as one of its priority areas 
and has incorporated many measures to ensure this goal. These, inter-alia, 
include several initiatives for the agriculture sector (such as digital public 
infrastructure for agriculture; Agriculture Accelerator Fund; focus on cotton 
crop and horticulture; making India a global hub for millets; enhanced 
agriculture credit target etc); skilling, health, and education.  
 The Budget has launched Pradhan Mantri PVTG Development Mission to 
improve socio-economic conditions of the particularly vulnerable tribal groups 
(PVTGs) and saturate PVTG families and habitations with basic facilities 
such as safe housing, clean drinking water and sanitation, improved access 
to education, health and nutrition, road and telecom connectivity, and 
sustainable livelihood opportunities. The outlay for PM Awas Yojana has also 
been enhanced by 66 per cent to over ₹ 79,000 crore. 

32 
 
 Further, recognizing that the investments in infrastructure and productive 
capacity have a large multiplier impact on growth and employment, the 
Capital investment outlay has been increased by 33 per cent to ₹ 10 lakh 
crore, which would be 3.3 per cent of GDP and almost three times the outlay 
in 2019-20. This substantial increase in recent years will help enhance 
growth potential and job creation, crowding in private investments, and 
provide a cushion against global headwinds.  
Funding from International Development Institutions 
f) India has been effectively engaging and participating in the Multilateral Development 
Banks (MDBs) including Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), New 
Development Bank (NDB), International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), 
resulting in significant financings for India for the sustainable infrastructure including 
social infrastructure development across the States.  
g) India plays a key role in the Governing Council and Executive Board of the IFAD. 
India’s representation has been successful in receiving funds from IFAD for projects 
in various sectors including social sector such as projects on rural development, 
tribal development, women’s empowerment, and micro-finance for uplifting the lives 
of our citizens. Since 1979, IFAD has assisted in 32 projects in the agriculture, rural 
development, tribal development, women’s empowerment, natural resources’ 
management, and rural finance sector.  Out of these, 26 projects have already been 
closed. Presently, 6 projects with a total IFAD assistance of USD 408.9 million 
(approx.) in the State of Uttarakhand, Maharashtra, Odisha, Nagaland, Mizoram, 
Meghalaya, and Chhattisgarh are under implementation, with a total commitment 
(i.e., IFAD’s assistance and State counterpart funding) of USD 1,507.37 million 
(approx.). 
h) Government of India is also mobilizing more finance from AIIB and NDB for providing 
financial assistance to social infrastructure projects in India. During the recent 
pandemic, Government of India has obtained budgetary assistance of USD 2000 
million for two Social Sector projects from NDB for combating CoVID-19. Both 
Projects has been closed. Further, the Government has also obtained budgetary 
assistance of USD 2250 million (04 projects) from AIIB under Social Sector 
Investment Projects for creating a responsive Indian Social Protection System 

33 
 
Program and for preparedness of our health system to combat the pandemic such as 
CoVID-19. Out of them two projects have already been closed and two projects is 
still ongoing. In addition, AIIB has also approved 500 million financial assistances, in 
2022, for modernization of technology and Education Infrastructure in Gujarat. 
Viability Gap Funding 
i) The Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) launched Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
scheme for providing financial assistance to financially unviable but socially/ 
economically desirable PPP projects. Under this scheme, economic sector projects 
may get up to 40 per cent per cent of the Capex as VGF grant. The VGF Scheme 
includes higher provisions of VGF grant for social sectors i.e., Health, Education, 
Water Supply, Waste Water Treatment, Solid Waste Management, etc. Social sector 
projects may get up to 80 per cent of the Capex and upto 50 per cent of Opex for 5 
years after Commercial Operation Date (CoD) as VGF grant. Social Sector projects 
get VGF grant under following two categories:  
 Sub scheme -1 to cater to Social Sectors such as Wastewater Treatment, Water 
Supply, Solid Waste Management, Health & Education sectors etc. The projects 
eligible under this category should have at least 100 per cent Operational Cost 
recovery. The Central Government will provide maximum of 30 per cent of 
Capex of the project as VGF and State Government/Sponsoring Central 
Ministry/Statutory Entity may provide additional support up to 30 per cent of 
Capex. 
 Sub scheme -2 supports demonstration/pilot social sectors projects. The 
projects may be from Health & Education sectors. The projects eligible under 
this category should have at least 50 per cent Operational Cost recovery. The 
Central Government will provide a maximum of 40 per cent of the Capex of the 
Project and a maximum of 25 per cent of Opex (operational expenditure) of the 
project for first five years of commercial operations as VFG. The State 
Government/Sponsoring Central Ministry/Statutory Entity may provide additional 
support up to 40 per cent of the Capex of the Project and upto 25 per cent of 
Opex of the project for first five years of commercial operations.  
 
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs )F.No.3(1)/Ec.Dn/2023 dated 20.4.2023]. 
 

34 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
The Committee note that various measures to enhance business activities in GIFT IFSC 
have been undertaken by the Government in recent times. The Committee believe that 
the success of the GIFT City depends upon the Government’s ability to create a support 
environment that attracts businesses and investors. The Committee feel that in addition 
to developing world class infrastructure and offering incentives to businesses, it is 
essential to establish regulatory framework which is easy to understand and comply 
with; aggressively market GIFT City to international investors and businesses at various 
international fora; foster a supportive ecosystem and develop a local workforce with 
requisite skills to work in the GIFT city to support its growth. The Committee are 
confident that GIFT City, which holds the potential to become a vibrant global financial 
hub for domestic and international entities, will contribute to our growth story in a major 
way. With the large aircraft orders being undertaken by India’s airlines, GIFT City has 
an excellent opportunity to emerge as India’s aircraft leasing hub.  
Reply of the Government 
Point wise Action Taken with respect to the recommendations made by the 
Hon’ble Committee with respect to GIFT City  may be seen as follows –  
A.  The International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) was established 
with effect from April 27, 2020 by the Government of India under the IFSCA Act, 2019. 
Subsequently, with effect from 1st Oct 2020, it assumed the powers of four domestic 
regulators namely SEBI, RBI, IRDAI & PFRDA to develop and regulate the financial 
markets in the IFSCs in India. 
Over the last three years, IFSCA has endeavored to develop a regulatory 
architecture for IFSCs, whichis aligned to international best practices and also has ease 
of understanding for enhanced compliance. IFSCA has since its inception come up with 
27 Regulations to regulate Banking, Capital Markets, Insurance, Bullion, Fund Industry, 
Global In House Centers, Foreign University/foreign institutions etc. within IFSC. IFSCA 
being a unified Authority for IFSCs in India, has undertaken consolidation of domestic 
regulations to a large extent pertaining to Insurance, Fund Industry, Capital Markets 
etc., which is unique in the Indian regulatory architecture. For example, IFSCA has 

35 
 
carried out a consolidation of almost 40 IRDAI regulations pertaining to domestic 
regulatory set up into a set of 13 regulations for regulating Insurance business at IFSC. 
Similarly IFSCA’s Fund Management Regulations are reflective of a consolidation of 
SEBI’s regulation pertaining to AIFs, Mutual Funds, ReITs, InVITs, PMS etc. 
Additionally, IFSCA has also issued Frameworks for Ancillary Services, FinTech Sector, 
Aircraft and Ship Leasing, International Trade Financing Services, Sustainable Finance, 
AML/CFT Guidelines etc. to aid and assist business at India’s maiden IFSC. 
B. IFSC Authority has established a Development Department for undertaking 
various outreach and engagement activities with global and domestic financial services 
industry. Additionally, GIFT Co. Ltd., which is the developer of GIFT City including the 
IFSC zone, is also supporting the global outreach and engagement activities.  
The outreach and engagement activities include bilateral meetings, road-shows, 
round table interactions, webinars, seminars, conferences, etc. carried out by IFSCA 
and GIFT City Co Ltd. As part of global outreach to showcase GIFT IFSC opportunities, 
roundtable interactions and seminars have been conducted with financial services 
industry from United States of America, United Kingdom, Singapore, Dubai, Ireland, 
Hong Kong, Japan, Malaysia, etc. with intent to increase awareness about IFSC at 
GIFT City. GIFT IFSC has moved from being an International Contender in (Global 
Financial Centres Index) GFCI 32 Report to an International Specialist in GFCI 33 
Report. GIFT IFSC continues to remain in the list of 15 centers likely to become more 
significant in next 2-3 years. Further, the regulator has been continuously engaging in 
deliberations with a host of globally prominent financial authorities/ standard setting 
bodies for signing of Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) in order to aid mutual 
exchange of information for the development of financial products and services in GIFT-
IFSC.As on date IFSCA has signed Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding 
(MMoUs) with International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 
Additionally, IFSCA has also entered into bilateral MoUs with Dubai Financial Services 
Authority (DFSA), Qatar Financial Services Authority (QFCA), Commission De 
Surveillance Du Secteur Financier (CSSF) Luxembourg, Finansinspektionen (FI) 
Sweden, Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) 

36 
 
C.GIFT City has tied up with various universities and educational institutions to develop 
relevant skill sets to meet the requirements of business units at GIFT City. GIFT City is 
also working with Asian Development Bank for developing an International FinTech 
Research and Innovation Institute at GIFT City to improve the access of Fintech 
education and research in India and provide skilled professionals to this emerging 
sector. Further, foreign universities have been allowed to set up their international 
branch campuses at GIFT City to provide courses, including, research programmes in 
Financial Management, FinTech, Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
(STEM), by the IFSC Authority. These courses are in the nature of financial services 
that are envisaged to assist the design and development of various financial 
products/financial services which will augment the capacity of highly specialized human 
resource for delivery of technology/financial services critical for sustaining the financial 
ecosystem at GIFT IFSC. 
D.  Following steps have been taken to promote GIFT IFSC to emerge as India's 
aircraft leasing hub: 
• Provision of regulatory frameworks and tax structure at par with leading financial 
centres globally have been notified in the Finance Act 2023 
• All custom bounded Airports in India have been notified for import/ export of 
Aircrafts by lessors in IFSC 
• Promotional activities including roundtable interactions, conferences and 
seminars have been held in India and globally to attract leading Aircraft Leasing 
and Financing entities to set up their units in GIFT City 
With the above enablers in place, as of 31st March 2023, twenty entities have 
registered for undertaking aircraft leasing business.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No.3/5/2023-IFSCA dated  
21.4.2023]. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 

37 
 
The Committee note that the Budget 2023-24 seeks to set up the National Financial 
Information Registry (NFIR) as a central repository of financial information, facilitate the 
efficient flow of credit, promote financial inclusion and foster financial stability in the 
country. The Committee understand that a comprehensive financial information system 
will remove information asymmetry, reduce the cost of assessing the credit worthiness 
of borrowers and improve access to credit especially to the Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs). The Committee have been apprised that the existing financial 
information system is fragmented, incomplete and inefficient and not available through a 
single window and that the establishment of NFIR will improve the credit delivery 
system and result in increased credit flow especially to the MSME sector and the 
underserved population. The Committee desire that the setting up of NFIR be 
expedited, which will thus help consolidate all the financial information, while facilitating 
Government’s push towards financial inclusion and sustenance of the MSME sector in 
the country, taking the Indian economy onto a faster growth trajectory.  
Reply of the Government 
A National Financial Information Registry will be set up to serve as the central repository 
of financial information. This will facilitate efficient flow of credit, promote financial 
inclusion, and foster financial stability. A new legislative framework will govern this 
financial information infrastructure, and it will be designed in consultation with all the 
stakeholders including the RBI. The Government is coordinating with all stakeholders to 
finalise the Bill on NFIR for introduction in the Parliament at the earliest. The further 
action to establish and operationalise the NFIR would be taken following the enactment 
of the law by the Parliament. 
[Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs) O.M. No.18/43/2014-FSDC dated 
19/04/2023].   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I) 
  

38 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
The Committee note that National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF) is a fund 
manager established as category II Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) under the SEBI 
regulations. It acts as a platform for both national and international investors with the 
goal of investing equity capital in domestic economic and social infrastructure and has 
three types of funds viz. National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (Master Fund, 
“NIIF MF”), National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (Fund of Funds –I “NIIF FoF”) 
and National Investment and Infrastructure Fund -II (Strategic Opportunities Fund 
“SoF”). The Committee observe that in NIIF Fund of Funds-I, Rs.2215 crore has already 
been deployed out of the Rs.3862 crore fund’s portfolio commitments. The Committee 
desire that the performance of Master Fund of NIIF should be enhanced since as on 
December 31, 2022, only Rs. 4177 crores have been deployed, while investor 
commitments to fund and fund’s portfolio commitments stand at Rs.15998 crore and 
Rs.9653 crore respectively. Needless to emphasize, the NIIF has an essential role in 
economy building with its objective to generate attractive long-term risk adjusted returns 
for investors on a sustainable basis and maximize the economic impact through 
infrastructure development. To that end, NIIF can facilitate the development of GIFT 
City as an aircraft leasing hub for India as well.  
Reply of the Government 
NIIF was set up with the objective of maximizing economic impact mainly through 
infrastructure development in commercially viable projects while also considering other 
nationally important projects, if commercially viable. 
NIIF Master Fund has created various platforms like ports and logistics, renewable 
platform, roads, smart meters, data centers and has recently invested in the airports 

39 
 
sector as well.  Post its final close in December 2020 the focus of Master Fund is 
presently on ensuring timely deployment of committed funds. 
As regards role of NIIF in facilitating the development of GIFT City as an aircraft leasing 
hub for India, it may be noted that aircraft leasing is a very niche and specialized 
domain of financial services. The growth of such specialized financial services requires 
a thorough understanding of this ecosystem, a dedicated team of professionals who 
have experience in this domain, and clarity on the risks that it entails. 
Enabling large scale catalytic private sector financing for India’s Infrastructure and Allied 
sectors is the primary objective of NIIF. Given the peculiarities of aircraft leasing a 
financial service and its nascent stage of development in the Indian context, investment 
in the same is not contemplated through NIIF as of now. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No.20/4/2022-DI dated 04.05.2023]. 
 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER - V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                    SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
20 July, 2023                                              Chairperson, 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Finance 
 

42 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-first sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2022-
23) The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th July, 2023 from 1500hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘2’, Parliament House Annexe Extension Block A, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri S.S Ahluwalia 
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
8. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
9. Shri Hemant Shriram Patil 
10. Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
11. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
12. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
13. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
14. Shri Manish Tewari 
15. Shri Balashowry Vallabbhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Dr. Radha Mohan Das Agarwal 
17. Shri Ryaga Krishnaiah 
18. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
19. Dr. Amar Patnaik 
20. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
21. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 1. Shri Siddharth Mahajan   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Puneet Bhatia    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
PART I 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
PART II 
 
3. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Cyber security and rising incidence of 
cyber/white collar crimes’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services), Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Third Report on the subject ‘Anti-Competitive Practices by Big-Tech 
Companies’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs.  
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Investment & Public Asset Management and Public Enterprises).  
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 

44 
 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
The Chairperson also appreciated the Committee Secretariat for putting their sincere 
efforts in drafting comprehensive reports within a short span of time. The Committee 
also decided to undertake a Study Tour during the third or fourth week of August, 2023. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
  

45 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2023-24) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF 
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS,  EXPENDITURE , FINANCIAL SERVICES, PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES & INVESTMENT AND PUBLIC ASSET MANAGEMENT). 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
13  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12 
and 13) 
12 92.31% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies (vide Recommendation Nos. 3) 
 
01 7.69% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
NIL -- 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
 
* * * 