1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2019-20) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Eighth 
 Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21)] 
 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020 /      Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
19 


2 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Eighth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21)] 
  
 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 9 September, 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on ___________, 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on __________, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 September, 2020 /      Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)   


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08 September, 2020. 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
Contained in the Eighth R eport ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________ 
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
 
 
(i) 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
    
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.       Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -         Additional Director  
 4. Shri Preetam Prabhakar    -  Committee Officer 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Nineteenth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of 
the Committee ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).  
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 12 March, 2020.  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were 
received from the Government vide their communication dated 16 July, 2020.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
08 September, 2020. 
4. An analysis o f the act ion taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference , the observations / recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                     SHRI JAYANT SINHA, 
 08 September, 2020                                 Chairperson, 
 17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance   

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I  
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
deals with action taken by the Government on the recommendations/  observations 
contained in the ir Eighth Report of S eventeenth Lok Sabha  on Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha / Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12th March, 2020. 
 2.  Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
8 recommendations/observations contained in the Report . These have been analyzed 
and categorized as follows: 
  
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8 
       (Total- 7) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No.  NIL 
                  (Total :NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation No.  4 
       (Total : 1)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL               
(Total : NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that the replies to the observations / recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 

7 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations.      
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
Revenue Collection Targets and Tax Buoyancy 
5. The budgetary target of collection of taxes is set before the beginning of the 
financial year on the basis of GDP forecast and expected buoyancy in direct taxes. The 
Revised estimate of direct tax collection for FY 2019 -20 has been revised downward to 
Rs. 11.70 Lakh crore from the earlier assessment of Rs. 13.35 lakh crore. During the 
current financial year, the actual direct tax collection has seen a declin e as compared to 
the collection figures of last financial year. The Committee note d that although all out 
efforts are being made to boost direct tax revenues during the current financial year and 
several amendments to the Income Tax Act, 1961 have been pro posed in the Finance 
Bill, 2020, tax buoyancy remains below par. The Committee, therefore, desire d that the 
Government should formulate a focused policy to increase tax buoyancy and the Tax -
GDP ratio in the economy. Taxation of all taxable entities/ transa ctions/ services, and 
rationalization of exemptions would pave the way for this purpose. At the enforcement 
level, a strict view should be taken of tax evasion. 
 The Committee believes that revenue estimates and underlying assumptions are 
somewhat opaque. Once revenue estimates are prepared for the Budget, their 
underlying assumptions could be made available to the Committee, the public, and 
various research centers in granular detail. For example, what is the revenue collection 
expected from Long -Term Capi tal Gains (LTCG)? How is that likely to change under 
different market conditions? What are the various different sources of LTCG – how 
much is likely to come from public and private markets? Similar analysis should be done 
for Dividend Distribution Tax, Co rporate Taxes, and Individual Income Tax. These 
assumptions can then be factored into various models, transparency improved, and 
better forecasts developed for revenue sources, implications on expenditure, and the 
overall fiscal deficit. Currently, these a ssumptions are known only to the Department of 
Revenue making it very difficult to know the risks and uncertainties associated with the 
revenue forecasts in the Budget. 

8 
 
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated as under :- 
 “CBDT: 
I. Over the past few years, the Indian economy has witnessed a significant 
growth in overall tax collection.  The direct tax to GDP ratio has increased over the 
recent years.  It is important to note that in recent years, the Indian Economy has 
displayed high tax buoyancy with a buoyancy factor greater than 1, i.e. the rate of 
growth of direct taxes has been greater than the rate of growth of GDP. This has 
been possible due to various tax reforms and other efforts undertaken by the 
Income-tax Department.    
Table 1 Tax to GDP Ratio 
  
FY 2016-17 
 
FY 2017-18 
 
FY 2018-19 
(Provisional) 
Direct Tax GDP Ratio 5.53 5.86 5.98 
Direct Tax Buoyancy Factor 1.10 1.59 1.21 
Source: Income Tax Department Time Series Data Financial Year 2001 to 2018-19                                                                          
II. With increased liberalisation and reforms in the economy, direct taxes 
have become prominent sources of tax revenue for the Government.  In FY 2000-01, 
the contribution of direct taxes in overall tax collection was only 36.3%, however, this 
ratio has increased to about 55 % in FY 2018-19.   
  Table 2 Direct Taxes as a % of Total Taxes 
  
Direct 
Taxes 
Indirect 
Taxes Total Taxes 
Direct Tax as % of 
Total Taxes 
2000-01 68,305 1,19,814 1,88,119 36.3% 
2018-19 
(Provisional) 11,37,685 9,39,018 20,76,703 54.8% 
*Source: Income Tax Department Time Series Data Financial Year 2001 to 2018-19 
III. The Government has consistently been making efforts to widen and 
deepen the tax base.  However, with regard to FY 2019 -20, it may be noted that the 
tax collection figures and GDP figures for FY 2019 -20 have seen a declin e from the 
projected estimates which will in turn lead to a fall in tax buoyancy. 
 The Revised Estimate (RE) of direct tax collection for FY 2019 -20 has 
been revised downward to Rs 11.70 lakh crore from the earlier assessment of Rs 
13.35 lakh crore. The Bu dget estimate of Rs 13.35 lakh crore was based on , inter-
alia, the projected nominal GDP growth of 11 % for FY 2019 -20.  The downward 
assessment for FY 2019 -20 has been estimated based on the actual nominal GDP 
growth rate of 7.5 % for FY 2019 -20 as well as the actual trends in direct tax 
collection.   

9 
 
 During FY 20 19-20, the actual direct tax collection has seen a decline as 
compared to the collection figures of last financial year. In this regard it may be 
mentioned, that the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019 ( TLAA), inter-alia, 
reduced corporate tax rates by pro viding for a concessional taxation regime of 22% 
for existing domestic companies and a concessional taxation regime of 15 % for new 
manufacturing companies provided that they do not avail of any specified incentive 
or deductions.  Further, the prevailing rate of Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) was also 
reduced from 18.5% to 15% for companies, which do not opt for the concessional 
taxation regimes. Further, TLAA also withdrew the enhanced surcharge introduced 
through the Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 on capital gains  arising on account of transfer 
of listed equity shares or certain units which are liable to securities transaction tax 
and on capital gains income of Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) arising from 
transfer of any security including derivatives, having co ncessional tax regime. The 
revenue forgone on account of the said reductions has been estimated to be Rs 1.45 
lakh crore. 
 The above reduction in corporate tax rates along with reduction in GDP 
growth projections for FY 2019 -20 will have dampening effect o n the tax buoyancy 
for FY 2019 -20. However, as is being discussed in following paragraphs several 
measures have been taken to boost the tax buoyancy in the recent years including 
several measures taken in the Finance Act, 2020. 
 For the domestic companies opting for the concessional taxation regime, it 
is expected that reduced taxes will lead to increase in earnings and hence further 
investments in new ventures or expansion of existing ventures leading to increase in 
jobs and wages. This will further stimul ate direct tax revenues in the medium to long 
run.  New manufacturing companies opting for the concessional taxation regime are 
required to commence manufacturing or production by 31.03.2024.  Thus, the 
impact of concessional corporate tax rates is expecte d to be visible in revenue 
collections and hence tax buoyancy in future. 
IV. As regards the recommendation “…. the Government should formulate 
a focussed policy to increase tax buoyancy and the Tax/GDP ratio in the 
economy…”, some of the tax- reforms undertaken in order to widen and deepen the 
tax net resulting in increased buoyancy over the last few years have been 
summarised below: 
A.   Widening the net of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) and Tax Collection 
at Source (TCS), Equalisation Levy in the recent years.     
(i)TDS on E -commerce transactions : In order to widen and deepen the tax net, 
section 194 -O has been inserted in the Income -tax Act, 1961 ( the Act) vide 
Finance Act, 2020 to provide that an e-commerce operator shall deduct TDS on all 
payments or credits to e -commerce participants at the rate of 1% in PAN/Aadhaar 

10 
 
cases and 5% in non -PAN/Aadhaar cases. In order to provide relief to small 
businessman, it is proposed to provide exemption to individual and HUF e -
commerce participants who receive less than Rs. 5 lakh and furnish PAN/Aadhaar.  
 
(ii)Enlarging the scope of TDS on interest :  Section 194A of the Act has been 
amended vide Finance Act 2020 in order to extend TDS on interest paid by certain 
large co-operative societies whose gross receipts exceeds fifty crore rupees during 
the last financial year. 
 
(iii)Widening the scope of Tax Collection at Source (TCS) : Through the Finance Act, 
2020, section 206C has been amended to: 
a. provide for collection of tax at the rate of 5% –– (1) by an authorised dealer 
for remittance out of India under the Liberalised Remittance Scheme of the 
Reserve Bank of India for a purpose other than purchase of overseas tour 
package on the amount of remittance exceeding Rs. 7 lakhs during the 
financial year; (2) by a seller of overseas tour programme package from the 
buyer of such package on the total amount of such package during the 
financial year.  
In case if the remittance made ab road is in relation to a loan taken from a 
financial institution for the purpose of pursuing any education, then TCS is to 
be deducted at the rate of 0.5% on the amount of remittance exceeding Rs. 7 
lakhs during the financial year. Moreover, exception has been made in case 
of a person, who is a buyer and is required to deduct tax under any other 
provision of the Act and has deducted the same on the said amount.  
b. provide for collection of tax at the rate of 0.1% by a seller on sale of goods 
(other than those mentioned in sub -section (1) or sub -section (1F) or sub -
section (1G) of the said section) of the value or aggregate of such value 
exceeding Rs. 50 lakhs in a p revious year. The above provision will not be 
applicable on any goods exported out of India. Further, if a person being the 
buyer of goods is liable to deduct TDS under any other provision of the Act on 
the goods so purchased by him from the seller and has  deducted TDS on the 
same, then the above provision will not be applicable.   
 
(iv)Broadening Scope of Equalisation Levy :  The scope of Equalisation Levy (EL) has 
been enlarged vide the Finance Act, 2020, to provide that EL shall be paid by an 
e-commerce operator at 2%, from 1st April 2020, on consideration received or 
receivable for e -commerce supply or services, if the consideration is two crore 
rupees or more during the previous year, made or provided or facilitated by it to a 
person resident in India or a non -resident in specified circumstances or a person 
buying such goods or services or both using internet protocol address located in 
India. 
 
(v) TDS on certain cash withdrawals - Finance Act, 2020 amended section 194N of 
the Act to provide for deduction o f tax on payment in cash by a banking company 
or co -operative society engaged in the business of banking or post office at the 
rate of 2% on the sum exceeding Rs. 1 crore in aggregate from one or more 
accounts maintained by the recipient. Further, in case of a person who has not 
filed income tax return for any of the three assessment years relevant to the 
previous year preceding the previous year in which such amount is withdrawn, 

11 
 
TDS is to be deducted at the rate of 2% on amount of cash withdrawn exceeding  
Rs. 20 lakhs but less than Rs.1 crores; and 5% on the amount of cash withdrawn 
exceeding Rs 1 crores in aggregate from one or more account maintained by such 
recipient during the financial year. 
(vi)TDS to be deducted by individual/HUF on contractual work/pro fessional fees - 
Section 194M was also introduced vide Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 to provide for 
levy of TDS at the rate of five per cent. on the sum, or the aggregate of sums, paid 
or credited in a year on account of contractual work or professional fees or 
commission by an individual or a Hindu undivided family, not required to deduct 
tax at source under section 194C, 194H and 194J of the Act, if such sum, or 
aggregate of such sums, exceeds Rs. 50 lakh in a year. However, in order to 
reduce the compliance bu rden, it is proposed that such individuals or HUFs shall 
be able to deposit the tax deducted using their PAN and shall not be required to 
obtain TAN. 
 
(vii)TDS on transfer of immovable property - TDS at the rate of one per cent on 
transfer, by a resident, of immovable property (other than rural agricultural land), 
having value Rs. 50 lakh or more, has been introduced under section-194-IA of the 
Act.  
 
(viii)Tax collection at source (TCS) on sale of motor vehicle- TCS has been introduced, 
at the rate of one percent, by the seller from buyer of a motor vehicle, where the 
value exceeds ten lakh rupees [Section 206C (1F)]. 
 
(ix)TDS on rental income - TDS on payment by specified individual and HUF to a 
resident of rental income exceeding fifty thousand rupees for a month or part of the 
month, at the rate of five percent has been introduced (Section 194-IB). 
 
B.     Other Measures for widening of tax base: 
(i) Deemed resident in India - Section 6 of the Act has been amended vide Finance 
Act, 2020 to provide that an Indian citizen or a person of Indian Origin who comes 
on a visit to India in any previous year and whose total Indian income exceeds Rs 
15 lakh, shall be considered a resident,  if his stay in India is 120 days or more.  
Also, a citizen of India who is not liable to tax in any other country shall be deemed 
to be a resident in India, if his Indian income exceeds Rs. 15 lakhs during the 
previous year. However, in view of the COVID -19 pandemic, Circular 11/2020 
dated May 8, 2020 has been issued to provide that for previous year ending 2019 -
20, certain period shall also not be taken into account for determination of 
residency status in certain cases. Also, a press release has been iss ued which, 
inter alia, states that for previous year 2020 -21, Circular providing for exclusion of 
certain period shall be issued in due course. 
 
(ii) Mandatory furnishing of Income Tax Return (ITR) -  It has been provided that 
persons entering into high value tr ansactions such as having a deposit of an 
amount/aggregate of the amounts exceeding one crore rupees in one or more 
current account, incurring expenditure of an amount/aggregate of the amounts 
exceeding two lakh rupees for himself or any other person’s for eign travel, having 

12 
 
paid an electricity bill of an amount/aggregate of the amounts exceeding one lakh 
rupees or fulfilling any other prescribed condition shall be mandatorily required to 
file ITR. 
 
(iii) Inter-changeability of PAN and Aadhaar – It has been provi ded that in case of a 
person who does not have PAN but has Aadhaar, PAN will be allotted to such 
person on the basis of Aadhaar if the person enters into certain reportable 
transactions. Further, a person who has linked his Aadhaar to his PAN can use 
Aadhaar instead of his PAN wherever required. 
 
(iv) Pre-filling of return by enlarging scope of SFT:  Pre-filled Income tax Returns (ITR) 
have been provided to individual taxpayers with income from salary, house 
property, capital gains from securities, bank interest, dividends and various tax 
deductions. Information regarding these incomes and deductions are being 
collected from concerned sources such as banks, mutual funds, EPFO etc. to 
enable pre-filling. The scope of furnishing of Statement of Financial Tr ansactions 
(SFT) has been widened by requiring more organisations/institutions to submit 
information in respect of financial transactions facilitated or undertaken by them. 
 
C.    Measures undertaken to promote digital transactions in the economy 
leading  to more reportable transactions- 
 
(i) Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 introduced Section 269SU in the Act to provide that 
every person, carrying on business, shall, provide facility for accepting 
payment through the prescribed electronic modes, in addition to the facility for 
other electronic modes of payment, if any, being provided by such person, if 
his total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business exceeds fifty crore 
rupees during the immediately preceding previous year. 
 
(ii)  Section 269ST has been inserted in the Act to prohibit cash receipt of rupees 
two lakh or more. Further, in order to enforce restriction on cash transactions, 
a new section 271DA has been inserted in the Act so to provide that if a 
person contravenes the provisions of section 269ST, he shall  be liable to pay 
penalty of a sum equal to the amount of such receipt. 
 
(iii) The limit of cash donation to charitable organisation and scientific research or 
rural development has been reduced from ten thousand to two thousand. 
 
(iv) The existing rate of deemed pro fit under section 44AD of the Act has been 
reduced from 8% to 6% in respect of the amount of total turnover or gross 
receipts received through banking channel / digital means. 
 
(v) In order to expand the scope of section 269SS and section 269T of the Act an 
amendment has been made so as to cover payment/advance in relation to 
transfer of immovable property under said sections. 
 
(vi) To bring transparency in the source of funding to political parties the 
provisions of section 13A of the Act have been amended to inter  alia, provide 
that no donations of Rs.2000/- or more shall be received otherwise than by an 

13 
 
account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee bank draft or 
use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through electoral 
bonds. 
 
(vii) Section 194N is tax on cash withdrawal which is also intended to   
promote digital transactions. 
 
V. As regards the recommendation of “ … Taxation of all taxable 
entities/transactions/services, and rationalisation of exemptions would pave 
the way for this purpose. At the enforcement level, a strict view should be 
taken of tax evasion ” some of the tax -reforms undertaken in recent years in order 
to improve effectiveness of tax administration and prevent tax abuse have been 
summarised as follows: 
A. Rationalisation of provisions: 
(i) Section 56 of the Act has been amended to widen the scope of deeming of 
income for the receipt of property for inadequate or without consideration. 
Further, the said section has been amended to levy tax on any forfeiture of 
advance received by the seller in relation to transfer of a capital asset. 
 
(ii) Section 43CA has been inserted in the Act to provide that where the stamp 
duty value on transfer of immovable property held as stock in trade is greater 
than the sale consideration, the stamp  duty value will be considered as full 
value of consideration. 
 
(iii) Chapter XII -DA has been inserted in the Act vide Finance Act, 2013 to 
provide that the consideration paid by the company for purchase of its own 
unlisted shares in excess of the sum received by the company at the time of 
issue of such shares will be charged to tax. 
 
(iv) Section 50CA has been inserted in the Act so as to provide that where 
consideration for transfer of share of a company (other than quoted share) is 
less than the Fair Market Value (FMV) of such share determined in 
accordance with the prescribed manner, the FMV shall be deemed to be the 
full value of consideration for the purposes of computing income under the 
head "Capital gains". 
 
(v) Keeping in view aggressive tax planning with the us e of sophisticated 
structures; statutory provisions, namely, General Anti -Avoidance Rules 
(GAAR), codifying the doctrine of “substance over form”; where the real 
intention of the parties and effect of transactions and purpose of an 
arrangement are taken in to account for determining the tax consequences; 
irrespective of the legal structure superimposed thereupon to camouflage the 
real intent and purpose; were brought in through the Finance Act, 2012 and 
have been applicable from Assessment Year 2018-19. 
 

14 
 
(vi) In order to check creation of shell companies which are incorporated outside 
but controlled from India, the concept of ‘Place of effective management' 
(POEM) for determination of residence of a company incorporated in a foreign 
jurisdiction, has been introduced. 
 
(vii) In order to check the avoidance of payment of Dividend Distribution Tax by 
companies which were opting for buyback of shares from their shareholders 
rather than distributing dividends, a tax on the amount distributed by the 
company on account of buy b ack of shares of unlisted companies was 
introduced through the Finance Act, 2013. The scope of buyback tax was 
broadened vide Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 wherein the provisions of buy -back 
tax were extended to the buy-back of shares of listed companies as well. 
 
B. Measures for strengthening information networks for widening and 
deepening of tax base: 
(i) The scope of rule 114B of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 (the Rules) has been 
widened vide Notification No 95/2015 dated 30 th December, 2015. The 
amended Rule inter-alia makes quoting of PAN for transactions of sale or 
purchase of goods or services of any nature above Rs 2 Lakh, mandatory. 
Also, Rule 114 E has been amended vide said notification to strengthen the 
third-party reporting mechanism. In order to tack le splitting of transactions, it 
has been provided that besides the single transaction value the annual 
aggregate of the transaction values shall also trigger reporting of transactions. 
Receipt from any person for sale of foreign currency including any cre dit of 
such currency to foreign exchange card or expense in such currency through 
a debit or credit card or through issue of travellers cheque or draft or any 
other instrument of an amount aggregating to ten lakh rupees or more during 
a financial year has been made a reportable transaction.  Also, cash receipt 
exceeding two lakh rupees for sale of goods or services of any nature by any 
person who is liable for audit u/s 44AB of the Act has been made a reportable 
transaction. Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019 has fu rther broadened the scope of 
statement of financial transactions to be furnished under 285BA of the Act by 
requiring certain more persons to submit information in respect of financial 
transactions facilitated or undertaken by them. 
 
(ii) In order to eliminate bogus/multiple permanent account number (PAN), a new 
section 139AA has been inserted in the Act, which inter alia mandates 
quoting of Aadhaar number for filing of Return of Income and in PAN 
application Form. 
 
(iii) An effective monitoring mechanism for reporting  of foreign remittances to 
identify cases where taxes have not been paid on certain remittances has 
been provided by expanding the scope of reporting in case of foreign 
remittances to cover payments which are taxable or non -taxable for certain 
category of non-residents.  
 

15 
 
(iv) The Centralised Verification Scheme, 2019 has been notified to enable 
centralised processing of information and making outcome of the same 
available to the Assessing Officer. 
 
(v) An Inter -Governmental Agreement between India and USA was signed for 
implementation of Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). The 
Government of India has also joined the Multilateral Competent Authority 
Agreement (MCAA) for Automatic Exchange of Information as per Common 
Reporting Standards (CRS). For implem entation of FATCA and CRS, 
necessary legislative changes have been made in the Act and the Rules 
114F, 114G & 114H and Form 61B have been inserted to provide legal basis 
for the Reporting Financial Institutions (RFIs) for maintaining and reporting 
information about the Reportable Accounts. 
 
C. Measures undertaken to curb Tax Evasion 
(i) In order to curb the flow of black money stashed abroad, the Black Money 
(Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 
(the Black Money Act) has been enacted. A total of 648 declarations involving 
undisclosed foreign assets worth Rs. 4164 crore were filed under the one -
time compliance window provided by the department. 
 
(ii) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 was amended by the 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2016 to enable 
confiscation of Benami Property and prosecution of benamidar and the 
beneficial owner.  As on 30.09.2019, 2145 cases of provi sional attachment 
have been made under the Prohibition of Benami Properties Transactions Act 
(PBPT Act). The value of properties under attachment is more than Rs.10,840 
crore.  Provisional attachment of benami properties under PBPT Act, 1988 
has been confi rmed by the Adjudicating Authority in 1282 cases as on 
30.09.2019. 
 
VI. Regarding the recommendation “ The Committee believe that revenue 
estimates and underlying assumptions are somewhat opaque …”, it is submitted 
that revenue estimates are prepared during the Budgetary process and are, 
therefore, secret in nature. However, the Central Board of Direct Taxes publishes 
direct tax time -series data on regular basis containing the details of number of 
income-tax returns (ITRs) for an assessment year, total direct tax collection over the 
years, tax buoyancy, direct tax to GDP ratio etc. which are laid in the public domain 
for further analysis.  
 It is also pertinent to note that most of the income -tax returns (ITRs) are 
filed electronically. The data in the ITRs are analysed at macro level for framing of 
policy. Outcome of such detailed analysis can be observed in the Statement of 
Revenue Impact of Tax Incentives under the Central Tax System which forms part of 
the Receipt budget of the Central Government and is laid on the table of both 
Houses of the Parliament. The said statement provides details of revenue impact 

16 
 
due to various incentives and exemptions provided under the Income -tax Act, 1961 
(the Act). F urther, a sectoral analysis of various business activities undertaken by 
corporate taxpayers is also presented in the said statement.  
 It is important to note that whenever an additional revenue raising 
measure is imposed or any incentive is extended, the  potential revenue implications 
are estimated and the same are informed accordingly. For example, while 
presenting the budget speech for FY 2018 -19, the Hon’ble Finance Minister 
informed Parliament that rationalisation of the LTCG taxation framework will l ead to 
marginal revenue gain of Rs. 20,000 crores during the first year. Similarly, while 
announcing the historical tax reform in the form of reduction in corporate tax rates for 
domestic companies, it was announced that the said reforms will lead to an 
estimated revenue foregone amounting to Rs. 1.45 lakh crores per annum. Thus, it 
can be observed that the necessary analysis is carried out by the Government for 
estimating the revenue implication of various proposals made.  
 
CBIC: 
The ind irect tax collectio n/buoyancy in particular financial year is mainly 
dependent on factors such as; GDP growth (nominal), change in tax policy, 
additional resource  mobilization measures (though annual budget), rate of 
exchange of leading international currencies against INR and prices of the imported 
goods & mix of commodities in the international market etc. the actual tax receipts 
may fall/ rise with regard to tax targets set during the annual budget due to variations 
in the aforesaid macroeconomic indicators.” 
 
7. The Committee, while recognizing all the measures undertaken thus far to 
set the tax buoyancy and Tax -GPD ratio in a trajectory of growth, also note that 
the BE of Rs. 13.35 Lakh crore was based on, inter-alia, the projected nominal 
GDP Growth of 11% for FY  2019-20, and that the downward assessment for FY 
2019-20 has been estimated based on the actual nominal GDP growth rate of 7.5% 
for FY 2019 -20 as well as the actual trends in Direct Tax collection. The 
Committee believe it would thus remain a huge challen ge augmenting direct tax 
collections this fiscal in the present scenario. 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
8. The Committee noted that system-based analytical tools and systems generated 
intelligence by Directorate General of Analytics and Risk Management (DGARM) were 
being used to curb evasion in GST. The Directorate General of GST intelligence (DGGI) 
and Central GST field formations are initiating various measures in this regard including 
checking of E - Way bill mechanism for ensure compliance, in addition to acting upon 
specific tax evasion related intelligence. The committee noted that intensive Anti - 
Evasion efforts are being un dertaken specifically with respect to input Tax Credit (ITC) 
frauds based on  fake invoice(s). However, the C ommittee are constrained to observe 
that the monthly revenue collections from GST are yet to fully stabilize. The States have 
been reporting losses in collection, which will only increase the compensation burden of 
the Union Government. The Committee desired that the grievances of the States, if any, 
be duty addressed under the aegis of GST Council so as to keep the states in a sound 
financial health.  The committee expect ed the Government to sort out all the festering 
issues pertaining to GST at the earliest. The Committee would also urge the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) to extend the monthly due date for filing GST returns 
to 25th of every month. 
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply stated as under :- 
“In this regard, it is submitted that the prescribed date of 20th of subsequent 
month for the purpose of filing GST returns has been fixed on the basis of 
recommendations of GST Coun cil, which is constitutional body established under 
Article 279A of the Constitution of India. The GST council has been entrusted with 
the task of making recommendations to the Union of India and States on all matters 
related to GST. However, to facilitate  small taxpayers having annual aggregate 
turnover up to Rs.5 Crores, the Government has introduced a system of staggered 
filing of return from the month of February 2020 ( January 2020 return) wherein the 
date of filing or return would be either 22nd or 24 th depending upon the State of UT 
where the taxpayer is registered.” 
 
10. The Committee in its recommendation with respect to Goods and Services 
Tax ( GST) had earlier observed that the monthly revenue collection from GST 

18 
 
were yet to fully stabilize and that the States have been reporting losses in 
collection which would only increase the compensation burden of the Union 
Government. The Committee had desired that the grievances of the States be 
duly addressed under the aegi s of the GST Council. The Committee would, 
therefore, urge the Government to sort out all the lingering issues pertaining to 
GST at the earliest while addressing the concerns/grievances of the States. 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
Budgetary Allocations and Utilisations 
 The Committee note that for Demand for Grants No. 31 pertaining to Department 
of Revenue, budgetary provision of Rs. 180949.70 crore was made at BE stage for  the 
FY 2018-19 which was revised downwards to Rs. 119396.96 at RE stage and finally Rs. 
56479.80 crore was shown as surrender/ saving. Then again in FY 2019 -20 a provision 
of Rs. 203466.73 was made despite substantial saving/ surrender during the last fis cal. 
Again at RE stage (FY 2019 -20) the allocation was increased to Rs. 243505.77 crore of 
which Rs. 101225.03 crore have been utilized upto 31 Dec. 2019 which is 41.57% of RE 
utilized. For the current fiscal 2020 -21, a budgetary provision of Rs. 272250.83  crore 
has been made which is a substantial upward revision. The Committee desire that the 
budgetary estimates under this Demand should be more accurately formulated and 
realistically projected, factoring in the monthly trends of net GST collections – both for 
Centre and States – and quantum of revenue losses incurred by each state as the 
majority of budget provision in respect of Demand No. 31 is for GST compensation to 
States/UTs. As regards Demand No. 32 relating to Direct Taxes for the fiscal 2019 -20 
an amount of Rs. 7338.44 was allocated at BE stage which was revised to Rs. 7343.44 
at RE Stage and the amount surrendered is yet to be finalized. The budgetary allocation 
of Rs. 8065.39 crore has been made for the current fiscal. With respect to Demand No. 
33 pertaining to Indirect Taxes while an amount of Rs. 7900.50 crore was made at BE 
stage for the FY 2019 -20, the corresponding allocation for FY 2020 -21 has been 
pegged at Rs. 8258.50 crore. The Committee recommends that the Ministry devise a 
coherent mechanism for realistic budgetary formulation, followed by proper utilization of 
allocated funds through effective management and close monitoring. The Committee 
also desire that mechanism for fixing accountability be developed so that the budgetary 
exercise is not rendered infructuous by such persistent over estimation followed by 
under-utilisation of varying degrees. 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
I. In pursuance of the provision of the Constitution (One Hundred and First 
Amendment) Act, 2016, the Goods and Servic es (Compensation to States) Act, 2017 
was enacted by Parliament for providing compensation to the States on account of 
Revenue loss due to implementation of GST w.e.f. 01.07.2017 for a period of five years. 
In this regard, it is also submitted that as per GST (Compensation to States) Act, 2017, 
the provisional GST compensation is being released on bi -monthly basis. Thus, the 
quantum of the GST compensation required is based upon collection trends of 
SGST/IGST and the subsumed tax collection by States. There fore, it is always difficult 
to assess the actual budget requirement, as the same is dependent  upon variable data 
being received from States on bimonthly basis. However, efforts are made mid -way, at 
RE stage, for course correction based on variable data b eing received from States on 
bimonthly basis. 
It is also true that the major component of the Budget provision of Department of 
Revenue is for payment of Compensation to States/UTs to protect the revenue loss due 
to implementation of Goods and Service Tax in India w.e.f. 1 st July, 2017. During 2018-
19, it was estimated that the requirement on payment of GST compensation may be 
around Rs.90,000 crore and cess collection will be of an equal amount of Rs.90,000 
crore. Thus, total budget provision of Rs.180949. 70 crore was made for 2018 -19, which 
included the amount of Rs.90,000 crore to be transferred to GST Compensation Fund 
and establishment related expenditure of Department of Revenue. However, at the RE 
stage, it was revised to Rs.119396.96 crore keeping in  view the release of 
apportionment of IGST component to States/UTs, which reduced the liability of Central 
Government on payment of GST compensation. This resulted in savings against Budget 
Estimate. At the close of the FY, it was found that due to fluctua tion in revenue 
collection of Government of Union Territories with Legislatures, the amount of GST 
compensation claim got increased significantly, and the actual expenditure for the FY 
2018-19 went up to Rs.124424.97 crore, which was higher than the Revise d Estimates 
but within the BE.      
Similarly keeping in view the past trend and available bi -monthly data, in the first 
half of FY 2018 -19, a budget provision of Rs. (101200+101200= 202400) crore was 

21 
 
made for BE 2019 -20. (Out of this Rs.101200 crore was k ept to meet the expenditure 
on payment of GST compensation to States/UTs with legislature. And further, an equal 
amount of compensation cess i.e. Rs.101200 crore was kept for transfer to GST 
Compensation Fund, in terms of GST Act, 2017). However, as stated  above, at the 
close of the FY2018 -19, it was found that due to fluctuation in revenue collection of 
Government of Union Territories with Legislatures, the amount of GST compensation 
claim got increased significantly, and the actual expenditure for the FY 2018-19 went up 
to Rs.124424.97 crore. Thus, the estimates for FY 2019 -20 were revised to Rs.(121200 
+121200= 242400) crore, at RE stage, based on actual expenditure of Rs.124424.97 
crore for the FY 2018 -19. (Again in terms of GST Act, 2017, a sum of Rs.12 1200 was 
kept to meet the expenditure on payment of GST compensation to States/UTs with 
legislature, and an equal amount of Rs.121200 crore was kept for transfer to GST 
Compensation Fund). And against the RE 2019 -20, a sum of Rs.120498.29 crore 
[Rs.112200 crores to States (under Major Head 3601) and Rs.8298.29 crore to UTs 
with legislature (under Major Head 3602)] has been paid as provisional GST 
Compensation. It is also submitted that a sum of Rs.701.71 crore, under Major Head 
3602 could neither be utilize d nor re-appropriated to other Major Head , due to closure 
of offices on account of out-break of Corona virus and other administrative reasons.  
For the FY 2020-21, the total Budget provision of Rs.272250.83 crores has been 
kept under Demand No 31 for Depa rtment of Revenue. This includes Capital 
expenditure of Rs.91.21 crores. On the Revenue expenditure side, a budget provision of 
Rs.135368.03 crore has been kept to meet the expenditure on payment of GST 
compensation to States/UTs with legislature. Similarl y, an equal amount of 
compensation cess (Rs.135368.03 crore) has also been kept for transfer to GST 
Compensation Fund, in terms of GST Act 2017. This estimate is again based on past 
trend and available bi -monthly data on trend of collection of revenue, in the first half of 
FY 2019-20. Apart from above, it is also submitted, that, the provision kept for release of 
compensation to States/UTs, due to loss of revenue collection, is actually fiscal neutral 
as there will be no cash outgo from the Consolidated Fun d of India, as the 
Compensation Cess collected through the GST (Compensation to States) Act, 2017, 
forms part of the Public Account of India through transfer of proceeds of the GST 
Compensation Cess to GST compensation Fund, which is a non-lapsable fund.  

22 
 
Lastly as regards the observation of the Standing Committee that the budgetary 
estimates under this Demand should be more accurately formulated and realistically 
projected, factoring in the monthly trends of net GST collections - both for Centre and 
States- and quantum of revenue losses incurred by each state as the majority of budget 
provision in respect of Demand No. 31 is for GST compensation to States/UTs, it is 
once again  stated that the quantum of the GST compensation required is totally based 
upon co llection trends of SGST/IGST and the subsumed tax collection by States. 
Therefore, the actual budget requirement cannot be assessed accurately before the 
data is received from States about bimonthly GST Compensation.  As these figures are 
variable and depe nd upon bi -monthly estimates from States/UTs, there is always an 
element of estimation involved. However, as desired by the Committee, further efforts 
will be made to ensure that the Budgetary Estimates, taking into account the monthly 
trends of revenue co llection by States/UTs, is more closer to real time revenue 
collection of States/UTs.  
 
In this regard, it is submitted that in pursuance of the provision of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, the Goods and Services 
(Compensation to States) Act, 2017 has been enacted by Parliament for providing 
compensation to the States on account of Revenue loss due to implementation of GST 
w.e.f. 01.07.2017 for a period of five years. Accordingly, budgetary provision of Rs. 
1,01,200 crore has b een made under Head 3601 & 3602 (Rs. 96,000 cr in 3601 and 
5,200 cr in 3602) in BE 2019-20, to compensate States/ UTs on account of revenue loss 
to states due to implementation of GST, based upon the initial trends of GST collection 
as well as subsumed tax  collected by States/ UTs. Further, the budgetary provision 
under Head 3601 & 3602 has been revised to Rs. 1,21,200 crore (Rs. 1,12,200 cr in 
Head 3601 & Rs. 9,000 cr in Head 3602) as per the requirement of GST Compensation 
to be paid to States/UTs. Accord ingly, provisional GST Compensation of Rs. 
1,20,498.29 crore (Rs. 1,12,200 cr to States and Rs. 8,298.29 cr to UTs with legislature) 
has been paid to the States/ UTs on bimonthly basis for the period of Feb -March, 2019 
(released in FY 2019 -20) to September , 2019 and part payment for period Oct -Nov, 
2019. Therefore, fund provided in RE 2019 -20 under Head 3602 for GST compensation 
has not been utilized to the tune of Rs. 701.71 cr and could not be re -appropriated into 

23 
 
other Heads due to closure of offices as per direction of Central Government due to ou -
break of Corona virus and other administrative reasons. 
 
 In this regard, it is further submitted that as per the GST (Compensation to 
States) Act, 2017, the provisional GST compensation is being released on bi-monthly 
basis. Further, the quantum of the GST compensation required is totally based upon the 
subsumed tax collection by States and collection trends of SGST/IGST. Therefore, the 
actual budget requirement cannot be assessed before the data is received from States 
about bimonthly GST compensation. Therefore, it is not possible to estimate the exact 
budgetary requirement for the purpose of GST compensation. However, the budgetary 
estimate made by this division in BE/RE 2019 -20, are correct and would be ut ilized 
fully, if offices had not been closed due to Corona pandemic. 
 
 Further, it will be ensured in future to make budgetary estimates under this 
Demand more accurately and realistically, taking into account the monthly trends of 
revenue collection by States/ UTs to avoid surrender of fund.  
 
II. With regard to Demand No. 32 (Direct Tax), it is stated that Grant for BE 2019-20 
was Rs. 7338.44 crore, which was revised to Rs. 7520.44 crore after additional grant 
was received under the Second Supplementary Demand for Grant. Out of which 244.80 
crore has been surrendered, which has been accepted by the Budget Division of 
Department of Economic Affairs as per Audit order dated 31.03.2020. 
 
III. With regard to Demand No. 33 (Indirect Tax), Central Board of Indir ect Taxes 
and Customs (CBIC) has been disbursing funds amongst its Budgetary Authorities on 
the basis of a harmonious balance between the availability of funds and the utilization 
pattern of the previous financial year. Further, additional Allocation is also made through 
reallocations, re-appropriations etc. after due approval by the competent authority. 
 
 
At present, CBIC has been maintaining manual monthly expenditure records in 
respect of Budgetary Authorities. However, CBIC is in process of putting in p lace a 
mechanism, in which the whole process including receipt of demand for funds from 
various Budgetary Authorities and subsequent issuance of sanction order to Budgetary 

24 
 
authorities will be made online. In the process, all this information would be main tained 
online so that necessary reports including expenditure on day to day basis can be 
extracted as required. The proposed online processing of budget would help in realistic 
Budgetary formulation followed by proper utilization of allocated funds. This w ould also 
help in fixing accountability and elimination of over estimation of requirement/ 
underutilization of funds. 
 
At the beginning of  the financial year, the budget allocated to the CBIC is 
disbursed amongst its 68 Budgetary Authorities. This allocations is made on the basis of 
a harmonious balance between the availability of funds, as detailed object head-wise in 
the detailed Demands f or Grants (DDG) and the utilization pattern of the previous 
financial year. 
 After the initial allocations are done, at various times, the BCA may require 
certain additional funds in the Revenue or Capital Accounts. These additional funds 
may be provided by way of additional Allocation, Reallocations and Re -appropriations 
respectively after due approval by the competent authority. In order to keep track of the 
Expenditure, the practice at present, in EMC, DGHRD is to maintain manual Monthly 
Expenditure Records in respect of 68 Budgetary Authorities.  
 DGHRD, CBIC is in process of pu tting in place a mechanism, in which the whole 
process including receipt of demand for funds from various Budgetary authorities and 
subsequent issuance of sanction order to Budgetary authorities will be made online. In 
the process, all this information wou ld be maintained online so that necessary reports 
including expenditure on day to day basis can be extracted as required. The proposed 
online processing of budget would help in realistic Budgetary formulation followed by 
proper utilizations of allocated funds. This would also help in fixing accountability so that 
the budgetary exercise is not rendered infructuous by such persistent over estimation 
followed by under-utilization of varying degrees. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
 
 

25 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
Revenue Collection Targets and Tax Buoyancy 
 The budgetary target of collection of taxes is set before the beginning of the 
financial year on the basis of GDP forecast and expected buoya ncy in direct taxes. The 
Revised estimate of direct tax collection for FY 2019 -20 has been revised downward to 
Rs. 11.70 Lakh crore from the earlier assessment of Rs. 13.35 lakh crore. During the 
current financial year, the actual direct tax collection has  seen a decline as compared to 
the collection figures of last financial year. The Committee note that although all out 
efforts are being made to boost direct tax revenues during the current financial year and 
several amendments to the Income Tax Act, 1961 have been proposed in the Finance 
Bill, 2020, tax buoyancy remains below par. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Government should formulate a focused policy to increase tax buoyancy and the Tax -
GDP ratio in the economy. Taxation of all taxable enti ties/ transactions/ services, and 
rationalization of exemptions would pave the way for this purpose. At the enforcement 
level, a strict view should be taken of tax evasion. 
 The Committee believes that revenue estimates and underlying assumptions are 
somewhat opaque. Once revenue estimates are prepared for the Budget, their 
underlying assumptions could be made available to the Committee, the public, and 
various research centers in granular detail. For example, what is the revenue collection 
expected fr om Long -Term Capital Gains (LTCG)? How is that likely to change under 
different market conditions? What are the various different sources of LTCG – how 
much is likely to come from public and private markets? Similar analysis should be done 
for Dividend Dis tribution Tax, Corporate Taxes, and Individual Income Tax. These 
assumptions can then be factored into various models, transparency improved, and 
better forecasts developed for revenue sources, implications on expenditure, and the 
overall fiscal deficit. C urrently, these assumptions are known only to the Department of 
Revenue making it very difficult to know the risks and uncertainties associated with the 
revenue forecasts in the Budget. 
 
 
 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
CBDT: 
I. Over the past few years, the India n economy has witnessed a significant growth 
in overall tax collection.  The direct tax to GDP ratio has increased over the recent 
years.  It is important to note that in recent years, the Indian Economy has displayed 
high tax buoyancy with a buoyancy fact or greater than 1, i.e. the rate of growth of direct 
taxes has been greater than the rate of growth of GDP. This has been possible due to 
various tax reforms and other efforts undertaken by the Income-tax Department.    
Table 3 Tax to GDP Ratio 
  
FY 2016-17 
 
FY 2017-18 
 
FY 2018-19 
(Provisional) 
Direct Tax GDP Ratio 5.53 5.86 5.98 
Direct Tax Buoyancy Factor 1.10 1.59 1.21 
Source: Income Tax Department Time Series Data Financial Year 2001 to 2018-19                                                                          
II. With increased liberalisation and reforms in the economy, direct taxes have 
become prominent sources of tax revenue for the Government.  In FY 2000 -01, the 
contribution of direct taxes in overall tax collection was only 36.3%, however, this ratio 
has increased to about 55 % in FY 2018-19.   
 Table 4 Direct Taxes as a % of Total Taxes 
  
Direct 
Taxes 
Indirect 
Taxes 
Total 
Taxes 
 Direct Tax as % of Total 
Taxes 
2000-01 68,305 1,19,814 1,88,119  36.3% 
2018-19 
(Provisional) 11,37,685 9,39,018 20,76,703 
 
54.8% 
*Source: Income Tax Department Time Series Data Financial Year 2001 to 2018-19 
III. The Government has consistently been making efforts to widen and deepen the 
tax base.  However, with regard to FY 2019 -20, it may be noted that the tax collection 
figures and GDP figures for FY 2019 -20 have seen a d ecline from the projected 
estimates which will in turn lead to a fall in tax buoyancy. 
 The Revised Estimate (RE) of direct tax collection for FY 2019 -20 has been 
revised downward to Rs 11.70 lakh crore from the earlier assessment of Rs 13.35 lakh 
crore. T he Budget estimate of Rs 13.35 lakh crore was based on , inter -alia, the 
projected nominal GDP growth of 11 % for FY 2019 -20.  The downward assessment for 

27 
 
FY 2019-20 has been estimated based on the actual nominal GDP growth rate of 7.5 % 
for FY 2019-20 as well as the actual trends in direct tax collection.   
 During FY 2019 -20, the actual direct tax collection has seen a decline as 
compared to the collection figures of last financial year. In this regard it may be 
mentioned, that the Taxation Laws (Amendment ) Act, 2019 ( TLAA), inter-alia, reduced 
corporate tax rates by providing for a concessional taxation regime of 22% for existing 
domestic companies and a concessional taxation regime of 15 % for new manufacturing 
companies provided that they do not avail of  any specified incentive or deductions.  
Further, the prevailing rate of Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) was also reduced from 
18.5% to 15% for companies, which do not opt for the concessional taxation regimes. 
Further, TLAA also withdrew the enhanced surcharg e introduced through the Finance 
(No.2) Act, 2019 on capital gains arising on account of transfer of listed equity shares or 
certain units which are liable to securities transaction tax and on capital gains income of 
Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) aris ing from transfer of any security including 
derivatives, having concessional tax regime. The revenue forgone on account of the 
said reductions has been estimated to be Rs 1.45 lakh crore. 
 The above reduction in corporate tax rates along with reduction in GDP growth 
projections for FY 2019-20 will have dampening effect on the tax buoyancy for FY 2019-
20. However, as is being discussed in following paragraphs several measures have 
been taken to boost the tax buoyancy in the recent years including several mea sures 
taken in the Finance Act, 2020. 
 For the domestic companies opting for the concessional taxation regime, it is 
expected that reduced taxes will lead to increase in earnings and hence further 
investments in new ventures or expansion of existing ventur es leading to increase in 
jobs and wages. This will further stimulate direct tax revenues in the medium to long 
run.  New manufacturing companies opting for the concessional taxation regime are 
required to commence manufacturing or production by 31.03.2024 .  Thus, the impact of 
concessional corporate tax rates is expected to be visible in revenue collections and 
hence tax buoyancy in future. 
IV. As regards the recommendation “…. the Government should formulate a 
focussed policy to increase tax buoyancy and the Tax/GDP ratio in the 

28 
 
economy…”, some of the tax - reforms undertaken in order to widen and deepen the 
tax net resulting in increased buoyancy over the last few years have been summarised 
below: 
A.   Widening the net of Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) and Tax Collection at 
Source (TCS), Equalisation Levy in the recent years.     
(i) TDS on E -commerce transactions: In order to widen and deepen the tax 
net, section 194 -O has been inserted in the Income -tax Act, 1961 (the Act) vide 
Finance Act, 2020 to provide that an e-commerce operator shall deduct TDS on all 
payments or credits to e -commerce participants at the rate of 1% in PAN/Aadhaar 
cases and 5% in non -PAN/Aadhaar cases. In order to provide relief to small 
businessman, it is proposed to provide exemption to individual and HUF e -
commerce participants who receive less than Rs. 5 lakh and furnish PAN/Aadhaar. 
 
(ii)  Enlarging the scope of TDS on interest :  Section 194A of the Act has 
been amended vide Finance Act 2020 in order to extend TDS on interest paid by 
certain large co -operative societies whose gross receipts exceeds fifty crore 
rupees during the last financial year. 
 
(iii) Widening the scope of Tax Collection at Source (TCS) : Through the 
Finance Act, 2020, section 206C has been amended to: 
a. provide for collect ion of tax at the rate of 5% –– (1) by an authorised 
dealer for remittance out of India under the Liberalised Remittance 
Scheme of the Reserve Bank of India for a purpose other than purchase of 
overseas tour package on the amount of remittance exceeding Rs . 7 lakhs 
during the financial year; (2) by a seller of overseas tour programme 
package from the buyer of such package on the total amount of such 
package during the financial year.  
b. In case if the remittance made abroad is in relation to a loan taken from  a 
financial institution for the purpose of pursuing any education, then TCS is 
to be deducted at the rate of 0.5% on the amount of remittance exceeding 
Rs. 7 lakhs during the financial year. Moreover, exception has been made 
in case of a person, who is a buyer and is required to deduct tax under any 
other provision of the Act and has deducted the same on the said amount. 
c.  provide for collection of tax at the rate of 0.1% by a seller on sale of goods 
(other than those mentioned in sub -section (1) or sub -section (1F) or sub -
section (1G) of the said section) of the value or aggregate of such value 
exceeding Rs. 50 lakhs in a previous year. The above provision will not be 
applicable on any goods exported out of India. Further, if a person being 
the buyer of goods is liable to deduct TDS under any other provision of the 
Act on the goods so purchased by him from the seller and ha s deducted 
TDS on the same, then the above provision will not be applicable.   
 
(iv) Broadening Scope of Equalisation Levy :  The scope of Equalisation Levy 
(EL) has been enlarged vide the Finance Act, 2020, to provide that EL shall be paid 
by an e-commerce operator at 2%, from 1st April 2020, on consideration received or 

29 
 
receivable for e -commerce supply or services, if the consideration is two crore 
rupees or more during the previous year, made or provided or facilitated by it to a 
person resident in India or a non-resident in specified circumstances or a person 
buying such goods or services or both using internet protocol address located in 
India. 
 
(v)   TDS on certain cash withdrawals - Finance Act, 2020 amended section 
194N of the Act to provide for deduction of ta x on payment in cash by a banking 
company or co-operative society engaged in the business of banking or post office 
at the rate of 2% on the sum exceeding Rs. 1 crore in aggregate from one or more 
accounts maintained by the recipient. Further, in case of a  person who has not filed 
income tax return for any of the three assessment years relevant to the previous 
year preceding the previous year in which such amount is withdrawn, TDS is to be 
deducted at the rate of 2% on amount of cash withdrawn exceeding Rs.  20 lakhs 
but less than Rs.1 crores; and 5% on the amount of cash withdrawn exceeding Rs 1 
crores in aggregate from one or more account maintained by such recipient during 
the financial year. 
 
(vi) TDS to be deducted by individual/HUF on contractual work/profes sional 
fees- Section 194M was also introduced vide Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 to provide 
for levy of TDS at the rate of five per cent. on the sum, or the aggregate of sums, 
paid or credited in a year on account of contractual work or professional fees or 
commission by an individual or a Hindu undivided family, not required to deduct tax 
at source under section 194C, 194H and 194J of the Act, if such sum, or aggregate 
of such sums, exceeds Rs. 50 lakh in a year. However, in order to reduce the 
compliance burden, it is pro posed that such individuals or HUFs shall be able to 
deposit the tax deducted using their PAN and shall not be required to obtain TAN. 
 
(vii) TDS on transfer of immovable property- TDS at the rate of one per cent on 
transfer, by a resident, of immovable property  (other than rural agricultural land), 
having value Rs. 50 lakh or more, has been introduced under section -194-IA of the 
Act.  
 
(viii) Tax collection at source (TCS) on sale of motor vehicle - TCS has been 
introduced, at the rate of one percent, by the seller from  buyer of a motor vehicle, 
where the value exceeds ten lakh rupees [Section 206C (1F)]. 
 
(ix) TDS on rental income - TDS on payment by specified individual and HUF 
to a resident of rental income exceeding fifty thousand rupees for a month or part of 
the month, at the rate of five percent has been introduced (Section 194-IB). 
B.     Other Measures for widening of tax base: 
(i) Deemed resident in India - Section 6 of the Act has been amended vide 
Finance Act, 2020 to provide that an Indian citizen or a person of Indian 
Origin who comes on a visit to India in any previous year and whose total 
Indian income exceeds Rs 15 lakh, shall be considered a resident,  if his stay 
in India is 120 days or more.  Also, a citizen of India who is not liable to tax in 
any other country shall be deemed to be a resident in India, if his Indian 
income exceeds Rs. 15 lakhs during the previous year. However, in view of 

30 
 
the COVID -19 pandemic, Circular 11/2020 dated May 8, 2020 has been 
issued to provide that for previous year ending 2019 -20, certain period shall 
also not be taken into account for determination of residency status in certain 
cases. Also, a press release has been iss ued which, inter alia, states that for 
previous year 2020-21, Circular providing for exclusion of certain period shall 
be issued in due course. 
 
(ii) Mandatory furnishing of Income Tax Return (ITR) -  It has been provided that 
persons entering into high value tr ansactions such as having a deposit of an 
amount/aggregate of the amounts exceeding one crore rupees in one or more 
current account, incurring expenditure of an amount/aggregate of the 
amounts exceeding two lakh rupees for himself or any other person’s for eign 
travel, having paid an electricity bill of an amount/aggregate of the amounts 
exceeding one lakh rupees or fulfilling any other prescribed condition shall be 
mandatorily required to file ITR. 
 
(iii) Inter-changeability of PAN and Aadhaar – It has been provided that in case of 
a person who does not have PAN but has Aadhaar, PAN will be allotted to 
such person on the basis of Aadhaar if the person enters into certain 
reportable transactions. Further, a person who has linked his Aadhaar to his 
PAN can use Aadhaar instead of his PAN wherever required. 
 
(iv) Pre-filling of return by enlarging scope of SFT:  Pre-filled Income tax Returns 
(ITR) have been provided to individual taxpayers with income from salary, 
house property, capital gains from securities, bank interest , dividends and 
various tax deductions. Information regarding these incomes and deductions 
are being collected from concerned sources such as banks, mutual funds, 
EPFO etc. to enable pre -filling. The scope of furnishing of Statement of 
Financial Transactio ns (SFT) has been widened by requiring more 
organisations/institutions to submit information in respect of financial 
transactions facilitated or undertaken by them. 
 
C.    Measures undertaken to promote digital transactions in the economy leading  
to more reportable transactions- 
 
(i) Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 introduced Section 269SU in the Act to provide that 
every person, carrying on business, shall, provide facility for accepting 
payment through the prescribed electronic modes, in addition to the facility fo r 
other electronic modes of payment, if any, being provided by such person, if 
his total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business exceeds fifty crore 
rupees during the immediately preceding previous year. 
 
(ii) Section 269ST has been inserted in the Act to  prohibit cash receipt of rupees 
two lakh or more. Further, in order to enforce restriction on cash transactions, 
a new section 271DA has been inserted in the Act so to provide that if a 
person contravenes the provisions of section 269ST, he shall be liabl e to pay 
penalty of a sum equal to the amount of such receipt. 

31 
 
 
(iii) The limit of cash donation to charitable organisation and scientific research or 
rural development has been reduced from ten thousand to two thousand. 
 
(iv) The existing rate of deemed profit under  section 44AD of the Act has been 
reduced from 8% to 6% in respect of the amount of total turnover or gross 
receipts received through banking channel / digital means. 
 
(v) In order to expand the scope of section 269SS and section 269T of the Act an 
amendment has been made so as to cover payment/advance in relation to 
transfer of immovable property under said sections. 
 
(vi) To bring transparency in the source of funding to political parties the 
provisions of section 13A of the Act have been amended to inter alia, provide 
that no donations of Rs.2000/- or more shall be received otherwise than by an 
account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account payee bank draft or 
use of electronic clearing system through a bank account or through electoral 
bonds. 
 
(vii) Section 194N is tax on cash withdrawal which is also intended to   promote 
digital transactions. 
 
V. As regards the recommendation of “ … Taxation of all taxable 
entities/transactions/services, and rationalisation of exemptions would pave the 
way for this purpose. At the enforcement level, a strict view should be taken of 
tax evasion ” some of the tax -reforms undertaken in recent years in order to improve 
effectiveness of tax administration and prevent tax abuse have been summarised as 
follows: 
A. Rationalisation of provisions: 
(i) Section 56 of the Act has been amended to widen the scope of deeming 
of income for the receipt of property for inadequate or without 
consideration. Further, the said section has been amended to levy tax on 
any forfeiture of advance received by the  seller in relation to transfer of a 
capital asset. 
 
(ii) Section 43CA has been inserted in the Act to provide that where the 
stamp duty value on transfer of immovable property held as stock in trade 
is greater than the sale consideration, the stamp duty value will be 
considered as full value of consideration. 
 
(iii) Chapter XII -DA has been inserted in the Act vide Finance Act, 2013 to 
provide that the consideration paid by the company for purchase of its own 
unlisted shares in excess of the sum received by the compan y at the time 
of issue of such shares will be charged to tax. 
 
(iv) Section 50CA has been inserted in the Act so as to provide that where 
consideration for transfer of share of a company (other than quoted share) 

32 
 
is less than the Fair Market Value (FMV) of such  share determined in 
accordance with the prescribed manner, the FMV shall be deemed to be 
the full value of consideration for the purposes of computing income under 
the head "Capital gains". 
 
(v) Keeping in view aggressive tax planning with the use of sophisti cated 
structures; statutory provisions, namely, General Anti -Avoidance Rules 
(GAAR), codifying the doctrine of “substance over form”; where the real 
intention of the parties and effect of transactions and purpose of an 
arrangement are taken into account fo r determining the tax 
consequences; irrespective of the legal structure superimposed thereupon 
to camouflage the real intent and purpose; were brought in through the 
Finance Act, 2012 and have been applicable from Assessment Year 2018-
19. 
 
(vi) In order to chec k creation of shell companies which are incorporated 
outside but controlled from India, the concept of ‘Place of effective 
management' (POEM) for determination of residence of a company 
incorporated in a foreign jurisdiction, has been introduced. 
 
(vii) In order to check the avoidance of payment of Dividend Distribution Tax 
by companies which were opting for buyback of shares from their 
shareholders rather than distributing dividends, a tax on the amount 
distributed by the company on account of buy back of shares  of unlisted 
companies was introduced through the Finance Act, 2013. The scope of 
buyback tax was broadened vide Finance (No.2) Act, 2019 wherein the 
provisions of buy -back tax were extended to the buy -back of shares of 
listed companies as well. 
 
B. Measures for strengthening information networks for widening and deepening 
of tax base: 
(i) The scope of rule 114B of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 (the Rules) has 
been widened vide Notification No 95/2015 dated 30 th December, 2015. 
The amended Rule inter-alia makes quoting of PAN for transactions of 
sale or purchase of goods or services of any nature above Rs 2 Lakh, 
mandatory. Also, Rule 114 E has been amended vide said notification to 
strengthen the third-party reporting mechanism. In order to tackle splitting 
of transactions, it has been provided that besides the single transaction 
value the annual aggregate of the transaction values shall also trigger 
reporting of transactions. Receipt from any person for sale of foreign 
currency including any credit of such c urrency to foreign exchange card or 
expense in such currency through a debit or credit card or through issue of 
travellers cheque or draft or any other instrument of an amount 
aggregating to ten lakh rupees or more during a financial year has been 
made a r eportable transaction.  Also, cash receipt exceeding two lakh 
rupees for sale of goods or services of any nature by any person who is 
liable for audit u/s 44AB of the Act has been made a reportable 

33 
 
transaction. Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019 has further broaden ed the scope of 
statement of financial transactions to be furnished under 285BA of the Act 
by requiring certain more persons to submit information in respect of 
financial transactions facilitated or undertaken by them. 
 
(ii) In order to eliminate bogus/multiple  permanent account number (PAN), a 
new section 139AA has been inserted in the Act, which inter alia 
mandates quoting of Aadhaar number for filing of Return of Income and in 
PAN application Form. 
 
(iii) An effective monitoring mechanism for reporting of foreign r emittances to 
identify cases where taxes have not been paid on certain remittances has 
been provided by expanding the scope of reporting in case of foreign 
remittances to cover payments which are taxable or non -taxable for 
certain category of non-residents.  
 
(iv) The Centralised Verification Scheme, 2019 has been notified to enable 
centralised processing of information and making outcome of the same 
available to the Assessing Officer. 
 
(v) An Inter-Governmental Agreement between India and USA was signed for 
implementation of Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). The 
Government of India has also joined the Multilateral Competent Authority 
Agreement (MCAA) for Automatic Exchange of Information as per 
Common Reporting Standards (CRS). For implementation of  FATCA and 
CRS, necessary legislative changes have been made in the Act and the 
Rules 114F, 114G & 114H and Form 61B have been inserted to provide 
legal basis for the Reporting Financial Institutions (RFIs) for maintaining 
and reporting information about the Reportable Accounts. 
 
C. Measures undertaken to curb Tax Evasion 
(i) In order to curb the flow of black money stashed abroad, the Black Money 
(Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 
(the Black Money Act) has been enacted. A t otal of 648 declarations 
involving undisclosed foreign assets worth Rs. 4164 crore were filed under 
the one-time compliance window provided by the department. 
 
(ii) The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 was amended by the 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2016 to enable 
confiscation of Benami Property and prosecution of benamidar and the 
beneficial owner.  As on 30.09.2019, 2145 cases of provi sional attachment 
have been made under the Prohibition of Benami Properties Transactions 
Act (PBPT Act). The value of properties under attachment is more than 
Rs.10,840 crore.  Provisional attachment of benami properties under 
PBPT Act, 1988 has been confi rmed by the Adjudicating Authority in 1282 
cases as on 30.09.2019. 

34 
 
 
VI. Regarding the recommendation “ The Committee believe that revenue 
estimates and underlying assumptions are somewhat opaque …”, it is submitted 
that revenue estimates are prepared during the Budgetary process and are, therefore, 
secret in nature. However, the Central Board of Direct Taxes publishes direct tax time -
series data on regular basis containing the details of number of in come-tax returns 
(ITRs) for an assessment year, total direct tax collection over the years, tax buoyancy, 
direct tax to GDP ratio etc. which are laid in the public domain for further analysis.  
 It is also pertinent to note that most of the income -tax retu rns (ITRs) are filed 
electronically. The data in the ITRs are analysed at macro level for framing of policy. 
Outcome of such detailed analysis can be observed in the Statement of Revenue 
Impact of Tax Incentives under the Central Tax System which forms par t of the Receipt 
budget of the Central Government and is laid on the table of both Houses of the 
Parliament. The said statement provides details of revenue impact due to various 
incentives and exemptions provided under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (the Act). F urther, 
a sectoral analysis of various business activities undertaken by corporate taxpayers is 
also presented in the said statement.  
 It is important to note that whenever an additional revenue raising measure is 
imposed or any incentive is extended, the  potential revenue implications are estimated 
and the same are informed accordingly. For example, while presenting the budget 
speech for FY 2018 -19, the Hon’ble Finance Minister informed Parliament that 
rationalisation of the LTCG taxation framework will l ead to marginal revenue gain of Rs. 
20,000 crores during the first year. Similarly, while announcing the historical tax reform 
in the form of reduction in corporate tax rates for domestic companies, it was 
announced that the said reforms will lead to an es timated revenue foregone amounting 
to Rs. 1.45 lakh crores per annum. Thus, it can be observed that the necessary analysis 
is carried out by the Government for estimating the revenue implication of various 
proposals made.  
 
CBIC: 
The ind irect tax collectio n/buoyancy in particular financial year is mainly 
dependent on factors such as; GDP growth (nominal), change in tax policy, additional 

35 
 
resource  mobilization measures (though annual budget), rate of exchange of leading 
international currencies against INR and prices of the imported goods & mix of 
commodities in the international market etc. the actual tax receipts may fall/ rise with 
regard to tax targets set during the annual budget due to variations in the aforesaid 
macroeconomic indicators.  
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
New Personal Income Tax Regime 
 The Committee note that in line with option of a concessional taxation regime 
provided to domestic companies under the Taxation Law Amendment Act (TLAA), 2019, 
the Finance Bill, 2020 has proposed to insert Section 115 BAC to the Act to provide an 
option to individual and Hindu Undivided Famil y (HUFs) to pay taxes at reduced rates 
provided that they do not avail of specified incentives or deductions and meet certain 
conditions. The proposed concessional tax regime intends to provide significant relief to 
taxpayers and more so to those in the mi ddle class. Currently, the Income Tax Act is 
riddled with various exemptions and deductions which make compliance by the 
taxpayer and administration of the Income Tax Act by the tax authorities a cumbersome 
process. It is almost impossible for a taxpayer to comply with the income-tax law without 
taking help from professionals. However, the Committee believe that this reduction in 
rate should be correspondingly matched with gradual phasing out of various 
exemptions, as too many exemptions make tax compliance  and tax administration 
difficult. Hence, these exemptions should be continually revisited, rationalized and 
eventually scrapped in tandem with moderation of tax rates. However, the Committee 
are of the view that terminal benefits available to retiring employees should not be taxed 
with a view to ensuring social security to senior citizens. 
Reply of the Government 
i. The then Hon’ble Finance Minister while presenting the Union budget for 
financial year (FY) 2015-16 stated that the deductions and incentives given to corporate 
taxpayers under the Act will be phased out over four years while simultaneously 

36 
 
reducing the tax rates.  It was also stated that this will lead to making our industry 
competitive, reduce tax litigation and prevent revenue loss. 
ii.    Further, the Finance Act, 2016,  inter-alia, provided a sunset date for the existing 
profit linked deductions under the various provisions of the Act. 
iii.  In continuation of the stated policy, the TLAA inserted section 115BAA and 
section 115BAB to the Act  to provide for a concessional tax rate of 22% for existing 
domestic companies and of 15 % for companies set up on or after 01.10.2019 engaged 
in the manufacture or production of article or thing or research or distribution in relation 
thereto and which co mmence manufacturing or production by 31.03.2023, subject to 
certain conditions including that they do not avail of any specified incentive or 
deductions. It has also been provided that the domestic companies opting for the 
concessional taxation regime shall not be required to pay any Minimum Alternate Tax.  
 
iv.  On the lines of the reduction in corporate tax rates, the Finance Act, 2020 has 
also proposed to insert section 115BAD to the Act to provide a concessional taxation 
regime for co-operative societies, wherein they can opt to pay tax at the reduced rate of 
22 % if they do not avail of any specified incentives or deductions. The co -operative 
societies opting for the said concessional taxation regime will also not be required to 
pay Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT). 
v. Further, the Finance Act, 2020 has also inserted section 115BAC to the Act to 
provide an option to individual and Hindu Undivided Family (HUF) to pay taxes at 
reduced rates provided that they do not avail of specified incentives or deductions and 
meet certain conditions. The individuals or HUF opting for the said concessional tax 
regime will also not be required to pay AMT.  However, under this concessional taxation 
regime, certain exemptions such as benefits available to retiring employees are  allowed 
with a view to ensuring social security to senior citizens. 
vi. Hence, as is evident from the above, the policy of the Government is to phase 
out exemptions and deductions available under the Act and to simplify the taxation 
regimes.   However, ce rtain exemptions are still available under the Act in order to 
provide safeguards to certain sectors and individuals. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
Tax Refunds and Interest on Refunds 
 The Committee are constrained to observe that in direct taxes Rs. 1,71,450 crore 
has been paid as refunds upto January 2020 (for FY 2019 -20) with 
estimated/provisional interest outgo of Rs. 22,856 crore, while the corresponding figures 
for FY 2018-19 stood at RS. 1,61,458 crore and 20,566 crore, respectively. This raises 
an apprehension that the assesses may be constrained to pay excess advance tax to 
fulfill revenue targets of the Department. Such over -estimated automatical ly result in 

37 
 
large amount of tax refunds along with accruing interest on refunds, which is avoidable 
similarly, in case of Indirect taxes, the amount of refund upto Jan. 2020 for the fiscal 
2019-20 stands at RS 164400.45 crore. The Committee, therefore, de sire that the 
Department should look into the reasons behind such large amount of refunds and take 
corrective measures, accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
CBDT: 
The Returns of Income filed by the assessee are processed by Central 
Processing Centre (CPC) under section 143(1) of the Act. The Act follows the principle 
of “pay as you earn” thereby meaning that a taxpayer has to pay the advance tax on the 
estimated income for a financial year to be earned by the taxpayer.  It is pertinent to 
mention that the b ooks of accounts and the income computation for most entities is 
finalised in the last month of the financial year in March.  In view of this, there may be 
instances when the estimated income is higher than the actual income as the person 
may claim deductions and exemptions which had not been anticipated earlier, or due to 
other external variables. In such a scenario, the taxpayer may be eligible for and claim a 
refund along with interest on account of higher advance tax paid while filing its return of 
income.  Further, in order to get timely payments, the Government has incentivised 
payment of advance tax on time as any shortfall in the advance tax has to be paid as 
self-assessment tax including interest charged under section 234B and 234C of the Act. 
In view of this several tax payers may prefer paying a higher advance tax on estimated 
income in order to avoid payment of additional taxes as self -assessment tax along with 
interest while filing their return of income.   However, it may also be noted that ther e are 
numerous cases wherein taxpayers also end up paying self -assessment tax on actual 
income while filing their return of income in order to compensate for short fall in the 
advance tax payments made on estimated income.   
Similarly, on specified payments, tax is deducted at source (TDS) by the payer to 
payee. The rates of TDS for residents is deducted at flat rates as prescribed under the 
Act on various kind of gross payments made.  The flat rates on gross payments reduce 
the compliance cost of the deduc tors as they are not required to estimate the exact 
income of the deductee while deducting the TDS. However, as the TDS is deducted on 

38 
 
gross payments, in several cases it may result in higher deduction of tax as a person 
(recipient) may claim several deduc tions /exemptions leading to a lower actual income 
level which is ascertained while filing the income -tax return.   The higher TDS deducted 
in such cases is claimed as a refund by the taxpayer while filing his return of income. 
Further, while an assessee h as an option of obtaining a lower deduction 
certificate from the Assessing Officer on the basis of lower estimated income out of the 
said payment, delay in making an application for such certificate leads to higher 
deduction which is later claimed as refund by the taxpayer. 
Apart from the above, an assessee is required to pay demand created by the 
assessing officer in the course of assessment proceedings (however, Assessing 
Officers have been directed to collect only 20% of the demand raised if an appeal has 
been filed before  the Commissioner (Appeals), inter -alia, to minimize the outgo of 
refunds and interest, in the event of an unfavourable appellate order). If the order so 
passed by the Assessing Officer is reversed by a higher appellate authority 
subsequently, then refund is generated against the tax demand paid by the taxpayer 
earlier.  
From the above discussion, it can be said that refund arises when taxes paid are 
higher than actual tax liability (including interest). This arises mainly on account of the 
following: the d ifference in the estimated income and the actual income as discussed 
above in the cases of advance tax; TDS; and assessed income under scrutiny 
proceedings. However, as has already been stated, there are numerous cases wherein 
additional taxes in the form of self -assessment tax have to be paid in order to 
compensate for the shortfall in tax payments in the form of advance tax or TDS. Further, 
it may be noted that all refunds are being processed and issued speedily minimising the 
interest outgo on such refunds. 
CBIC: 
In this regard it is submitted that Section 16 of the Integrated Goods and Service 
Tax (IDST) Act, 2017, provides for refund on account of zero -rated supplies (export or 
supplies made to SEZ) in terms of the provisions of Section 54 of the Central Goods 
and Service Tax (CGST) Act, 2017. In addition to refund on zero-rated supplies, Section 

39 
 
54 also provides for refund on account or inverted duty structure, wherein the outward 
supply is taxed at lower rate than inputs used in the manufacturing of Goods and in  
case of deemed export (Supplies to EOU, EPCG and AA License holders). Further, the 
law also provides for refunds or excess tax or the tax paid in wrong head to taxpayers. 
As per the Provisions of CGST Act,2017 a taxpayers can file for refund within 2 year s 
from the  relevant date and the Tax authorities are mandated to sanction the refund 
within 60 days from the date of filing or refund.  In addition to the above, Section 55 of 
the CGST Act, 2017, provides for refund to UN Organization, International Agenc ies 
and Embassies which it to be filed quarterly and with 6 months from the end of the 
quarter. All these provisions pertaining to refunds under GST have been incorporated in 
the GST Act and Rules on the Basis or recommendations of the GST Council, which i s 
a constitutional body established under Article 279A of the constitution of India as stated 
earlier. 
 As 2019 -20 is the financial Year during which the time period of 2 years for 
claiming refund under Section 54 expires for the supplies made during July 2017 – 
March 2018, the higher amount of refunds is attributed to filing of refunds of the FY 
2017-18 (July 17-March 18) along with the refunds pertaining to 2018 -19 and 2019-20. 
In this regard, as per the date obtained for GSTN, it is informed that total 2 ,70,849 
refund applications (Where tax period is mentioned) involving refund amount or Rs. 
2,14,25,54,10,095/- were filed by the taxpayers during the financial Year 2019 -20 out of 
|Which 1.07.832 applications involving amount of RS. 55,29,28,03,378/- pertained to tax 
period July, 2017 to March, 2018 and 1,63,017  applications involving amount of Rs. 
1,58,96,26,06,716/- pertained to tax period April, 2018 to March,2019. 
 Further to eliminate the refund filing where payment is made in wrong head by 
the taxpaye r, the Government has enabled a provision of single unified cash ledger 
w.e.f. 21.04.2020. Also, Government has made amendment in CGST Rules, 2017, to 
provide for refund of tax paid in excess by using ITC in the form of credit of  ITC in the 
electronic credit ledger which would reduce the cash outflow of the Government under 
the said category of refund. 
 Unlike Direct Taxes, refund claims under Central Excise & Service Tax (now 
GST) are filed by the  assesses consequent to a particular event entitling them to  file 

40 
 
such claim and not as a result of excess payment or advance tax. This is evident from 
following broad  categories in respect of  which refund claims are filed and sanctioned, 
namely:-  
a. Rebate on goods cleared for export prior to 30.06.2017 on payment or 
Central Excise duty, which has been claimed as rebate. 
b. Refund of PLA balance lying as on 01.07.2017, as the balance of PLA 
(Personal Ledger Account) is not allowed to be transferred in GST credit 
balance as either ITC or cash, under GST Law. 
c. Refund arising due to pre-deposit under Section 35F of Central Excise Act, 
1944. 
d. Refund of dues paid by taxpayer in cases which are s ubsequently decided 
in favour of party by various appellate authorities/ tribunals/ courts. 
In respect of export, refund is available as a means of incentivising the taxpayer, 
enabling him to become competitive in the international market. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
Faceless Appeals 
 The Committee note that the Finance Bill, 2020 has proposed to introduce e -
appeal in order ot eliminate human interface between the commissioner (Appeal) and 
the appellant in the course of appellate proceedings to the extent technologically 
feasible. The Comm ittee note and appreciate that the IT law has been amended, 
wherein any notice that doesn’t have a Document Identification Number (DIN) would be 
‘Non est’. The Committee hope that the proposed E -appeal system with dynamic 
jurisdiction would impart greater efficiency, transparency and accountability to the 
appellate process and would also lead to optimal utilization of resources through 
economies of scale, functional specialization and adoption of global best practices. This 
would help instill confidence and  trust in the minds of tax payers. While recognizing the 
transformational changes initiated by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee would urge 
the Department of Revenue to extensively publicize the enabling provisions proposed in 
the Income Tax Law throu gh print and electronic media and even through the dynamic 
social media. 
 

41 
 
Reply of the Government 
Finance Act 2020 amended section 250 of I.T. Act, 1961 to enable the  Central 
Government to notify a scheme in official gazette for faceless appeals. As and when the 
said scheme is notified, efforts will be undertaken by the department to give it wide 
publicity in print, electronic and social media, as recommended by the Hon’ble 
Committee. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
‘Vivaad se Vishwas Scheme’ – No Dispute but trust scheme 
 The Committee anxiously note that over the years the pendency of appeals filed 
by taxpayers as well as the Government has increased, resultantly, a huge amount of 
dispute tax arrears are locked up in these appeals. There are 4,83,000 direct tax case 
disputes pending at various appellate fora - Commissioner (appeals), Income -Tax 
Appellate Tribunal  (ITAT), High Court and Supreme Court. A s on 30th November, 2019 
the amount of disputed tax arrears is a staggering Rs. 9.32 lakh crores. Considering 
that the actual direct tax collection into the financial year 2018 -19 was Rs. 11.37 lakh 
crores , the disputed tax arrears constitute nearly one -year’s direct tax collection. Tax 
disputes consume copious amount of time, energy and resources both on the part of the 
Government as well as taxpayers and they also deprive the government of timely 
collection of revenue. While acknowledging the introductio n of an immunity Scheme – 
“Vivaad se Vishwas” during the Union budget 2020 for citizens to settle disputes on 
income tax, offering relief from a vexatious litigation process, the Committee hope that 
this amnesty scheme would not only benefits the Governmen t by unlocking revenue 
blocking in long-drawn litigation at various for a but also enable the taxpayers to deploy 
their time, energy and resources towards their regular    business actives. As the final 
contours of the scheme are awaited, the Committee wou ld urge the Government to 
make it completely web–based and easily accessible to ensure better success. 
 
 

42 
 
Reply of the Government 
Post announcement of Vivaad se Vishwas  Scheme, the Direct Tax Vivaad se 
Vishwas (DTVSV)  Act, 2020 has been enacted. The Direct Tax Vivaad se Vishwas  
Rules, 2020 have also been notified, which provide for submission of declaration, 
intimation etc. under the Act electronically making it completely web -based. The 
taxpayers can submit Forms 1 & 2 and Form 4 DTVSV, online on the E -filing portal of 
the Department. The entire process is completely electronic and the Department also 
issues Form 3 and Form 5 to the taxpayer electronically. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8) 
Taxpayer’s Charter 
 The Committee note that the Union Budget 2020 has proposed a charter for 
taxpayers and having it enshrined in the Income Tax Act. Any tax system requires trust 
between taxpayers and the tax administration. This trust can be harnessed when 
taxpayer’s rights are clearly enumerated. The Committee recognize that taxpayer’s 
charter is an enabling legislation that shall enhance the efficiency of the delivery 
mechanism of the I ncome Tax Department. The Committee hope that the intended 
charter will strengthen the trust between the taxpayers and the Department by 
enumerating the taxpayer’s right. The committee would therefore recommend that the 
Ministry of incorporate the best int ernational practices with respect to the Charter. 
Besides, the Department should publicize the Charter extensively though mass media. 
In this regard, while sending tax notices, a related like should also be sent so that tax 
payers are clearly able to know their rights and duties. 
The Taxpayer’s Charter is a game -changing concept. Many jurisdictions around the 
world have implemented similar charters and these charters have been successful in 
reducing friction between taxpayers and the tax collection authorit ies. The Committee 
believes that Charter should be formulated taking into consideration three important 
aspects. First, the draft Charter should be released into the public domain for wide 
consultation. Second, workshop should be conducted across the count ry with 

43 
 
stakeholders to get their detailed inputs in writing. Finally, the Taxpayer’s charter should 
be introduced as a bill and passed in parliament to ensure that it has statutory authority. 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal was incorporated in the Fi nance Bill, 2020 and has been enacted 
vide section 64 of the Finance Act, 2020. A new  section 119A has been inserted in the 
Act which is reproduced below: 
"119A. The Board shall adopt and declare a  Taxpayer’s Charter and issue such orders, 
instructions, directions or guidelines to other income -tax authorities as it may deem fit 
for the administration of such Charter." 
The notification of Taxpayer’s Charter is under process. The Taxpayer’s Charter shall 
be formulated on the basis of feedback / inputs receive d from stakeholders and best 
international practices. The Department will provide a link for the Taxpayer charter, after 
it is notified, on all notices. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
 The Committee note that system -based analytical tools and systems generated 
intelligence by Directorate General of Analytics and Risk Management (DGARM) are 
being used to curb evasion in GST. The Directorate General of GST intelligence (DGGI) 
and Central GST field formations are initiating various measures in this regard including 
checking of E - Way bill mechanism for ensure compliance, in addition to acting upon 
specific t ax evasion related intelligence. The committee also note that intensive Anti - 
Evasion efforts are being undertaken specifically with respect to input Tax Credit (ITC) 
frauds based on fake invoice(s). However, the committee are constrained to observe 
that the monthly revenue collections from GST are yet to fully stabilize. The States have 
been reporting losses in collection, which will only increase the compensation burden of 
the Union Government. The Committee desire that the grievances of the States, if an y, 
be duty addressed under the aegis of GST Council so as to keep the states in a sound 
financial health. The committee expect to Government to sort out all the festering issues 
pertaining to GST at the earliest. The Committee would also urge the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) to extend the monthly due date for filing GST returns 
to 25th of every month. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, it is submitted that the prescribed date of 20th of subsequent month 
for the purpose of filing GST returns has been fixed on the basis of recommendations of 
GST Council, which is constitutional body established under Article 279A of the 
Constitution of India. The GST council has been entrusted with the task of making 
recommendations to the Union of India an d States on all matters related to GST. 
However, to facilitate small taxpayers having annual aggregate turnover up to Rs.5 
Crores, the Government has introduced a system of staggered filing of return from the 

46 
 
month of February 2020 ( January 2020 return) wherein the date of filing or return would 
be either 22nd or 24th depending upon the State of UT where the taxpayer is registered. 
[Ref. Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
 O.M. No. H-11015/02/2020-Parl., dated 16.07.2020] 
 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

48 
 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained  in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on th e recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry o f Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (De partment of 
Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 

50 
 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery 
in the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 

51 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT OF 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF 
REVENUE) 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
08  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation at 
Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 & 8) 
07 87.5% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies  
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.No. 4) 
 
  01 12.5% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 