12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
  
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS AND REVENUE) 
AND  
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE 
(DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE) 
 
 
 
FINANCING THE STARTUP ECOSYSTEM  
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                        
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
  


 
 TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
(DEPARTMENTS OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS AND REVENUE) 
AND  
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE 
(DEPARTMENT FOR PROMOTION OF INDUSTRY AND INTERNAL TRADE) 
 
 
 
 
FINANCING THE STARTUP ECOSYSTEM  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 9th September 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on _________________ 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on _______________ 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
             
Composition of the Committee (2019-2020)       
Introduction            
                                          
PART-I 
 
A. Introduction            
B. The Startup Ecosystem in India          
C. About Venture Capital/Private Equity and Its Contribution    
 
D. Way Ahead to Strengthen the Financing of the Startup     
 Ecosystem 
 
 
PART-II 
   OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS              
APPENDICES 
 Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 03.01.2020, 28.07.2020 and 
08.09.2020.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
   
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.      Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -          Addl. Director  
 4. Ms. Yugma Malik     -  Committee Officer 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twelfth Report on the subject ' Financing the Startup 
Ecosystem' 
 
2. At their sittings held on 03 January, 2020, the Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Indian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association (IVCA) .  O n 28 
July, 2020, the Committee took evidence of the officials of the Ministry of Finance (Departments 
of Economic Affairs and Revenue and Ministry of Com merce (Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade).  The Committee also interacted with the representatives of 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and Life Insurance Corporation 
of India (LIC) on 8 September, 2020. 
3. During the study visit to  Bengaluru on 20th Jan uary, 2020, the Committee held 
discussions with the representatives of IVCA. 
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 8 September, 2020 considered and adopted the 
draft report and authorised the Chairperson to finalize the same and present it to the Hon'ble 
Speaker. 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials  of the Ministry of Finance  
(Department of Economic Affairs and Revenue), Ministry of Commerce (DPIIT) and 
representatives from IVCA, PFRDA and LIC for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 
the requisite material and information which were desired in connection with the examination of 
the subject. 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
 
New Delhi                       Shri Jayant Sinha 
08 September, 2020                                    Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942(Saka)                                                Standing Committee on Finance 
 
  

Report 
PART - I 
Introduction 
1.1 A startup ecosystem enables the flow of high -impact innovations into the 
economy. Through this ecosystem, innovators and entrepreneurs develop and launch 
solutions to solve real -world problems faster and at scale. Additionally, startup 
ecosystems accelerate job and wealth creation from high -impact innovations. The value 
of a startup ecosystem lies in the access to resources and information flow creating 
more investment opportunities for the right institutions to connect with the right ideas for 
their businesses and portfolios, at the right time and for the right reasons. 
1.2 Innovation-driven job and wealth creation drive prosperity and comprehensive 
national power. As a result, the grow th of startup ecosystems is an important national 
priority in all major economies. Moreover, all countries are currently reeling under the 
high and rising human and economic cost caused by the outbreak of COVID -19 
pandemic, which has compelled governments to enforce isolation, lockdown and 
widespread closures in order to contain the spread of the highly infectious virus. India's 
ability to rise and show resilience post the pandemic and generate wealth and create 
social goodwill will come by tapping its huge entrepreneurial potential.  
 
1.3  India’s rapid recovery from the COVID -19 pandemic and sustainable fast -growth 
thereafter will depend vitally on the quality of our startup ecosystem. Such 
an ecosystem includes incubators, startup accelerators, venture ca pitalists, private 
investors, foundations, entrepreneurs, universities, government, corporations, mentors 
and the media. They all play a significant role in creating valu e in the larger ecosystem 
by transforming new ideas into reality through knowledge generation, its diffusion and 
use; domestic and international regulatory environment; training; product market 
conditions and availability of finance. Startups and innovator s are driving the next wave 
of innovation in India. Innovative services, products, and business models are going to 
dictate the growth trajectory of the Indian economy for the next decade and play a key 
role in helping India realize its potential as a glob al superpower and in achieving the 
goal of Aatmanirbhar Bharat. 
1.4 India is set to become one of the biggest consumer markets in the coming years 
and entrepreneurship is deemed as one of the key pillars to drive India’s growth. Under 

these circumstances, India must actively construct and nurture its innovation hubs that 
bring together entrepreneurship, industry, capital, and research. Startup ecosystems are 
an amalgamation of highly specialised talent, research from top -tier universities, an 
incentive syst em for entrepreneurs, a promising market and large pools of investable 
capital. 
1.5 In total, India has produced about 50 or so unicorns – namely, startups that have 
gone on to exceed $1 billion in equity valuation. Each of these startups has been started 
by entrepreneurs with the backing of institutional investors such as venture capital and 
private equity funds. Startups are therefore quite different from companies started by 
established business groups, since they do not start with any built -in advantage s and 
resources. Their business success is largely due to their proprietary intellectual property, 
innovative business models and entrepreneurial hustle. 
1.6  These unicorns are now worth more than $500 billion collectively and have 
greatly contributed to job and wealth creation. Among these are well -known leaders in 
the IT services, telecom, financial services, airline, e -commerce, and retailing industries. 
In the past decade alone, India has created about 35 unicorns and 60 soonicorns. 
These startups have  raised about $40 billion in equity financing from institutional 
investors. Therefore, to reach unicorn status (and to achieve national/global scale), 
startups typically have to raise hundreds of millions of dollars in equity financing. Simply 
stated, we will not be able to create global scale competitors in India if we are not able to 
put thousands of crores of equity financing into our top startups. 
1.7  Industry data indicates that more than 80% of startup financing is coming through 
foreign capital, largely channelled through the venture capital and private equity industry. 
India’s financial system must be strengthened so that much more domestic equity capital 
is available to scale up our startups. This will support our goal of building an 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat. 
2. The Startup Ecosystem in India 
2.1 The Startup India initiative, managed by the Ministry of Commerce (Department 
for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade) was launched on 16th January, 2016 by 
the Honourable Prime Minister with an objective to build a strong ecosystem for 
nurturing inno vation and startups in the country that will drive sustainable economic 
growth and generate large scale employment opportunities.  

Entrepreneurial activity is gathering pace in the following six broad categories of 
Startups in India: 
(a) Category I: Scalable i n Emerging / Fast -businesses in growth sectors (Unicorns) 
These ventures have scaled up with countrywide operations. Funding for scaling 
has been received in multiple rounds from venture capital funds. In search for scale 
and synergies these ventures have a lso made acquisitions of other ventures 
engaged in similar domains. Currently more than more than 80% of capital going 
into India’s unicorns comes from foreign sources and China has investment of over 
Rs. 30,000 crore in India’s growth companies and are cu rrently investors in 18 of 30 
unicorns. 
(b) Category II: Hyper-growth technology businesses 
These are ventures with innovative business models or which apply technology to 
create new markets or cater to existing markets. They aim for very high growth in 
revenue or in operating metrics such as number of users/customers. 
(c) Category III: Innovation driven by Intellectual Property (IP) 
Such ventures have long gestation periods and may produce low returns. They have 
a high focus on Research and Development (R&D) and i nnovation to create unique 
products and services and if successful, they can be disruptive and grow rapidly. 
(d) Category IV: Priority Sector Enterprises 
Such ventures focus on priority sectors such as agriculture, affordable housing loans, 
micro credit etc. U sually they work in rural/low -income markets and have low 
profitability. 
 
(e) Category V: Me-Too Enterprise 
Me-Too ventures aim to execute a previously -proven business model. Accordingly, 
they have less focus on innovation and new technology. The emphasis is on 
reducing cost and increasing revenues. 
(f) Category VI: Grassroots Innovation 
These ventures execute customized solutions incorporating local knowledge and 
tradition. Innovation is aimed at delivering everyday products and services at low 
cost. 
 
2.2 India has the third largest startup ecosystem in the world and it is continuing to 
grow rapidly. Between the years 2012 and 2019, the number of startups have grown by 

17% each year, while funded startups have shown a compounded annual growth of 19% 
during the same period. Among funded startups in India, typically 25% or more go on to 
raise subsequent rounds. Startups create value across multiple dimensions in a 
cascading fashion in the following manner:  
(a) Step 1: Propelled by entrepreneurial drive  and innovation, startups employ new 
business models, produce new products, create jobs and as they grow, pay direct 
and indirect taxes; 
(b) Step 2 : An SME ecosystem forms around a successful startup giving birth and 
impetus to more startups; 
(c) Step 3: Given the ir own favourable experience and their network, entrepreneurs 
of successful startups are able to identify other promising startups to which they 
provide risk capital – a process known as ‘Paying –it-Forward’. In addition, 
successful entrepreneurs serve as role models for new startups; 
(d) Step 4 : As more and more startup entrepreneurs pay -it-forward a cascading 
multiplier effect occurs, leading to greater economic growth, job creation, 
innovation, competitive economic dynamism and a favourable social impact; and 
(e) Step 5: Successful entrepreneurs serve as a role model for new startups leading 
to a rising pool of entrepreneurial talent. 
2.3 The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) has taken 
several steps to promote a startup ecosystem in t he nation. The introduction of the 
National IPR Policy, 2016 was a major step forward to spur creativity and stimulate 
innovation. The document lays the roadmap for the future of Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPRs) in India through its objectives to establ ish an IP framework in the country 
conducive to innovation and creativity not only in terms of IP awareness and creation, 
but also commercialization and enforcement. To this effect, DPIIT has created a 
professionally-run Cell for IPR Promotion and Manageme nt (CIPAM) to facilitate 
promotion, creation and commercialization of IP assets . Further, schemes  such as the 
Startups Intellectual Property Protection (SIPP) scheme and Scheme for Pedagogy and 
Research in IPRs for Holistic Education and Academia (SPRIHA) have encouraged 
innovations in startups, colleges and universities. The department has also set -up four 
new National Institutes of Design and financial and administrative support is being 
extended to these institutes to foster an ecosystem for design educa tion and innovation 
in the country. 

2.4 To encourage the startup ecosystem in India, various direct tax and 
administrative reforms have been provided to companies in general and to startups in 
particular such as: 
(a) Reduction in corporate tax rate for all exi sting domestic companies at the rate of 
25.17% (including surcharge and cess) subject to the condition that such 
companies do not avail any specified exemption or incentive. Also, such 
companies are also not liable to pay Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) and 
companies who do not opt for the above concessional tax rate regime the rate of 
MAT has been reduced from 18.5% to 15%;  
(b) Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) has been abolished to provide relief to a large 
class of investors in whose case dividend income is taxable at the rate lower than 
the rate of DDT. The Finance Act, 2020 removed the Dividend Distribution Tax 
under which the companies shall not be required to pay DDT with effect from 
01.04.2020; 
(c) To promote investments from certain notified Sovereign Wealt h Fund (SWF), 
wholly owned subsidiaries of Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA) and certain 
notified Pension funds, the Finance Act, 2020 exempted the interest, dividend 
and capital gains income of such funds from Income -tax Act, 1961 subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions, in respect of investment made in the infrastructure 
sector. Further incentives have been provided for offshore borrowing. 
(d) 100% deductions to the profit of the startups has been provided under the   
Finance Act, 2020 wherein eligibl e startups will be able to avail for 100% profit 
linked deduction for three consecutive years out of ten years from the year in 
which such startup is incorporated if the total turnover of its business does not 
exceed one hundred crore rupees (as opposed to  twenty five crore rupees 
earlier) in any of the previous years beginning from the year in which it is 
incorporated. The benefit is available to startups incorporated on or after the 1st 
day of April 2016 but before the 1st day of April, 2021 and are engag ed in 
innovation, development or improvement of products or processes or services, or 
a scalable business model with a high potential of employment generation or 
wealth creation. Further, investment in startups has been exempted from capital 
gains and rela xations have been introduced for an eligible startup to carry 

forward and set -off losses if the original shareholders continue to hold their 
shares. 
(e) Units set up in International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) have been 
provided several incentives such as 100% profit-linked deduction for 10 years out 
of a block of 15 years, exemption of interest income of non -resident on money 
lent to a unit located in IFSC from tax, transfer of specified capital asset made by 
a non-resident on a recognised stock exchange  in IFSC is exempt from capital 
gains tax and pass through of income and losses are allowed to Category -I and 
Category-II AIFs 
(f) In order to ease the compliance burden of startups, several administrative 
measures such as a dedicated Startup Cell to redress g rievances and address 
various tax related issues in the cases of startups has been set up. Also, 
simplified assessment procedure for the startups has been initiated and 
outstanding income-tax demand relating to additions made under angel tax are 
now not to be pursued and no communication in respect of outstanding demand 
be made with the Startup entity. 
3. About Venture Capital/ Private Equity And Its Contribution 
3.1 VC/PE funds invest in young and fledging startups as well as more mature 
companies and prov ide equity risk capital. They can be categorized as Onshore and 
Offshore funds i.e Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) and Non AIFs. 
 
Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) 
3.2 Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) regulates and defines the 
Alternative Investment Fund as any fund established or incorporated in India in the 
form of a Trust, or a Company or a Limited Liability Partnership or a Body Corporate 
which is a privately pooled investment vehicle which collects funds from investors, 
whether Indian or foreign for investing. 
 
3.3 The Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) have been categorised into three 
classes: 
 
(a) Category-I AIF – which invests in startup or early stage ventures or social 
ventures or SMEs or infrastructure or other sectors or areas which the 

government or regulators may consider as socially or economically desirable 
and include the following: 
(i) Venture capital Fund (including Angel Fund) 
Venture capital funds invest primarily in unlisted securities of startups, 
emerging or early -stage venture capital undertakings mainly involved in new 
products, new services, technology or intellectual property right based 
activities or a new business model and include an angelfund. 
(ii) Angel Funds 
To provide a framework for registration and regulation of angel pools and to 
develop the startup -system, in year 2013, SEBI amended AIF regulations to 
include Angel Funds. 
Angel funds under AIF  regulations are to invest in Venture Capital 
 Undertaking which: 
• satisfies the age criteria specified by the DPIIT 
• has turnover not more than Rs. 25crores 
• is not sponsored by an industrial group with turnover more than      
 Rs. 300 crores 
• is not company with family connection with its angelinvestors 
(iii) Social Venture Fund  
Social Venture Fund invests primarily in securities or units of social ventures 
and sati sfies social performance norms laid down by the fund and whose 
investors may agree to receive restricted or mutedreturns. 
(iv) SME Fund 
SME Fund invests primarily in unlisted securities of investee companies which 
are SMEs or securities of those SMEs which are listed or proposed to be 
listed on a SME exchange or SME segment of anexchange. 
(v) Infrastructure Fund 
Infrastructure Fund invests primarily in unlisted securities or partnership 
interest or listed debt or securitized debt of investee companies or special  
purpose vehicles engaged in or formed for the purpose of operating, 
developing or holding infrastructureprojects. 
 
(b) Category-II Funds – which does not fall in category I and category III and does 
not undertake leverage. This includes PE funds, debt funds,etc. 
 

(c) Category-III Funds – which employ diverse or complex trading strategies and 
are allowed to employ leverage. This category includes hedge funds etc. 
 
Non-AIFs 
3.4 Funds that are domiciled outside India/foreign funds, that invest in Indian 
companies. 
 
3.5 Some Investment Stage Definitions: 
 
Venture Capital 
Early rounds of institutional investments into companies that are typically less than five 
years old, with the Investment amount typically less than $20 M 
 
Private Equity 
(a) Growth-PE: Investing growth and expansion capital in companies with proven 
business models. 
(b) Late Stage : Investment growth and expansion capital into mature companies, 
typically over 10 years old. 
(c) PIPEs(Private Investment in Public Equity) : PE investments in publicly -listed 
companies via preferential allotments / private placements, or acquisition of 
shares by PE firms via the secondary market. 
(d) Buyout: Acquisition of controlling stake via purchase of stakes of existing 
shareholders 
(e) Special Situation Funds/ Distressed Asset Funds : Investing in debt and equity 
instruments of companies facing temporary dislocation in business, balance 
sheet mismatch, closure, litigation, bankruptcy etc. 
(f) Credit Funds: Referred to as direct lending or private lending funds, and invest in 
debt instruments in private & public companies 
(g) Real Estate Funds : Specialised funds investing in residential and commercial 
real estate properties across strategies 
(h) Infrastructure Funds: Specialised funds investing in infrastructure sector 
 
3.6 At US$48 billion (in agg regate including infrastructure, real estate, PIPE and 
credit investments), Indian VC/PE investments grew by 28% y -o-y in 2019. The VC/PE 

industry has provided risk capital of over ₹10 Lakh Crore over the last 15 years . VC/PE 
is today the single largest source of FDI to the country, exceeding all other sources put 
together. Almost 80% of the money that PE/ VC funds raise is from foreign sources with 
US accounting for approximately 50% and most of the money comes from pe nsion 
funds, insurance companies, banks, foundations and endowments plus fund-of-funds.  
 
Contributions 
3.7 VC/PE investments are significant catalysts of economic growth and 
socioeconomic value creation. They can play a meaningful role in helping solve some of 
the problems facing the country today and provide the right momentum to the Indian 
economy where the companies backed by them champion innovation, create new jobs, 
mentor new entrepreneurs and bring the right solutions to help promote financial 
inclusion, build better infrastructure, increase renewable energy, promote capital 
efficiency in the Indian economy and give companies the much needed capital at critical 
times. Some of the major contributions are listed as follows: 
 
(a) Portfolio companies of VC/P E funds have contributed significantly to India’s 
economic development through outcomes such as: 
• Stronger Job Creation Record 
• Superior Financial Performance 
• Greater Export Earnings 
• More Acquisitive and Global Mind-set 
• Superior Corporate Governance and Higher Tax Contribution 
 
(b) Thanks to VC/PE, capital for the right idea, the right team and the right business 
is now more easily accessible. The new businesses funded by VC/PE 
investments are in turn creating employment opportunities and skill  development, 
which is central to the various initiatives of the Government such as Make in 
India, Startup India and the recent reinstated emphasis on being “Vocal about 
Local” and “Aatmanirbhar Bharat”, thus playing a meaningful role in the growth 
and development of the country. 
(c) VC/PE investments aid in technological innovation as new technology 
accompanies the inflow of private capital and leads to technological 
advancement which can have spill -over effects on other sectors as well and thus 
lead to increase in productivity of the economy. 

(d) VC/PE investments mitigate dependence on external leverage from portfolio 
companies’ perspective which is critical in the context of current economic 
environment. 
(e) The risk appetite of the VC/PE asset class has helped shap e several new 
industries. They provide long term and high -risk capital to a wide variety of 
ventures at all stages of their evolution, creating stability and entrepreneurial 
capability. This includes risk capital in the form of equity capital for pre -revenue 
stage companies, early and late stage ventures, growth companies that wish to 
scale their operations, and even companies facing distress. 
(f) As a result of VC/PE funding, the Indian startup ecosystem has emerged as one 
of the largest in the world with some  of the major startups being OYO, Big 
Basket, Swiggy, Ola, Zomato etc. Between 2012 and 2019, the number of 
startups has grown by 17% each year, while funded startups have shown a 
compounded annual growth of 19% during the same period. 
(g) Investments are ramp ing up in advanced technology sectors like AI / ML 
(Artificial intelligence and Machine Learning), IoT (Internet of things), Biotech and 
Fintech thus paving the way for an advanced digital economy. 
 
4. Way Ahead to Strengthen the Financing of the Startup Ecosystem 
4.1 Representatives from the VC/PE industry and members of the startup community 
over the course of Committee meetings and a study tour put forward their views on 
increasing flexibility in funding instruments for channelizing capital from investor s 
particularly attracting the money into transactions which are commensurate with risk 
and reward of investing in the current situation; investments mobilization of domestic 
institutional funds into the market and certain suggestions under the Income -tax Act and 
GST law. They also highlighted different mechanisms through which mature companies 
and high networth individuals (HNIs) could support startups. 
4.2 Startup ecosystem representatives are of the opinion that these measures will 
act as a catalyst to en hance liquidity in the market and boost capital influx in the 
economy, which is a critical requirement to tide over the liquidity crunch during the 
ongoing Covid crisis. Some of the major points deliberated upon are listed below: 
 
 
 

Investments in Listed vs. Unlisted Securities 
4.3 Currently, there is considerable benefit for investing in listed shares than unlisted 
shares in terms of taxes levied. Startup ecosystem representatives expressed that in 
order to further channelize domestic and foreign risk capi tal; there is a need for 
complete tax parity for investments between listed and unlisted securities. 
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their comments 
furnished that, “ The capital gains regime for the listed equity share under the 
Act cannot be compared with the capital gains regime for unlisted shares. This 
is due to the fact that the transactions of unlisted shares are not subjected to 
Securities Transaction Tax (STT) and computation of capital gains are allowed 
indexation benefits unlike in the case of listed securities.” 
 
Taxation of Long Term Capital Gains Of Foreign Vs Domestic Investors 
4.4 Industry representatives submitted, that the disparity between taxation of Long 
term capital gains (LTCG) of foreign and domestic investors should be resolved as 
under the current scenario LTCG earned by foreign investors in private companies 
attracts taxa tion at concessional rate of 10%, in comparison to the domestic VC/PE 
investments being taxed at 20% (for LTCG) with an enhanced surcharge of 37%.  
 
Pass-Through Status to AIF under GST Regulations 
4.5 Industry representatives pointed out that if the pooli ng vehicle is formed offshore, 
then the services provided to such offshore pooling vehicle are regarded as export of 
services for the service provider. Accordingly, the fund manager is not charged any 
GST to the offshore fund and is also eligible to claim a refund of GST paid on any input 
services. In comparison, a domestic/onshore AIF suffers from GST which is an 
additional cost. Given the above anomaly, offshore VC/PE Funds are encouraged to 
pool funds outside India, resulting in growth of the Asset Manag ement industry abroad 
and not in India. 
 
Treatment of Management Fees as Cost of Investment  
4.6 Under the current GST legislation, AIFs are largely set up as contributory trusts 
which are considered as distinct persons from overseas investors with its loca tion being 
in India. Thus, any services (from Fund Manager and any other service provider) 
availed by the AIF are liable to GST, and typically the fund management fee is the most 
significant service and since AIF is only a pooling vehicle for investments a nd does not 

provide any service, the GST paid on fund management fees is a sunk cost even 
though it is consumed by the non -resident investors of the AIFs for their investment 
activity. Thus, industry representatives feel that the levy of GST is emerging as  a 
challenge in attracting foreign investments to AIFs thereby impeding the onshoring of 
investment in India and the growth of the Indian asset management industry. 
 
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their background note 
submitted to the Committee that, “...... the investment manager uses several input 
services, like renting, financial services, advisory services, IT services, portfolio 
services, security services and other business and professional services for 
supplying output services t o an AIF. The investment manager is entitled to avail 
input tax credit on such input services and set off the same against his output 
liability. 
...investment manager provides service to AIF, and both of them are located in 
India. Thus, as per the place of  supply provisions, the place of supply of such 
service is in India. It does not violate principle of destination -based consumption 
tax under GST Law.” 
 
Mobilisation of domestic institutional funds 
4.7 OECD economiessuch as USA, have hundreds of profession ally managed fund-
of-funds attracting institutional capital which help mobilize greater capital across the 
economy. Although there are large pools of domestic capital available with pension 
funds, provident funds, and charitable organizations, they are not  being used as 
investment sources in the country. The industry representatives opine that these funds 
should be allowed to invest in private equity and venture capital by setting up of fund -of-
funds platforms. 
 
4.8 Different sets of institutions/corporatio ns should be encouraged to constitute 
different fund-of-funds programs through public private partnership model as has been 
successfully seen in the case of National Investment and Infrastructure Fund (NIIF). 
This will make possible diversity of strategies  with diverse players and will eliminate the 
current limitation of each institution to evaluate each AIF for making contributions thus 
helping in fund the capital needs of businesses across sectors and decrease the 
dependence on foreign capital. 
 

4.9 Traditionally, institutions in India such as banks, insurance companies and 
pension funds have shied away from taking exposure to alternative asset classes and 
their investments are limited to public markets, while globally such institutions make 
significant contributions in alternative asset classes. The global model can be replicated 
in India by removing certain regulatory hurdles surrounding investments by these 
institutions. 
 
4.10 Startup ecosystem representatives expressed desire for the government to 
encourage banks, insurance companies and pension funds to channelize a portion of 
their corpus into AIFs. 
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their comments 
furnished that, “...pension sector is in a nascent stage, exposing the fund s of 
subscribers to too much risk at this stage is not prudent. However, the same will 
be reviewed in calibrated manner considering the security and risk of investment 
of fund meant for old age pension at appropriate time and decision will be taken 
accordingly. 
...DPIIT had arranged a meeting on l8th June, with representatives from IVCA and 
IRDAI to discuss the issues pertaining to insurers' investments in AlFs. ln the 
meeting it was decided that IVCA would prepare a Concept Note and submit to 
lRDAI” 
 
Allowing Category I AIFs to invest in NBFCs 
4.11 Startup ecosystem representatives put forward the case to allow Venture Capital 
Funds (VCFs) to invest in non-banking finance companies (NBFCs). They stated that as 
the ecosystem in India is still developing and most of the companies are in early growth 
stage, VCFs have been categorized s pecifically under the AIF Regulations to invest 
only in startups or early stage ventures or other sectors or areas which the government 
or regulators consider as socially or economically desirable. 
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) i n their comments 
furnished that, “SEBI has informed that, the proposal on permitting Category I AIF - 
VCFs to invest in NBFCs registered with RBI was discussed in the 15 thmeeting of 
AIPAC held on January 10, 2020. Various aspects of the proposal are being 
examined by SEBI including review of rationale of not allowing Category I AIF - 
VCFs to invest in NBFCs, concerns regarding taxation, etc. and the matter is 
under examination in SEBI.” 

 
Permanent Capital Vehicle 
4.12 Startup ecosystem representatives submitt ed that Alternate Investment Funds 
should be allowed to be listed on capital markets, thereby creating a permanent source 
of capital for investee companies. 
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their comments 
furnished that, “...a pr oposal on ‘Mid -Market Permanent Capital Vehicles’/ 
‘Permanent Capital Vehicles’ was discussed in three meetings of AIPAC held on 
July 23, 2018, February 26, 2019 and January 10, 2020. 
...However, no revised proposal was submitted by industry representative s. 
Accordingly, it was decided in the 15th meeting of AIPAC held on January 10, 
2020 that, the proposal may not be pursued further. No further action is required 
on this at this stage.” 
 
Funds for follow-on Investment under FFS Scheme  
4.13 Small Industrie s Development Bank of India  (SIDBI) is the leading government 
financial institution which supports the growing startup ecosystem through its capital 
infusions. But, startup ecosystem representatives submitted that funds having capital 
commitment from SIDBI have not received the drawdown capital in the past 2 -3 months 
and that such a delay has repercussions for the whole industry. 
The Ministry of Commerce (Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade) in their background note to the Committee subm itted that, “As of 2 ndJuly 
2020, SIDBI has committed Rs. 3,798.20 Cr to 53 SEBI registered Alternative 
Investment Funds (AIFs). These funds have raised a corpus fund of Rs. 29,128 
Cr.  and Rs. 1,080.53 Cr. have been drawn from the FFS and Rs. 3,810.44 Cr. 
have been invested into 342 startups.” 
 
Expansion of the list of eligible sectors under the FVCI route 
4.14 Startup ecosystem representatives submitted that there is a need to expand the 
list of permitted sectors allowed for investment under the Foreign Venture Capital 
Investor (FVCI) route in line with FDI policy as this route provides a flexible investment 
framework and hence will be able to attract significant capital in the economy. Currently, 
it is permitted in the below listed items and this  significantly restricts the flow of money 
under this route. 

(a) securities, issued by an Indian company engaged in any sector mentioned below 
and whose securities are not listed on a recognised stock exchange at the time 
of issue of the said securities :- 
i. biotechnology; 
ii. IT related to hardware and software development; 
iii. nanotechnology; 
iv. seed research and development; 
v. research and development of new chemical entities in pharmaceutical 
sector; 
vi. dairy industry; 
vii. poultry industry; 
viii. production of bio-fuels; 
ix. hotel-cum-convention centres with seating capacity of more than three 
thousand; 
x. Infrastructure sector wherein the term “Infrastructure Sector” has the 
same meaning as given in the Harmonised Master List of Infrastructure 
sub-sectors approved by Government of India vide  notification F. No. 
13/06/2009- INF, dated the March 27, 2012 as amended or updated. 
 
(b) units of a Venture Capital Fund (VCF) or of a Category I Alternative Investment 
Fund (Cat-I AIF) or units of a scheme or of a fund set up by a VCF or by a Cat -I 
AIF. 
(c) equity or equity linked instrument or debt instrument issued by an Indian startup 
irrespective of the sector in which the startup is engaged wherein the definition of 
startup is as per Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade’s 
Notification No. G.S.R. 364(E), dated the 11 April 2018. 
 
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their comments 
furnished that, “Under the FDI route, only Indian startups are allowed to raise 
funds through issuance of Convertible Notes to foreign investors. Further, as per 
Schedule VII of FEM NDI Rules, Foreign Venture Capital Investors (FVCIs) are 
allowed to acquire any permissible security/instrument, at a price that is mutually 
acceptable to the buyer and the seller/ issuer.” 
Long term c apital gains exemption on fresh investments made by Private Equity 
and Venture Capital funds for certain period 
 

4.15 The current law governing the taxation of long -term capital gains is highly 
complex due to varying tax treatment of income from capital gains based on varied 
parameters such as holding, tax rates that range from 10% to 40% and allows 
indexation only in respect of certain assets. For instance, the capital gains tax rates for 
investment in unlisted shares by domestic investors can ra nge from 28.49% to 42.74%. 
As per industry representatives the complex tax regime dampens the enthusiasm of 
investors in the PE/VC fund space eyeing Indian investments and there is a need to 
incentivise large PE/VC funds to invest in the private sector and  provide necessary 
capital to cash crunched companies. In contrast, various developed jurisdictions, such 
as US, UK and other EU countries do not tax capital gains earned by foreign investors. 
Even closer to home, countries such as Singapore do not have an y capital gains tax, 
which attracts investors to pool/ invest in Singapore. 
 
4.16 Furthermore, the Finance Act, 2020 introduced an exemption for income on 
investments made before 31 March, 2024 subject to the investment being held for a 
period of at least 36 months and is likely to encourage investment in infrastructure 
related projects in India. While infrastructure is one of the primary sectors for PE/VC 
investment, various other sectors such as financial services, technology, e -commerce, 
telecommunication etc. are also sectors that have been focused on by PE/VC investors. 
Given that the Indian economy is reeling under the post COVID – 19 crisis and various 
sectors need capital to recover, such exemption should be provided to long -term and 
patient capital invested across all sectors. 
 
Rationalize pricing guidelines under various regulations for investors 
 
4.17 There is no consistent valuation approach prescribed across different laws, 
thereby creating complexity in interpretation of laws and unintended chal lenges in 
compliance requirements on investment by foreign investors and AIFs.Investment by 
foreign investors under the FDI route is subject to pricing regulations and has to comply 
with the pricing methodologies prescribed under the multitude of laws – SEBI, IT Act, 
Companies Act, FEMA. Investment by domestic AIFs is also subject to pricing 
regulations under IT Act and Companies Act. 
 
Expanding financing sources for startups 

4.18 Startup ecosystem representatives highlighted that multiple other sources of 
capital could also be encouraged to invest in startups. Listed companies should be 
allowed to invest in startups directly, not necessarily indirectly through VC/PE funds. 
However, listed companies run the risk of being classified as NBFCs if their assets o r 
revenues from startups exceed 50% as per RBI’s current rules. They are also not 
treated on par with angel investors and cannot utilise tax loss carry forwards. 
 
Similarly, limited liability partnerships (LLPs) could be an effective financing vehicle for 
HNIs, family offices, and companies. LLPs can also accept foreign direct investments. 
However, LLPs can also be classified as NBFCs by RBI if their investment assets or 
revenues exceed 50%. SEBI could also classify them as collective investment schemes. 
Due to these considerations, LLPs are not used as investment partnerships in India 
even though they are widely used in OECD countries. 
 
Establishing IFSCs in multiple cities 
4.19 Startup ecosystem representatives put forward the case that the International 
Financial Services Centre (IFSC) needs to be closer to the financial and industrial 
markets, and thus there is a need to create more IFSCs on the lines of GIFT City in 
Gujarat.  
The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their comments 
furnished that, “Since the first IFSC is in a nascent stage it has been decided that 
we may optimally utilize the first IFSC before setting up more such centres.” 
 
 
 
 

PART - II 
Observations/ Recommendations 
Role of Startups and their Financing 
1. The ongoing Covid -19 pandemic has drastically impacted the global 
economy. There has been significant demand contraction, supply chains have 
been disrupted, and investment has stalled.  Under such circumstances, the 
Committee believe that the ability to grow a nd show resilience after the pandemic 
will be dependent on building a strong startup ecosystem that can propel 
investment, jobs, and demand creation. A startup ecosystem stands on the pillars 
of startup accelerators, venture capitalists,  private investors , foundations, 
entrepreneurs, universities, government, corporations, mentors, and the media. 
They all play a significant role in creating value in the larger ecosystem by  
transforming new ideas into reality through knowledge generation, its diffusion 
and use; domestic and international regulatory environment; training; product 
market conditions and availability of finance. 
2. The Committee further believe that the startups an d innovators are driving 
the next wave of innovation and new ideas need support and financing now more 
than ever and the role of Private Equity/ Venture Capital, larger companies, HNIs, 
family offices, and other institutional investors needs to be encourag ed. These 
entities invest in young and fledging startups as well as mature companies in the 
form of risk capital and are significant catalysts of economic growth and socio -
economic value creation. They have the potential to increase the economy’s total 
factor productivity and improve the quality of economic growth itself by providing 
the right momentum to the Indian economy where companies backed by them 
champion innovation, create new high quality jobs, bring improved products and 
services to the mass market, mentor new entrepreneurs, drive financial inclusion, 

build better infrastructure, promote capital efficiency and enhance digital 
economy. 
Expanding the Startup Ecosystem 
2. The Committee note with satisfaction the steps taken so far to promote 
innovation and foster a conducive startup ecosystem in the nation through 
various Government schemes. The Committee desire that the scope of startups 
may be further widened, encouraging and supporting young people and 
expanding the startup culture at the r ural level too. The startup culture across 
multiple sectors should be promoted on a much larger scale. 
Scaling up Unicorns 
3. The Committee note that substantial growth capital is required to scale up 
startups in India and for unicorns in particular. Unico rns initially require seed 
capital of hundreds of crores, and then as they grow they need thousands of 
crores to build global scale businesses. The Committee note in this regard that 
capital going into India’s unicorns comes mainly from foreign sources suc h as 
US and China. The Committee believe that this dependence be reduced so that 
India becomes self -reliant by having several large domestic growth 
fundspowered by domestic capital to support India’s unicorns. Further, the 
Committee are of the opinion that  Small Industries Development Bank of India 
(SIDBI) Fund -of-Funds vehicle should be expanded and fully 
operationalised/utilised to play an anchor investment role. SIDBI should play a 
pivotal role in disbursing more funds that would help startups and Unicor ns to 
scale up significantly, enabling the nation to become more self -reliant and be in a 
better position to control its economic destiny. It is further desired that these 
funds be managed by top quality professional management teams who specialise 
in different sectors such as healthcare, e-commerce, agritech, cyber security etc. 

Expansion of Securities Transaction Tax (STT) to collective investment vehicles 
(CIVs) 
4. The Committee note the administrative and taxation reforms effected so far 
with respect to  companies in general and startups in particular.In addition to 
these reforms, the Committee would like to strongly recommend that tax on Long 
Term Capital Gains be abolished for all investments in startup companies (as 
designated by DPIIT) which are made through collective investment vehicles 
(CIVs) such as angel funds, AIFs, and investment LLPs. At a minimum, this 
should be done for at least the next 2 years to encourage investments during the 
pandemic period. After this 2 year period, the Securities Tran saction Tax (STT) 
may be applied to CIVs so that revenue neutrality is maintained. Investments by 
CIVs are transparently done and have to be done at fair market value. Thus it is 
easy to calculate the STT associated with these investments. This can be done  in 
lieu of imposing LTCG on these CIVs and to make the taxation system fairer, less 
cumbersome, and transparent. This will also ensure that investments in unlisted 
securities are on par with investments in listed securities. 
 
Undoing Punishing of Risk Capital  
5. The Committee are of the opinion that there should be no punishing of 
domestic risk capital at any level,as the current tax disparity is proving 
advantageous to foreign capital through low tax jurisdictions and low taxes for 
fund management servic es. This will establish a level playing field for domestic 
investments vis-a-vis foreign investments and domestic listed vis-a-vis unlisted 
securities. The Committee recommend that to encourage domestic investments 
in unlisted debt and equity securities, and once the pandemic period concessions 

are lifted, CIV capital gains should always be taxed at the same rate as listed 
securities. 
Growth of Asset Management Industry 
6. The Committee understand that most nations waive or commute GST on 
overseas funds poo led onshore, as the ultimate investors in these funds are 
located overseas, which ultimately results in the government earning incremental 
revenues from local ecosystem employment in banking, consulting, finance and 
law firms, and from the secondary effect s of their consumption. However, the 
current domestic scheme of taxation for the AIFs / investors results in 
inconsistency in the commercial gains of the investors and the amount on which 
the investors are required to discharge taxes i.e. it entails higher  tax implications 
on the investors. The Committee are in agreement with the plea of the industry 
representatives for setting -off management fees on returns to investors, that is 
AIF management fees be deducted before computing capital gains, as otherwise 
they have a negative impact on overall returns. Moreover, asset management 
services provided to foreign investors should be treated as an export service and 
should not be subjected to GST. This would also encourage the growth of the 
Asset Management industr y in the country instead of fostering the current 
scenario, where funds are being pooled offshore and not within the country.   
Mobilisation of Domestic Institutional Funds 
 
7. The Committee recommend that in line with the global practices, large 
financial institutions in India should be encouraged to channelise a proportion of 
their investible surplus into domestic funds which would bring in much -needed 
additional domestic capital for startup investments. Towards this end, the 
Committee would recommend the following specific measures: 

(i) Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and National 
Pension Scheme (NPS) may be encouraged to invite bids from professional fund 
managers for running a fund -of-funds program. SIDBI would be eligible to 
participate as well. Further, the removal of restrictions such as the minimum 
corpus of AIF being an eligibility criteria for pension fund investment and 
requirement to invest only in listed AIFs, would considerably ease roadblocks for 
investment by NPS in AIFs.  The Committee would also like to recommend that 
pension funds can start by allocating small percentage of their corpus into AIFs 
currently and then gradually increase it as they gain more experience. 
(ii) Major banks should join hands to float a fun d-of-funds. Furthermore, the 
current exposure limits applicable to banks need to be enhanced and permission 
be granted to invest in Category III AIFs also. 
(iii) Insurance companies (both life and non -life) must be given latitude to invest 
in fund-of-funds by IRDAI as well as directly in VC/PE funds along with a higher 
exposure cap. The Committee desire that the Concept note on the issues 
pertaining to insurers’ investments in AIFs by the industry be submitted to 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authori ty of India (IRDAI) at the earliest 
so that positive measures in that direction can be worked upon quickly. Further, 
the Committee recommend that investments by insurance companies in AIFs 
must be carved out under a separate category while calculating the applicable 
exposure limits and must not be clubbed with other investments under 
‘unapproved investments’.  
(iv) Foreign Development Finance Institutions may also be encouraged to 
participate with local asset management companies to set up fund-of-funds 
structure or direct VC/PE funds, particularly in social impact, healthcare and 
venture/startup sectors. 

 The Committee believe that these steps will not only infuse more capital in 
the economy but also help India move closer in achieving some  of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set for the country. 
 
Investment by AIFs in Non Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) 
 
8. The Committee desire that Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
should allow Venture Capital funds to invest in Non -Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) which would help enhance their capital base. The Committee 
note that successful Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) of Real Estate Investment 
Trusts (REITs) and Infrastructure Investment Trust (InvITs) have already shown 
that asset portfolios can be packaged together to attract specific investor type 
and thus would like to recommend that NBFCs also be allowed to list on stock 
exchanges to be able to draw in a larger investment pool.  
 
Permanent Source of Capital 
 
9. The Comm ittee would like to point towards the need for Alternate 
Investment Funds to be allowed to be listed on capital markets, thereby creating 
permanent source of capital for the startup ecosystem.The Committee desire that 
the proposal on ‘Mid -Market Permanent Capital Vehicles/ Permanent Capital 
Vehicles’ be pursued further and proposal in this regard be submitted by industry 
representatives to the Ministry so that necessary action can be taken on this 
front. Also, the need to create more domestic Development Financial Institutions 
(DFIs) on the lines of International Finance Corporation (IFC) and The German 
Investment and Development Company (DEG) should be emphasised for 
financing various sectors of the economy.  Further, allowing for University 

endowments to invest into AIFs can prove to be highly beneficial in the long run 
to bring the economy on the trajectory of sustained growth. 
 
Expansion of Sectors under Foreign Venture Capital Investor (FVCI) route 
 
10.  The Committee desire that the sectors  in which Foreign Venture Capital 
Investor (FVCIs) are allowed to invest should be expanded to include all sectors 
where Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is permitted, as this route provides a 
flexible investment framework and hence will be able to attract significant capital 
in the economy. The Committee feel that this inflow of capital will play a 
significant role in boosting the economy. The Committee are also of the opinion 
that since foreign investors/ pooling vehicles are allowed to invest in equity 
capital or instruments which are compulsorily convertible into equity under the 
FDI route, there is  now a need to allow issuance of hybrid securities, which bear 
characteristics of both debt and equity under the FDI route, at least for a limited 
period to e nhance the fund -raising capabilities of the companies to raise capital 
at commercially suitable terms in this difficult time. 
 
Incentivising Long Term and Patient Capital 
 
11. Given that the Indian economy is reeling under the post COVID – 19 crisis 
and various sectors need capital to recover, the Committee recommend that the 
exemption for income on investments made before 31 March, 2024, subject to the 
investment being held for a period of at least 36 months as incentivised in the 
Finance Act, 2020, should  be provided to long -term and patient capital invested 
across all sectors. 
 
 

Rationalising Pricing Guidelines 
 
12.  Under the current environment, given that the businesses are stressed for 
liquidity and valuations of businesses have softened, there is a n eed to adopt a 
more pragmatic approach on applying fair market value principles in transactions 
between independent parties. Hence, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
pricing guidelines prescribed under the various laws and regulations by SEBI, 
Income Tax Act, Companies Act, Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) 
should be made more consistent to provide a certain, coherent and simple 
framework for facilitating large -scale investments in India. The Department of 
Economic Affairs in the Ministry of Fi nance may set up an expert committee to 
provide pricing guidelines to government authorities. 
 
Expansion of Financing Sources 
 
13.  The Committee are of the opinion that more sources of capital should be 
made available for startup financing. Companies and LLPs should be allowed to 
invest in startups without being classified as NBFCs by the RBI. This can be done 
by allowing only debt -free companies and LLPs to be kept out of the NBFC 
designation. Thus companies and LLPs cannot borrow and then u se those 
borrowed funds to make investments. Their investments will have to be made by 
either through equity contributions from investors or through internal accruals. 
This will ensure that no leverage is built up in the financing system through these 
vehicles. Additionally, as long as LLPs have less than 20 members, they should 
not be classified as collective investment schemes by SEBI. 
 
 
  

Providing a Strong Support System for India’s Startups 
 
14.  The Committee firmly believe that India is one of the few large economies 
that has the potential to deliver high economic growth for a sustainable future 
and this can only be made possible by providing adequate growth capital (debt 
and equity) to India’s dynamic entrepreneurs.With adequate risk capital backin g 
them, they can provide innovative new services which can have a multiplier effect 
on the economy. The Committee therefore believe and would urge that a strong 
support system to finance the startup ecosystem should be put in place to drive a 
sharp post-pandemic revival and sustainably high economic growth thereafter. 
 
 
New Delhi;          SHRI JAYANT SINHA,  
8 September 2020        Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Finance 
  

Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 3rd January, 2020 at 1130 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension Block 'A', New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
 3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
 4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
 5. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
 6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
 7. Shri Pinaki Misra 
 8. Shri P.V. Midhun Reddy 
 9. Prof. Saugata Roy 
 10. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
 11. Dr.(Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
 12. Shri Manish Tewari 
 13. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 14. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 15. Shri Giridhari Yadav 
     
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
 16. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
 17. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
 18. Shri Praful Patel 
 19, Shri Amar Patnaik 
 20. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
 21. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao 
 22. Dr. Manmohan Singh 
 23. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
  
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 
 
  
 
 

WITNESSES 
 
 Experts 
 
i. Shri Padmanabh Sinha, Chairman, Indian Private Equity & Venture 
 Capital Association (IVCA) and Managing Partner, Tata Opportunities 
 Fund 
 
ii. Shri Rajat Tandon, President, IVCA  
 
iii. Ms. Renuka Ramnath, Vice Chairman, IVCA 
           Founder, MD & CEO Multiples Alternate Asset Management 
 
iv. Shri Ashley Menezes, Partner and COO, Chrys Capital 
 
v. Shri Arun Natarajan, Founder, Venture Intelligence 
 
vi. Shri Rahul Bhasin, Founder, MD, Baring Private Equity Partners India 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee and conveyed greetings for the new year. 
3. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the Chairperson initiated the 
discussion on the subject 'Performance and Regulation of Capital Markets - Private 
Equity in India'.  The major issues discussed include increasing the level of participation 
of private equity in our economy; reforms, change of norms and desired wishlist of the 
industry to widen and expand itself; industry specific investment and job creation; 
tackling of fixed return deals pretending to be private equity deals; skill development 
initiatives taken up; tapping opportunities offered by tourism sector; status of GIFT city 
and scope of opening IFSCs in other parts of the country; share of private equity 
sectorwise & experience thereof in sectors like manufacturing, social infrastructure etc; 
cash net returns generated over the decade or so, pooling of capital and relocation of 
fund management activity from offshore locations to India to boost the economy. 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject.  
The Comm ittee desired the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within a week. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20)  
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28 July, 2020 from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
   
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
4. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
7. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
8. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
9. Shri Pinaki Misra 
10. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
11. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
12.  Shri Manish Tewari 
13. Shri P. Velusamy 
14. Shri Rajesh Verma 
   
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
15. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
16. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan 
17. Shri Praful Patel 
18. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
19. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
20. Smt. Ambika Soni 
   
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
 3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
 
  
  

WITNESSES 
 
 Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
 
1. Shri Ajay Bhushan Pandey, Finance Secretary and Secretary (Revenue) 
2. Shri P.C. Mody, Chairman (CBDT) & Ex-Officio Special Secretary 
3. Shri M. Ajit Kumar, Chairman, CBIC 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Jha, Additional Secretary 
5. Shri Ritvik Pandey, Joint Secretary (Revenue / Parliament) 
6. Shri Rajesh Bhoot, Joint Secretary, TPL-2, CBDT 
7. Shri G.D Lohani, Joint Secretary, TRU, CBIC 
 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) 
 
1. Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj, Additional Secretary, Financial Market Division 
2. Shri. K. Rajaraman, Additional Secretary (Investment), DEA 
3. Dr. Madnesh Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary, DFS 
 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department for Promotion of Industry and 
Internal Trade) 
 
1. Shri Guruprasad Mohapatra, Secretary 
2. Shri Shashank Priya, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser 
3. Shri Anand Singh Bhal, Senior Economic Adviser 
4. Shri Ravindra, Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion on the subject ‘Financing the Innovation Ecosystem 
and India’s growth companies’. The major issues discussed include prioritizing domestic 
capital as equity capital for financing start -ups and MSMEs; achieving tax parity 
between listed companies and Alternative Investment Funds (AIFs) for investing in start-
ups; registration of start -ups, its trend and ways to ramp it up further; mobilization of a 
portion of the corpus of domestic institutional funds such as pension funds and funds of 
insurance companies into AIFs; status of National Research Foundation with respect to 
funds provided, disbursed etc; disbursement by SIDBI and NABARD and the share of 
funding towards larger start -ups; familiarizing and encouraging start -ups in rural India; 
promoting start-ups in sectors other than IT, assessment of the impact of the pand emic 

on the start -up sector; post Covid -19 approach for attracting foreign capital; expansion 
of IFSCs in other cities; focusing on new needs of the consumer and new challenges to 
the economy post the pandemic. 
3. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject. 
The Committee directed the witnesses to furnish written replies to the queries which 
could not be readily replied by them during the sitting within a week. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 hrs 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
WITNESSES 
 

LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA (LIC) 
 
1. Shri Raj Kumar, Managing Director 
2. Shri Masil Jeya Mohan P, Executive Director (INVMA) 
3. Shri Ashwani Ghai, Chief (Invo) 
 
PENSION FUND REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (PFRDA) 
 
1. Shri Supratim Bandyopadhyay, Chairperson 
2. Shri A.G. Das, Executive Director 
3. Shri Sumit Kumar, General Manager 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses, the 
Chairperson initiated the discussion o n the subject ‘Financing the Startup Ecosystem’. 
The major issues discussed include the steps that can be taken to mobilize domestic 
pension and insurance funds into Alternate Investment Funds (AIFs); the dichotomy in 
experience of global and domestic pens ion and insurance funds in respect of 
investment made in AIFs and returns reaped; exploring the idea of pooling a fund -of-
funds and ways to minimize the gap between what is being currently invested and how 
it can be enhanced so that the economy gets the de sired impetus to grow. The 
witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members on the subject.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
4. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 

(iv) Draft Action Taken Rep ort on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the r ecommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme  
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery 
in the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 