 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE            
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifth  
 Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2019-20)' ] 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020 /     Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
17 


SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Fifth  
 Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants (2019-20)'] 
  
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 9 September, 2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on __________, 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ____________, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
September, 2020 /     Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
  


CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................……….………… 
 
INTRODUCTION .........................................................……………………......  
 
CHAPTER I  Report ...................................................................…………  
 
CHAPTER II*  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government ............................……………  
 
CHAPTER III*  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .......………  
 
CHAPTER IV*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee …..  
 
CHAPTER V*  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of 
the Government is still awaited .....................................……  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 08 September, 2020 
 
 
                 APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations Contained in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Finance on Demands for 
Grants (2019-20)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________  
* Not appended in the cyclostyled copy 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2019-2020) 
   
  
Shri Jayant Sinha - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
3. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria  
4.  Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry  
5. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
6. Dr. Subhash Ramrao Bhamre  
7. Smt. Sunita Duggal  
8. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
9. Shri Sudheer Gupta  
10. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh  
11. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak  
12. Shri Pinaki Misra  
13. Shri P.V Midhun Reddy  
14. Prof. Saugata Roy  
15. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty  
16. Dr. (Prof.) Kirit  Premjibhai Solanki  
17. Shri Manish Tewari  
18. Shri P. Velusamy  
19. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
20. Shri Rajesh Verma  
21. Shri Giridhari Yadav  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar  
23. Shri A. Navaneethakrishnan   
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Amar Patnaik  
26. Shri Mahesh Poddar  
27. Shri C.M. Ramesh   
28. Shri Bikash Ranjan   
29. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao  
30. Dr. Manmohan Singh  
31. Smt. Ambika Soni  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi               -         Joint Secretary 
 2.       Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan      -         Director 
 3.       Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora                      -          Addl. Director  
 4. Shri Tenzin Gyaltsen    -  Under Secretary 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Seventeenth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
of the Committee (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 10 December, 2019.  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations 
were received from the Government vide their communication dated 11 March, 
2020.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
8 September, 2020.        
4. An analysis o f the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference , the observations / recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                     SHRI JAYANT SINHA 
08 September, 2020                      Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER – I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok  Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019 -20) of the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok  Sabha / 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 December, 2019.  
 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the G overnment in respect 
of all the five recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed 
and categorized as follows: 
 
 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2 and 3 
       (Total: 3 ) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
                  (Total: NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation No. 4 and 5 
       (Total : 2)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL               (Total: 
NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 

4.  The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on  
their recommendations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Budgetary Allocations 
5. The Committee note that under the major head 3454 of Central Statistics 
Office (CSO), there has been a substantial increase of Rs. 314.9 crore in the B.E of 
2019-20 in view of an overall better statistical coverage of various sectors/areas 
apart from other ongoing activities. In this regard, the Ministry has taken up two new 
surveys, i.e. Time Use Survey(TU S) and Annual Survey for use in corporate sector 
Enterprises (ASUSE) along with the 7 th Economic Census(EC) under the capacity 
development scheme. The Committee recommend that keeping in view the huge 
exercise undertaken by the Ministry involving collectin g information from households 
and commercial establishments through a door to door survey, the time has come 
for the Ministry to introduce a more technology intensive technique of data collection 
over the established format of regular human interface. 
6. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
"In its endeavour to increase the use of technology in surveys, Ministry of Statistics 
&Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has introduced the use of Computer Assisted 
Personal Interviewing (CAPI) mode  for collecting information  from respondents in 
some of its surveys . MoSPI is working towards developing a General Survey 
Solution to make extensive use of technology for all survey related work, including 
survey design, data collection, field w ork managem ent and supervision, data 
validation and data processing.  
 
After the stabilization of such an IT -based survey solution, it is proposed to make it 
available to State Governments and other Central Ministries to facilitate their survey -
related activities.   For conducting the 7 thEconomic Census  (EC), MO SPI has 
engaged Common Service Centre (CSC) e -Governance Services India Limited, a 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) under the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology. Extensive use of technology is made i n the various activities of the 7 th 
EC. These include online Learning Management System for training, testing and 
certification of field staff, data collection through a mobile -based application, data 
transfer, data validation, and a Management Information  System for supervision and 
monitoring of field operations, etc." 
 
7. The Committee note that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MOSPI)  strives to make use of technology in surveys and 
have therefore int roduced Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) 
towards collection of information from respondents in some of its surveys. In 

this regard, the Committee would like the Ministry to work earnestly towards 
development of the General Survey solution so as to enable extensive use of 
technology towards all survey related work , while sharing it with State 
Governments and other Central Ministries, which may be completed in a time 
bound manner.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) 
 
8. Indian Statistical Institute is mainly engaged in conducting comprehensive 
programme of research, training and practical application of different statistics 
spanning various disciplines through a large number of projects/ schemes. The 
Committee discern that with its specific mandate, the Institute strives to maintain a 
reliable reputation and commitment towards the field of education, national progress, 
social development and welfare. The Committee note the BE for this fiscal stands at 
Rs. 276.52 crore, while the same for the fiscal 2018 -19 stood at Rs. 275.32 crore 
which was later revised to Rs. 315.39 crore at RE stage. The apparent trend seems 
to be that of fluctuation and occasional inability of the Ministry to fully utilize the 
grant. The Committee w ould, therefore, urge the Ministry to provide necessary 
resources to enable the institute to fulfill its mandate, particularly completion of its 
ongoing projects including academic programmes. 
 
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
"Ministry of Statistics &Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has always tried to 
provide grants to ISI for its regular needs, as well as for its requirements of 
additional funds for staff salary/ pension, etc. on account of the pay commission 
recommendations implementation and for new buildings, constructions, etc. 
However, the funds are made available to ISI depending on the budgetary 
allocations made by the Ministry of Finance." 
 
 
10. While acknowledging the role of Indian Statistical Institute ( ISI) towards 
conducting comprehensive programmes of research, training and other 
important activities , t he Committee note that  the standard reply of Ministry 
with respect to issues flagged by them viz., fluctuation in budgetary allocation 
and Ministry's inability to proper ly utilize the grants provided does not allay 

the concerns expressed by the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their original recommendation and urge the Ministry to come up with 
a proper roadmap to fully utilize the  budgeted funds made available to  the 
Institute. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Manpower related issues 
11. The Committee has time and again in their earlier reports pointed out the 
issue pertaining to the shortage of manpower in the Ministry and its various field 
offices. The Committee have been informed that in view of the acute shortage of 
regular manpower for conducting surveys, the Ministry has resorted to a hybrid 
model where the core statistical activities and supervision thereof are undertaken by 
available i n-house expertise, while the primary level field work will be outsourced. 
The Committee are of a view that although the proposed method can be a stop -gap 
arrangement, it cannot be a replacement for the professionalism required for the 
data collection exerc ise. The Committee would therefore recommend that the 
Ministry should carry out regular recruitment of qualified/trained staff for this 
purpose. The Ministry should not compromise in any manner on the quality of 
statistical staff at the field level, so tha t the credibility of the whole process is not 
jeopardized. Appropriate IT systems may also be considered to improve efficiency 
and reduce manpower needs. 
12. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 "There has been an increased demand for regular data on various facets of 
economy. In order to meet the requirements of the Government, the Ministry is 
required to undertake new surveys on annual basis besides the regular surveys on 
various subjects. In or der to ensure quality and accuracy of the data collected, 
adequate number of field level staff is required to be deployed for each survey. 
Keeping in view the workload and surveys to be undertaken, the Ministry regularly 
assess the additional manpower requ irement of statistical functionaries working in 
Central Government and accordingly, reviews the cadre posts in Indian Statistical 
Service (ISS) (Group ‘A’ posts) and Subordinate Statistical Service (SSS) (Group ‘B’ 
posts) from time to time. The last Cadre Review of ISS was held in 2015 and the 
recommendations approved by Government have been implemented. For SSS 
cadre, the latest Cadre Review took place in 2012. To meet the additional manpower 
requirements, the Ministry, in consultation with participating M inistries has initiated 
steps to undertake next cadre review of ISS and SSS.      In addition, the Ministry is 
also taking steps towards adoption of technological interventions to improve 
efficiency and to optimize manpower needs." 

13. The Committee are of the v iew that the Ministry needs to have a 
comprehensive look at its increased workload and corresponding need for 
adequate manpower at its disposal.  The Committee are not satisfied with the 
Ministry’s reply regarding its specific recommendation to resolve the issue of 
shortage of manpower in the Ministry and its  large number of  field offices.  
The Committee are thus constrained to reiterate that time bound recruitment 
of officers/staff , particularly at the field level  should be undertaken by the 
Ministry in mission mode. 
 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
    
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS 
1. The Committee note that the budget proposal for the Ministry includes a 
budget grant of Rs 5216.33 crore for the fiscal 2019 -20, of which the demand under 
revenue scheme is Rs 5216.33 crore and capital scheme is Rs 14.73 crore. Under 
the revenue side of Rs 5216.33 crore, the scheme portion stands at Rs 4474.10 
crore and non-Scheme portion is at Rs 742.23 crore. The capital portion of Rs 14.73 
crore includes only the scheme portion and all inclusive grant of Rs 14.73 crore. The 
budget grant of previous fiscals stood at Rs 4752.83 crore, Rs. 4759.82 crore and 
Rs 4270.83 crore at BE, RE and Ac tuals stage respectively. The same for the fiscal 
2017-18 stood at Rs 4795.74 crore at BE stage, Rs 4783 crore at RE stage and Rs 
4302.87 crore at Actuals stage. The BE, RE and Actuals of 2017 -18 increased by 
0.9%, 0.5% and 0.7% over 2016 -17. Similarly, th e BE and RE of 2018 -19 moved 
upwards of 13% and 3%. The Committee further note that the BE of 2019 -20 has 
gone up by a substantial 7.7% to Rs 5231.09 crore from BE of 2018 -19 of Rs 4859 
crore. The Committee hope the enhanced allocations would help the Mini stry 
strengthen their data collection machinery and available infrastructure. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Under the Capacity Development (CD) scheme during 2019-20, in addition to 
its regular ongoing activities, t he Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI) has taken up two new surveys namely, Time Use Survey (TUS) and Annual 
Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE), as well as  the 7 thEconomic 
Census (EC).  The enhanced budget allocation in BE 2019 -20 has predominantly 
been for these new activities.  
   [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation vide  O.M. 
NO.N-11016/1/2020-CAP, dated 11.03. 2020] 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that the grant under Major Head 2552 for ‘Provision for 
scheme for benefit of North Eastern Region and Sikkim, the BE portion of current 
fiscal has been a reasonably increase of Rs. 7 crore over the previous fiscal. The 
Committee have been informed that the same is a sub -scheme under the Support 
for Statistical strengthening (SSS) whereby the Grant -in-aid is made available to the 
states to strengthen their statistical system and data flow process. The Committee 
note with satisfaction that under this scheme, along with the states of Sikkim, 
Mizoram and Manipur, the states of Meghalaya and Assam have also been 
associated with the scheme since 2017-18. The Committee are of the view that such 
an inclusion would enable the Ministry to cement the foundation of a reliable 
statistical framework in the Nort h Eastern region, enabling the government to 
pinpoint and rectify the roadblocks in the advancement of North Eastern region for 
its pre-eminent development projects there. 
Reply of the Government 
Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) is a sub -scheme of the Capacity 
Development Scheme . Under SSS, Grants-in-Aid are provided to States for 
strengthening their statistical systems  through an  enabled IT environment, faster 
data processing and transmission, undertaking new surveys/ studies, enhanced 
capacity of stati stical personnel, etc.  Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) agrees with the view of the Committee that the participation 
by the various North-Eastern states in the SSS will help them improve their statistical 
systems, and thus promote development. 
 
   [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation vide  O.M. 
NO.N-11016/1/2020-CAP, dated 11.03. 2020] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that under the major head 3454 of Central Statistics 
Office (CSO), there has  been a substantial increase of Rs. 314.9 crore in the B.E of 
2019-20 in view of an overall better statistical coverage of various sectors/areas 
apart from other ongoing activities. In this regard, the Ministry has taken up two new 
surveys, i.e. Time Use S urvey(TUS) and Annual Survey for use in corporate sector 
Enterprises (ASUSE) along with the 7 th Economic Census(EC) under the capacity 
development scheme. The Committee recommend that keeping in view the huge 
exercise undertaken by the Ministry involving c ollecting information from households 

and commercial establishments through a door to door survey, the time has come 
for the Ministry to introduce a more technology intensive technique of data collection 
over the established format of regular human interface. 
Reply of the Government 
 In it’s endeavour to increase the use of technology in surveys, Ministry of 
Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has introduced the use of 
Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) mode for collecting 
information from respondents in some of its  surveys. MoSPI is working towards 
developing a General Survey Solution to make extensive use of technology for all 
survey related work, including survey design, data collection, field work management 
and supervision, data validation and data processing. After the stabilization of such 
an IT -based survey solution, it is proposed to make it available to State 
Governments and other Central Ministries to facilitate their survey-related activities. 
 
 For conducting the 7thEconomic Census (EC), MoSPI has engaged Common 
Service Centre (CSC) e -Governance Services India Limited, a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
Extensive use of technology is made in the various activities of the 7 th EC. These 
include online Learning Management System for training, testing and certification of 
field staff, data collection through a mobile -based application, data transfer, data 
validation, and a Management Information System for supervision and monitoring of 
field operations, etc. 
  
   [Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation vide  O.M. 
NO.N-11016/1/2020-CAP, dated 11.03. 2020] 
 
 (For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No.7 of Chapter I)  
 
  

CHAPTER - III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTE 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
Indian Statistical Institute 
 Indian Statistical Institute is mainly engaged in conducting comprehensive 
programme of research, training and practical application of different statistics 
spanning various disciplines through a large number of projects/ schemes. The 
Committee discern that with its specific mandate, the Institute strives to maintain a 
reliable reputation and commitment towards the field of education, national progress, 
social development and welfare. The Committee note the BE for this fiscal stands  at 
Rs. 276.52 crore, while the same for the fiscal 2018 -19 stood at Rs. 275.32 crore 
which was later revised to Rs. 315.39 crore at RE stage. The apparent trend seems 
to be that of fluctuation and occasional inability of the Ministry to fully utilize the 
grant. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Ministry to provide necessary 
resources to enable the institute to fulfill its mandate, particularly completion of its 
ongoing projects including academic programmes. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has always tried 
to provide grants to ISI for its regular needs, as well as for its requirements of 
additional funds for staff salary/ pension, etc. on account of the pay commission 
recommendations implementation a nd for new buildings, constructions, etc. 
However, the funds are made available to ISI depending on the budgetary 
allocations made by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation vide  O.M. NO.N-11016/1/2020-CAP, 
dated 11.03. 2020] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No. 10 of Chapter I)

Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
Manpower related issues 
 The Committee has time and again in their earlier reports pointed out the issue 
pertaining to the shortage of manpower in the Ministry and its various field offices. The 
Committee have been informed that in view of the acute shortage of regular manpower 
for conducting surveys, the Ministry has resorted to a hybrid model where the core 
statistical activ ities and supervision thereof are undertaken by available in -house 
expertise, while the primary level field work will be outsourced. The Committee are of a 
view that although the proposed method can be a stop -gap arrangement, it cannot be a 
replacement for  the professionalism required for the data collection exercise. The 
Committee would therefore recommend that the Ministry should carry out regular 
recruitment of qualified/trained staff for this purpose. The Ministry should not 
compromise in any manner on the quality of statistical staff at the field level, so that the 
credibility of the whole process is not jeopardized. Appropriate IT systems may also be 
considered to improve efficiency and reduce manpower needs. 
Reply of the Government 
 There has been an increased demand for regular data on various facets of 
economy. In order to meet the requi rements of the Government, the Ministry is required 
to undertake new surveys on annual basis besides the regular surveys on various 
subjects.  
 
 In order to ensure qu ality and accuracy of the data collected, adequate number 
of field level staff is required to be deployed for each survey. Keeping in view the 
workload and surveys to be undertaken, the Ministry regularly assess the additional 
manpower requirement of stati stical functionaries working in Central Government and 
accordingly, reviews the cadre posts in Indian Statistical Service (ISS) (Group ‘A’ posts) 
and Subordinate Statistical Service (SSS) (Group ‘B’ posts) from time to time.  
 
 The last Cadre Review of ISS  was held in 2015 and the recommendations 
approved by Government have been implemented.  For SSS cadre, t he latest Cadre 
Review took place in 2012. To meet the additional manpower requirements, the 
Ministry, in consultation with participating Ministries has  initiated steps to undertake 
next cadre review of ISS and SSS. 

17 
 
 In addition, the Ministry is also taking steps towards adoption of technological 
interventions to improve efficiency and to optimize manpower needs. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation vide  O.M. NO.N-11016/1/2020-CAP, dated 
11.03. 2020] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee Please refer para No.13 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER- V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                         SHRI JAYANT SINHA 
08 September, 2020                      Chairperson, 
17 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on Finance 
 

19 
 
Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 8th September, 2020 from 1500hrs. to 1600 
hrs in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Jayant Sinha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria 
3. Shri Vallabhaneni Balashowry 
4. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5. Smt. Darshana Vikram Jardosh 
6. Shri Manoj Kishorbhai Kotak 
7. Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty 
8. Shri Manish Tewari 
9. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
11. Shri Amar Patnaik 
12. Shri G.V.L Narasimha Rao 
13. Smt. Ambika Soni 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri V.K Tripathi    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan  - Director 
3. Shri Kulmohan Singh Arora  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kh. Ginlal Chung   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
PART I  
 
(1500 hrs – 1545 hrs) 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
PART II  
 
(1545 hrs onwards) 
 
 
3. The Committee t hereafter took up the following draft reports for consideration 
and adoption: 
 
(i) Draft Report on the subject ‘Financing the startup ecosystem’. 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 1 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expendi ture and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 2 nd Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 3 rd Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 4 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 5 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 19-20) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 7 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of th e Ministry of Finance (Departments of 
Economic Affairs, Financial Services, Expenditure and Investment and Public 
Asset Management). 
(viii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 8 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of  Finance (Department of 
Revenue). 
(ix) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 9 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 

21 
 
(x) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 10 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI) 
(xi) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in 11 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(xii) Draft Action Taken Report on  the 50 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘'Review of NSSO and CSO and Streamlining Of Statistics Collection Machinery 
in the Country, including Management Information System for Project 
Monitoring/Appraisal' 
 
 After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports and 
authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Report to the Hon’ble 
Speaker / Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2019-20) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
5  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation at 
Sl. Nos. 1,2 and 3) 
 
3 60% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
2 40% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 