 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
EVOLVING ROLE OF COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA IN 
THE ECONOMY, PARTICULARLY THE DIGITAL LANDSCAPE 
  
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
25 

ii 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
EVOLVING ROLE OF COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA IN THE 
ECONOMY, PARTICULARLY THE DIGITAL LANDSCAPE 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 August, 2025
03.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 202503 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                  (iv)    
Introduction                                                                                                                (v) 
PART-I 
 
Section                                          Content                                                     Page No. 
  A Introduction 1 
B Digitalization of Markets 2 
C CCI’s Regulatory Response and Evolution under the 
Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023 
9 
D CCI’s Experience 22 
E Monitoring of Digital Markets 42 
F Mergers and Acquisitions (M&As) 51 
G Regulation of Duopolies in Critical Sector 52 
H Protection of MSMEs and Small Businesses 53 
I Market Study 57 
J Disposal of cases by the CCI 63 
K Budget of the CCI 68 
L Penalties Imposed by the CCI 71 
M Cross Jurisdiction,  Global Collaboration and Coordinati on 
with Other Regulators 
75 
 PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
80 
 ANNEXURES  
Annexure-I Details of sanctioned strength, actual strength and vacanci es 
at various levels/posts in CCI during the last five years 
96 
Annexure-II Data for the past 10 financial years regarding the amount  
sought for allocation by CCI vis-à-vis the actual amount 
sanctioned to CCI by the Ministry in the Budget 
97 
Annexure-III Coordination Mechanisms between Competition Agencies and 
Sectoral Regulators 
98 
 APPENDICES  
Appendix-I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 20 Jan uary, 
2025 
100 
Appendix-II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 28 April, 2025 103 
Appendix-III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06 Aug ust, 
2025 
106 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25)  
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
   

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance , having been authorized 
by the Committee, present this Twenty Fifth Report on the  subject ‘Evolving Role of 
Competition Commission of India in the Economy, particularly the Digital Landscape’. 
 
2. The Committee, on 20 January, 2025, held deliberat ions with the representatives of 
the Competition Commission of India on the subject. Thereafter, on 28 April, 2025, the 
Committee held discussions with the representatives of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 
the subject. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at  their sitting held on 06 August, 
2025.       
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the abo ve-mentioned organizations 
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the r equisite material and information 
desired by the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record thei r deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officia ls of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommen dations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
 
  
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
06 August, 2025 
15 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
PART – I 
 
A. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 India's economic liberalization, initiated in the e arly 1990s, marked a 
paradigm shift from a controlled and protectionist regime t o one that embraced 
market-driven mechanisms as the primary engine for growth, innov ation, and 
consumer welfare. This transition was founded on the be lief that competitive 
markets, free from undue restrictions, would allocate res ources more efficiently, 
spur entrepreneurship, and create opportunities for both b usinesses and 
consumers. However, this optimism about market forces was tem pered by the 
recognition that market are not inherently self-regulating an d may suffer from 
inherent deficiencies such as monopolistic tendencies, info rmation asymmetries, 
and exploitative practices. 
 
1.2 The Competition Act, 2002, was enacted to address t hese deficiencies; 
and to ensure that market dynamics remained aligned with pub lic interest by 
safeguarding competition across sectors. The Act provided the f oundational 
principles for addressing anti-competitive agreements, preven ting the abuse of 
dominance by powerful market players, and regulating mergers and acquisitions 
that could lead to market concentration or the stifling of innovation. At the helm of 
implementing this legislation, the Competition Commissi on of India (CCI) was 
constituted to act as the watchdog for maintaining compe titive neutrality and 
fairness.  
 
1.3 In recent years, India’s economy has undergone another tra nsformative 
phase, characterized by the rapid adoption of digital te chnologies, which has 
redefined market structures and consumer behaviour, creating i mmense 
opportunities for innovation and growth while posing n ovel challenges. In this 
evolving landscape, the CCI continues to adapt its enforceme nt strategies, 
analytical tools, and regulatory frameworks to keep pace with t he rapid changes in 
market dynamics while preserving the principles of fair compe tition that underpin 
India’s economic liberalization.  

2 
 
   B. DIGITALIZATION OF MARKETS 
1.4 Digitalization has facilitated innovation at an unp recedented scale, and 
introduced new efficiencies across sectors. Businesses have used digital platforms 
to expand their reach, reduce operational costs, and cater to a global audience, 
while consumers have benefited from greater convenience, ac cess to a broader 
range of products and services, and improved transparency. The CO VID-19 
pandemic acted as a catalyst, accelerating the adoption of digital technologies.  
 
1.5 However, alongside these opportunities, digitalizat ion has also introduced 
significant challenges. The most notable among these is t he concentration of 
economic power in a handful of large technology platforms  that serve as 
intermediaries between consumers and businesses. These platforms have become 
central to the functioning of the digital economy, leverag ing their positions to 
consolidate their influence and expand into adjacent marke ts. This concentration 
has led to concerns over reduced contestability, stifling of innovation, etc. 
 
1.6 Platforms have developed intrinsic features that entrench their dominance 
and create significant barriers to entry for new competitors. The se platforms often 
function as gatekeepers, controlling critical market access p oints for businesses 
and consumers. Their ability to influence market outcomes—su ch as ranking 
search results, prioritizing their own products, or imposing t erms on businesses 
that depend on them—gives rise to significant competition concerns. Moreover, the 
development of multi-product ecosystems by these platforms a llows them to 
leverage their dominance in one market to capture others, further reinforcing their 
positions. 
 
1.7 The digital revolution, therefore, presents a dual challenge for regulators. 
On the one hand, there is a need to ensure that the o pportunities created by 
digitalization—such as enhanced market access, consumer empowerm ent, and 
innovation—are fully realized. On the other hand, it is imperative to address the 
risks of concentration, anti-competitive practices, and consumer ha rm. For 
competition regulators like the CCI, this requires a nuance d approach that 

3 
 
balances the need to preserve innovation incentives with the  imperative to 
maintain fair and competitive markets. 
 
Unique Features of Digital Markets and their Implications 
1.8 Several characteristics make digital markets distinct from traditional ones, 
posing unique challenges to competition authorities: 
(i) Network Effects Platforms like social media networks and e-commerce 
marketplaces thrive on user density, where their value increase s with each 
additional user. These network effects can cause markets to “ti p” toward 
monopoly-like concentrations, making it nearly impossible fo r competitors to gain 
traction. 
(ii) Data Advantage Big tech platforms derive significant power from their ability to 
collect, process, and leverage vast amounts of user data. T his data advantage not 
only strengthens incumbents’ positions but also undermines t he competitive ability 
of smaller firms to achieve scale or match personalization capabilities. 
(iii) Ecosystem Dominance Major digital firms operate expansive ecosystems 
comprising complementary and interlinked products, such as a pp stores, payment 
systems, operating systems, and cloud services. While these eco systems offer 
supply-side efficiencies, they can also enable anti-compet itive leveraging of 
dominance into adjacent markets, foreclosing opportunities for standalone 
competitors. 
(iv) Gatekeeper Position Platforms often act as intermediaries, controlling access  
between consumers and businesses. This gatekeeper role gives them the ability to 
influence consumer choices, dictate terms to businesses, and potentially distort 
market dynamics. 
 
(v) Zero-Price Markets  Many digital services are offered free to consumers, where 
the "price" paid is user data. This shifts the focus of competition analysis from 
price to non-price factors such as quality, innovation, and consumer privacy. 
  

4 
 
Anti-Competitive Practices by Big Tech in Digital Markets 
1.9 The meteoric rise of a handful of technology giants has brought immense 
benefits to businesses and consumers alike. However, the same dominance may 
also lead to practices that can potentially undermine co mpetition, distort markets, 
and disadvantage smaller players. Big tech firms, particularly t hose operating 
platform-based business models, may deploy strategies that e xploit their control 
over key market access points, creating significant barriers for co mpetitors and 
tilting the playing field in their favour. These anti-c ompetitive practices take various 
forms, each with far-reaching implications for the economy. 
(a) Self-Preferencing 
One of the most scrutinized practices in digital markets is sel f-preferencing, 
where platforms prioritize their own products or services over t hose of competitors. 
For instance, an e-commerce platform may rank its private-label go ods higher in 
search results than similar products offered by third-party s ellers. Similarly, search 
engines may tweak algorithms to favour their own affiliated services, such as maps 
or shopping platforms, over rivals. This not only reduces visibi lity for competitors 
but also limits consumer choice, as users are steered toward platform-owned 
products even when better alternatives might exist. Self-prefere ncing exploits the 
platform’s gatekeeper role, allowing it to leverage it s dominance to stifle 
competition and entrench its market power further. 
(b) Exclusive Agreements 
Big tech platforms often enter into exclusive agreements  with businesses or 
service providers, restricting their ability to work with competi ng platforms. These 
agreements can foreclose markets, particularly for smaller c ompetitors, by limiting 
their access to critical inputs, suppliers, or distribution chan nels. For example, an 
online hotel booking platform might sign an exclusivity d eal with a popular hotel 
chain, preventing other platforms from listing those pro perties. Such arrangements 
can deny competitors the ability to offer a complete prod uct portfolio, thereby 
discouraging consumers from using alternative services and consolida ting the 
dominant platform’s market position. 
 

5 
 
(c) Predatory Pricing and Deep Discounting 
Large technology firms, with their deep financial reserves, ma y resort to 
predatory pricing or offer deep discounts to attract customer s. By pricing their 
products or services below cost, these firms can drive out smaller competitors who 
lack the resources to sustain such losses. While consumers may initi ally benefit 
from lower prices, the long-term effects are detrimental: once competition is 
eliminated, the dominant platform can raise prices, reduce  service quality, or 
impose unfavourable terms on consumers and businesses. This p ractice 
undermines the competitive landscape and stifles innovatio n by discouraging new 
entrants. 
 
(d) Tying and Bundling 
Big tech companies frequently use tying and bundling str ategies to reinforce 
their dominance across multiple markets. For example, a platf orm might condition 
access to a “must-have” product, such as an operating system or an  app store, on 
the mandatory inclusion of other services. This practice limits consumer choice, as 
pre-installed apps often deter users from seeking alternat ives. It also forecloses 
competition, as rival service providers find it challenging to  reach consumers in 
such tightly controlled ecosystems. 
 
(e) Exploitation of Bargaining Power 
As gatekeepers of digital markets, big tech platforms wield s ignificant 
bargaining power over businesses that depend on them. T his dependence creates 
an imbalance, allowing platforms to impose unfair terms of engagement on smaller 
businesses. Such practices erode trust between businesses an d platforms, 
creating an exploitative environment that inhibits competition and innovation. 
 
1.10 The above highlighted anti-competitive practices h ave profound 
implications for market dynamics and consumer welfare. By suppr essing 
competition, big tech firms limit consumer choice, discourage i nnovation, and 
create artificial barriers to entry. Moreover, these practices often  result in higher 

6 
 
prices, lower quality, and fewer options in the long run, negating the initial benefits 
of digital platforms. 
 
Future Challenges  
1.11 The digital economy, characterized by rapid innovati on and the dominance 
of technology-driven markets, presents a dynamic set of challenge s for regulators 
worldwide. The CCI, as the guardian of fair competition in India, faces the daunting 
task of adapting its regulatory framework to address these compl exities effectively. 
While the opportunities offered by the digital economy are immense, they are 
accompanied by challenges that test regulatory capacity/ agil ity and institutional 
resources. 
(i) Technological Complexity 
The rapid pace of technological advancement in the digit al sector is a 
significant challenge. Emerging technologies like Artificial I ntelligence (AI), 
machine learning, blockchain, and advanced data analytics are reshaping market 
structures and creating novel competition issues. This requires  the regulatory 
toolkit to be continually updated to keep pace with these developments.  
(ii) Cross-Jurisdictional Issues 
Digital markets often transcend national borders, with ma jor players 
operating globally. Anti-competitive practices by these firms may have localized 
effects in India but originate from actions taken in othe r jurisdictions. Addressing 
these cross-jurisdictional issues requires the CCI to collaborate  with international 
competition authorities. Such cooperation allows for info rmation sharing, alignment 
of enforcement strategies and capacity building within the overall domestic 
statutory architecture.  
(iii) Resource and Capacity Gaps 
The complexity and scale of digital market cases place a considerable strain 
on the CCI’s existing resources. Handling these cases demand s specialized skills 
that go beyond traditional economic and legal analysis. Sp ecific challenges 
include: 

7 
 
(a) Technical Expertise 
The ability to analyse big data is crucial for evaluating market dominance and 
anti-competitive effects in data-driven markets.  Understan ding algorithmic design 
and its implications for market behaviour is critical to ad dress issues like 
algorithmic collusion or discriminatory search rankings. Expertise  in AI and 
machine learning is essential to assess how these techno logies impact 
competition, innovation, and consumer welfare. 
 
(b) Coordination with other Regulators  
Digital markets often involve overlapping concerns such as priva cy, data 
protection, and cyber security requiring a multidisciplinary app roach, working with 
sectoral regulators like the Data Protection Authority to address  these 
interconnected issues comprehensively. 
(c) Human Resources 
The move towards ex-ante regulation, when it happens, w ould require an 
increase in human resources. The CCI would need specializ ed personnel, 
including data scientists, technologists, and market analysts, to complement its 
existing legal and economic expertise. Addressing these re source and capacity 
challenges is imperative to remain effective in regulating digital markets. 
Digital Markets Division (DMD) 
1.12 Recognizing the unique challenges posed by digital m arkets, the CCI has 
recently constituted a Digital Markets Division (DMD) as a ded icated unit to focus 
on these issues. The establishment of the DMD marks a sign ificant step toward 
addressing these challenges, ensuring that the CCI remain s agile and effective in 
regulating digital markets.  
1.13 On being asked the CCI to provide comprehensive detai ls on Digital 
Markets Division (DMD) including its operational structure, spe cific responsibilities, 
staffing, and training; its difference in functioning from other CCI divisions, and its 
performance since its inception, particularly in terms of c ollaboration with other 
regulatory bodies, the CCI has submitted the following written response:-  

8 
 
“In September 2024, the Commission granted approval for creation  of Digital 
Markets Division (DMD) as a specialized unit to address the cha llenges of 
regulating digital markets. It will focus on present and fu ture work 
requirements relating to draft Digital Competition Bill  (DCB). Its primary 
functions inter alia include: 
 
(i) facilitate cross-divisional exchange/discussions; (ii) connect wit h experts; 
(iii) engage with industry, academia, other regulators/ de partments, 
international agencies; (iv) provide inputs on policy issues; (v) support in data 
analytics/management; and (vi) undertake any other task assigned to it in the 
context of digital markets. 
 
Presently, staffing provision has been made for a core team of seven 
persons focussing on the niche area of digital markets. Training requirements 
include exposure to AI, data analytics, and algorithmic model ing. Lectures / 
workshops on AI are being organized, and further efforts are  made to 
facilitate workshops on algorithmic behavior and data anal ytics. The DMD 
collaborates extensively with other divisions of CCI to tap knowledge and 
experience on digital markets that is internally available.  
 
The DMD is involved in the following initiatives: 
(i)  Coordinating the market study on Artificial Intelligence and 
Competition. 
(ii)  Tracking developments in digital markets and in the regulatory 
landscape both in India and abroad. 
(iii) Assisting in work relating to the draft Digital Compet ition Bill (DCB) 
and; 
(iv) Coordination with Advocacy division of CCI to sensitize s takeholders 
on digital markets and competition issues.
  
 
1.14 In this regard, one of the important suggestions rec eived from the 
Stakeholder is given below:- 
Limited institutional capacity of the CCI and the need  to strengthen capacity 
& mandate of the Digital Markets and Data Unit (“DMDU”) at t he CCI with 
technical experts in AI, data analytics, and platform economics 
The response of the Ministry on the above-mentioned suggestio n is as 
follows:- 
Views/Comments of the Ministry:- 
The MCA has noted the need to assess CCI’s infrastructural  capacity to 
effectively implement the DCB. 
 

9 
 
Justification by the Ministry:- 
CCI has established a Digital Markets Division (DMD) with th e objective of 
developing a comprehensive understanding of digital markets and 
formulating an informed roadmap for addressing competition issu es in this 
rapidly evolving domain. The constitution of DMD reflects th e CCI’s proactive 
recognition of the distinct complexities of digital markets—such as algorithmic 
pricing, data-driven network effects, and AI-enabled busin ess models. By 
creating a dedicated Division, the CCI has taken a critical  institutional step 
toward enhancing domain-specific expertise, in dynamic digit al ecosystems. 
The DMD would enable monitoring, better coordination w ith stakeholders, 
and support capacity building within the Commission. 
Furthermore, in order to strengthen the resource capacity, a cadre 
restructuring proposal has been submitted by the CCI for the creation of 55 
additional posts and the same is under consideration by the Ministry.  
 
C. CCI’s REGULATORY RESPONSE AND EVOLUTION UNDER THE 
COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023 
 
1.15 Recognizing the complexities of regulating digital  markets, the 
Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023, introduced several provisio ns to strengthen 
the CCI’s ability to address emerging challenges:- 
(i) Deal Value Thresholds (DVT): Recognising the need for regulating Merger & 
Acquisition (M&As) transactions particularly in the digital mark ets, involving 
high deal / transaction value and targets which may not h ave huge asset and 
turnover and for capturing such transactions within the purvi ew of the 
Competition Act, the Government of India introduced the  Deal Value Threshold 
(DVT) through Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023; thereby, en abling the CCI 
to look in to all such transactions which could have escaped its review.   
 
With this enabling provision, all M&A transactions with de al value exceeding 
Rs. 2000 crore and the target enterprise ( i.e., enterprise being acquired) also 
having substantial business operations in India, are t o be notified to the CCI, 
including transactions involving enterprises in new age markets,  for competition 
assessment and accordingly will get tested for anti-compet itiveness. This has 

10 
 
provided an opportunity to CCI to address likely harm to co mpetition 
(appreciable adverse effect on competition) due to such transactions. 
(ii) Settlement and Commitment Mechanisms:  To resolve cases expeditiously, 
the Act empowers CCI to accept voluntary commitments from part ies in certain 
types of anti-competitive conduct cases. 
(iii) Proportional Penalties:  A revised penalty structure ensures fair and 
proportionate punishment for violations in the digital sector. 
(iv) CCI has notified regulations, including the Competiti on Commission of India 
(Combinations) Regulations, 2024, the Competition Commi ssion of India 
(Settlement) Regulations, 2024, the Competition Commissi on of India 
(Commitment) Regulations, 2024 and the Competition Commi ssion of India 
(Determination of Monetary Penalty) Guidelines, 2024, to o perationalise 
aforesaid amendments introduced through the Competition (Amendment) Act, 
2023. 
 
1.16 On being asked as to whether the enabling provisio ns as introduced in the 
Competition Amendment Act like Deal Value Threshold, Settlement & Commitment 
Mechanisms have bolstered the CCI or need further improveme nts, the Ministry in 
their post-evidence replies has stated the following:- 
“The Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023 has introduced several  important 
enabling provisions that significantly strengthen the enforc ement and 
regulatory toolkit of the Commission. Among them, the introdu ction of the 
Deal Value Threshold (DVT) for merger control and the in corporation of 
settlement and commitment mechanisms represents major advancements. 
The deal value threshold provision empowers the Commission t o examine 
transactions that may not meet conventional asset or turn over thresholds but 
have high competitive significance particularly relevant in t he digital 
economy, where acquisitions of nascent or innovative firms may escape 
notification under traditional criteria. As per DVT provision , any merger and 
acquisition would require prior notice to, and accordingly prior approval of, 
the Commission if the deal value of the transaction excee ds Rs.2000 crore 
and parties to such transaction has substantial business op erations in India. 
This change allows the Commission to scrutinize potentially an ti-competitive 
acquisitions that were previously outside its jurisdiction, thereby enhancing its 
preventive capabilities. 

11 
 
The Settlement and Commitment Mechanisms, introduced unde r Sections 
48A and 48B of the Act, are designed to ensure faster reso lution of cases, 
reduce litigation, and promote compliance through a coope rative approach. 
These mechanisms bring the Indian competition law framework in line with 
global best practices and allow the Commission to tailor outcomes in a 
proportionate and efficient manner, particularly in complex or evolving 
markets. 
In sum, these reforms have substantially enhanced the Commission ’s 
enforcement and regulatory framework, and with continued i nstitutional 
support and experience-based adjustments, they are well-po sitioned to 
address emerging competition concerns effectively.” 
 
1.17 The current ex-post framework under the Competition Act, 2 002, was 
designed to ensure fairness and contestability in tradition al markets, addressing 
anti-competitive conduct after it has occurred. However, th e rapid digitalization of 
markets and the unique characteristics of the digital eco nomy—such as network 
effects, learning effects, and increasing returns to scale—pose significant 
challenges to this framework. These features enable digital markets to concentrate 
quickly, often leading to dominance by a few players before anti-competitive 
practices can be effectively adjudicated. 
1.18 Recognizing these limitations, the Parliamentary Stand ing Committee on 
Finance (2022-23), in its report titled “Anti-Competitive Practices by Big Tech 
Companies” (presented on 22 December 2022), emphasized the need for a shift in 
regulatory strategy. The Committee inter-alia recommended that competitive 
behaviour in digital markets be also evaluated ex-ante, to pre-empt and prevent 
the emergence of monopolistic structures. 
1.19 In response, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) const ituted the 
Committee on Digital Competition Law (CDCL) in 2023 u nder the chairmanship of 
the Secretary, MCA. The CDCL was tasked with examining th e adequacy of the 
existing competition law framework and exploring the need fo r a separate ex-ante 
regulatory mechanism for digital markets. The Committee’s co mprehensive terms 
of reference included reviewing the sufficiency of the Comp etition Act, studying 
international best practices, other regulatory regimes and t he practices of 
Systemically Important Digital Intermediaries (SIDIs). 

12 
 
1.20 The CDCL has since submitted its report, which inclu des a Draft Bill on 
Digital Competition Law, proposing an ex-ante regulato ry framework tailored to the 
unique challenges posed by the digital economy. The propo sed framework seeks 
to have provisions to prevent dominant digital intermedia ries from engaging in 
practices which stifle competition or harm consumer interests . The Report of the 
CDCL  along with Draft Digital Competition Bill (DCB) wa s placed on MCA website 
under the e-Consultation mode from March 12- May 15, 2024  and 106 
comments/observations were received. These suggestions are being examined by 
the Ministry. Additionally, Ministry of Electronics and Informatio n Technology 
(MeitY) organised stakeholder discussions between 18.06.2024 to  20.06.2024. 
The comments/feedback is awaited. Further the Ministry of Corp orate Affairs has 
felt that an evidence-based foundation through market stud ies is also required to 
consider all relevant aspects for ex-ante regulation consid ering it is in nascent 
implementational stages globally. 
1.21 In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs  has further 
added during oral evidence before the Committee as follows:- 
“The Digital Competition Bill, I think like I explained,  we have reached the 
stage where a draft bill is there, but like I pointed o ut, and everybody has 
pointed out, that we have to also encourage our ecosyste m of our startups 
and our MSMEs. The Bill is right now in the stage where we  are trying to 
harmonize and make sure that whatever is being recommended in  terms of 
the draft Bill does not harm the interests of our startup industry…” 
1.22 The CCI has also submitted their written view as fol lows:- 
“The Competition Commission of India (CCI) is of the view th at ex-ante 
regulatory framework should reflect a balanced approach so as to achieve 
the objective of competitive digital markets without stifl ing innovation. Only 
the largest of the technology behemoths with systemic significa nce should 
come within its ambit and the ex-ante obligations shoul d target/prevent only 
such conduct that are unambiguously anti-competitive. A tran sparent 
framework will enable the regulator (CCI) to effectively enforce  the law and 
deliver on its mandate while providing regulatory certainty  to the 
stakeholders.”  
 
  

13 
 
1.23 When further asked as to whether the Ministry activel y considered the 
inputs and representations made by Indian startups and dig ital businesses that are 
likely to benefit from the enactment of the DCB, share a  list of such entities; key 
categories of feedback and the key points made by stakehold ers thereunder, the 
Ministry in their post-evidence replies has stated that durin g March 2023, CDCL 
held closed-door consultations with entities and stakeholde rs likely to be impacted 
by the proposed law including industry associations, domesti c and foreign digital 
enterprises and think-tanks etc. The views/ comments received fro m the members 
and entities/stakeholders were suitably incorporated. The fo llowing 
entities/associations/organisations, including Indian startups and digital businesses 
that were consulted by the Ministry:- 
Sr. No. Name of Stakeholders 
1 Amazon  
2 Apple India Private Ltd. 
3 Bundl Technologies Pvt Ltd. & Swiggy  
4 Centre for the Digital future 
5 Flipkart  
6 Google  
7 India Cellular and Electronics Association  
8 Internet and Mobile Association of India 
9 Meta (Facebook) 
10 Oyo  
11 Uber 
12  USIBC 
13 Zomato 
14 All India Gaming Federation 
15 Alliance of Digital India Foundation  
16 Artha Global  
17 Asia Travel Technology Industry Association  
18 AZB & Partners  

14 
 
Sr. No. Name of Stakeholders 
19 Confederation of All India Traders  
20 Digital News Publishers Association  
21 Esya Centre  
22 Federation of Hotel & Restaurant Associations of India 
23 Indian Council for Research on International Economic 
Relations 
24  MakeMyTrip 
25 Newspaper Association of India 
26 National Restaurant Association of India  
27 NASSCOM  
28 Paytm 
29 Twitter 
 
1.24  The CCI has submitted in their written reply as follows:- 
“The key categories of feedback on the draft Digital Compe tition Bill (DCB) 
2024 and the key points made by stakeholders thereunder are summarised 
below -   
Thresholds for designation for SSDEs – The SSDE thresholds in the 
proposed DCB could encompass numerous Indian companies that  are not 
yet competitive on a global scale, adversely affecting their growth and 
international standing. Given the diverse nature, size of their respective 
markets and mode of operations of different Core Digital S ervice (CDS), the 
metric for assessing the financial strength and spread shoul d also differ for 
each CDS.  
Rebuttal of presumption of designation – There is no provision for 
rebutting presumption of designation based on quantitative thresholds. Under 
Article 3(5) of the DMA, the presumption of designation is rebuttable through 
sufficiently substantiated arguments.  
Qualitative criteria for designation - Qualitative criteria for designation are 
broadly defined and includes a residuary catch-all provisio n. Such qualitative 
criteria defeat the purpose of having quantitative criteria . Qualitative criteria 
entail policy unpredictability which may stifle innovation.  
Associate Digital Enterprises  - Refining the criteria for ADEs is crucial to 
ensure precise identification of ADEs and minimize unintende d 
consequences. The DCB does not clarify what constitutes ‘ind irect 
involvement’ in providing a Core Digital Service. This lack of  clarity may lead 
to uncertainty as to whether entities with offerings tha t are separate from but 
related/ complementary to the offerings of another group e ntity are required 
to be reported. 

15 
 
Identification and Definition of Core Digital Services (CD S)- Some 
definitions of CDSs are overly expansive, potentially coverin g entire digital 
markets regardless of their risk of competition harm. There is a  need to bring 
more certainty and clarity in the definition of Core Digital Services.  
Differential Obligations for SSDEs providing the same CDS - In case, 
differential conduct requirements for SSDEs providing competi ng CDS are 
specified, it may result in differing outcomes where competi ng SSDEs may 
face different compliance obligations and thus competitive pressures.  
Pro-competitive effects of obligations  – Certain obligations, such as self-
preferencing, tying and bundling, cross usage of data, are n ot amenable to 
blanket prohibition, in view of their possible pro-competiti ve implications. 
Likewise, stakeholders sought that the obligation not to restrict third-party 
applications may be revisited to the extent it impacts the  ability of an entity to 
provide a secure, trustworthy and reliable offering.  
Regulatory Complexity and overlap: India already has established an 
effective framework for regulating digital markets and several legislative 
measures have been recently enacted and proposed to regulate  digital 
markets in India viz the Digital Personal Data Protection   Act, 2023 
(DPDPA); the (proposed) Digital India Act; the Information Tec hnology Act, 
2000 (IT Act); the IT Rules, 2021; and the FDI Policy circu lar of 2020 (FDI 
Policy) etc. Given the availability of these regulatory tools, ca reful 
consideration should be given to ensure that introductio n of any ex-ante 
regime does not conflict with existing laws and that any n ew ex-ante 
regulation effectively addresses regulatory gaps.” 
( 
 
 
1.25 Asked to clarify as to whether integration of DPDP Act and Draft Digital 
Competition Law is feasible, the CCI has submitted the  written response as 
under:- 
 “ Competition Agencies have an important role in data reg ulation. Online 
businesses are able to amass large amounts of consumer data . Access to 
data enables such businesses to engage in data-driven innov ations. This 
in turn helps them to better assess consumer demand, habits, needs and 
preferences. Access to data can, therefore, represent a form  of 
competitive advantage. Lower data protection standards can harm 
consumers by reducing the quality of services besides creating 
insurmountable entry barriers for potential competitors, en trenching the 
dominant position of established firms and distorting co mpetition across 
various markets. The anti-trust law framework is an important regul atory 
tool to address the exploitative and exclusionary behaviour a rising out of 
data accumulation by the entities commanding market power. CCI as such 
does not look into data protection per se.  CCI’s role comes into play when 
usage of data as a non- price parameter leads to anti-compe titive 
practices.  Thus, role of CCI in this regard is critical in ma intaining and 
ensuring that markets remain competitive and contestable……  
 

16 
 
The DPDP Act provides a framework for processing digital personal data, 
balancing the individual's right to protect personal dat a with the need to 
process such personal data for lawful purposes. 
 
The draft Digital Competition Bill (DCB) aims to regulate t he practices of 
identified Systemically Significant Digital Enterprises (SSDEs), ke eping in 
view the principles of contestability, fairness and transpar ency, with the 
objective to foster innovation, promote competition and pro tect the interest 
of users in India.  
 
Given the implications of data for competition in digital markets, the draft 
DCB provides for certain data-related obligations, which include an 
obligation that does not allow SSDEs to (a) intermix or cross use  the 
personal data of end users or business users collected from d ifferent 
services including its Core Digital Service; or (b) permit usage of such 
data by any third party, without the consent of end use rs and business 
users. For the purposes of this provision, the concept/meaning of end user 
consent is aligned with that of the DPDP Act and the provi sion makes an 
explicit reference to the same.”  
 
 
1.26 On being asked as to how does the Ministry plan to ensure the proposed 
Digital Competition Act remains sufficiently flexible to  adapt to rapidly evolving 
technologies; and what concrete measures is the Ministry i mplementing to 
enhance the interoperability of digital platforms, thereby fostering a more open and 
competitive digital ecosystem, the Ministry has submitted written replies as under:- 
“The draft Digital Competition Bill envisages that the t hresholds for 
designating SSDEs will be periodically revised thereby providin g for 
flexibility.” 
 
1.27 The following suggestion has been received from a stakeholder regarding 
threshold limit:- 
“The importance of defining appropriate threshold limits f or designated 
enterprises to avoid overburdening of startups, strengthening c ompliance, 
enforcement and monitoring mechanisms to prevent regulatory eva sion by 
Big Tech, clarifying enforcement priorities, narrowing scope of Core Digital 
Services to streamline initial focus, and ensuring remedies are tailored, 
specific and practically enforceable.” 
 

17 
 
1.28 The written views/comments of the Ministry on the a bove suggestion are 
given below:- 
Views/Comments of the Ministry:- 
“As per the recommendations of the CDCL, the draft DCB def ines 
appropriate threshold limits for designated enterprises to prev ent 
overburdening of startups and outlines enforcement prioriti es and provides 
list of nine (9) Core Digital Services (CDS) as indicated in the Schedule I. 
The DCB has accounted for strengthening compliance, enforceme nt and 
monitoring mechanisms through specific provisions on anti-circumve ntion 
from obligations and reporting and compliance mechanisms. Furt her, the 
DCB is in line with the penalty regime under the Competition Act, 2002.  
  
1.29 When the Committee, referencing a national daily's assertion that 'The 
European Union is the only jurisdiction where a comprehensi ve ex-ante 
competition framework, under the Digital Markets Act, is curre ntly in force,' asked 
the Comments of the CCI on the accuracy of this statement;  and also asked as to 
whether the draft Digital Competition Law in India i s being proposed along similar 
lines to the European Union's framework.; and finally, co uld the CCI elaborate on 
any potential downsides this proposed Act might have on investments for start-ups 
in India, or any other foreseeable negative impacts, the CCI has submitted detailed 
written response as follows:- 
“EU is not the only jurisdiction where a comprehensive ex-ante competition 
framework for digital markets is currently enforced. The Digita l Markets Act 
(DMA) is a comprehensive law in the EU, however, the United Ki ngdom has 
also introduced the Digital Markets, Competition and Consumer Act, 2024.  
While both legislations i.e., DMA and DCB share a common objective—
regulating large digital enterprises to ensure fair competition—their approach, 
scope, and design reflect distinct domestic considerations an d market 
realities.  
DMA is applicable to ten Core Platform Services (CPS). Nine of t hese 
services are included in the regulatory scope of the DCB as Co re Digital 
Services (CDS), excluding “virtual assistants.” DCB uses inclusive definitions, 
whereas DMA relies on precise definitions. 
Designation in both DMA and DCB is based on financial thre sholds and user 
thresholds. Under DMA, financial threshold for designation is met if either 

18 
 
turnover in the European Economic Area (EEA) or market capitalisati on is 
met. In terms of user threshold, both end-user and busin ess-user thresholds 
are required to be fulfilled. Under DCB, financial thresh olds are based on 
turnover in India, global turnover, gross merchandise value and global market 
capitalisation and it provides either end-user or busin ess-user thresholds as 
spread test to trigger designation. While the DMA provides entities an 
opportunity to rebut under exceptional circumstances, DCB doe s not provide 
such an opportunity upon crossing the threshold. The DCB fu rther provides a 
qualitative designation mechanism based on sixteen qualitati ve criteria. 
Additionally, the DCB allows the Commission to designate ot her entities 
within the same corporate group as Associate Digital Enterprise s (ADEs) if 
they are directly or indirectly involved in the provision of Core  Digital Services 
in India.  
The obligations under DCB and DMA pertain to the areas o f fair dealing, self-
preferencing, anti-steering, tying and bundling, use of no n-public business 
user data to compete, intermixing/ cross-usage of data, da ta portability, 
installation of third-party applications/changing of defau lt settings. The DMA 
includes additional obligations such as reporting of M&A acti vities. The DCB 
allows the CCI to specify distinct conduct obligations f or each CDS via 
subordinate legislation. SSDEs are required to periodicall y report compliance 
measures to the Commission. The DMA, on the other hand, sets out 
obligations in the statute itself, which designated ga tekeepers are required to 
implement within six months of designation.  
Stakeholder feedback has highlighted that the DCB’s comp aratively lower 
quantitative thresholds could lead to larger-coverage, resulti ng in inadvertent 
capture of fast-growing domestic firms and start-ups that do no t pose 
systemic risks. This may disincentivise scaling, hinder innovation,  and deter 
long-term investment in India’s burgeoning digital commerce space. In 
addition, by imposing obligations on large digital pla tforms that serve as 
critical intermediaries for market access, the DCB may indirectly con strain 
the ability of start-ups and smaller businesses to leverage these  platforms for 
visibility, reach, and customer acquisition.”  
1.30 In this regard, the CCI has further added in their w ritten replies as follows:- 
 “ Scope and applicability 
“The Digital Markets Act (DMA) in the EU is applicable to the fo llowing 10 
(ten) Core Platform Services (CPS): 
 
a) Online intermediation services; 
b) Online search engines; 
c) Online social networking services; 
d) Video-sharing platform services; 

19 
 
e) Number-independent interpersonal communication services;  
f) Operating systems; 
g) Cloud computing services; 
h) Advertising services; 
i) Web browsers; 
j) Virtual assistants. 
 
India’s Draft Digital Competition Bill (DCB) 2024 is appli cable to the 
following 9 (ten) Core Digital Services (CDS): 
 
 (a)  Online search engines;  
 (b)  Online social networking services;  
 (c) Video-sharing platform services;  
 (d)  Interpersonal communications services;  
 (e) Operating systems;  
 (f)  Web browsers;  
 (g)  Cloud services;  
 (h)  Advertising services; and  
 (i)  Online intermediation services 
 
Thus, the draft DCB in India is applicable to 9 (nine) of the 10 (ten) digital 
services covered under the DMA in the EU (excluding virtual assistants).  
 
Obligations 
Obligations pertaining to the following areas are in cluded in both the draft 
DCB and the DMA–  
 Fair dealing  
 Self-preferencing  
 Anti-steering 
 Tying and bundling  
 Use of non-public business user data to compete, interm ixing/ 
cross- usage of data, data portability 
 Installation of third-party applications/changing of  default settings”  
 

20 
 
1.31 Asked to share the experience of UK etc. where ex-ante  framework has 
been introduced, the CCI has submitted their written response as under:- 
“The European Union (EU) and the United Kingdom (UK) have in troduced 
comprehensive legislations to regulate competition in digi tal markets in their 
respective jurisdictions, establishing ex-ante obligations for  designated large 
digital platforms (gatekeepers/platforms with strategic market st atus). These 
regimes are still in the early stages of implementation, and as a result, 
enforcement experience is currently limited for CCI to draw upon. CCI is 
closely monitoring the developments to assess the impact, effectiveness, and 
challenges associated with enforcing ex-ante rules in digit al markets. CCI 
has engaged in bilateral meetings with competition auth orities in the EU and 
the UK to better understand their legal frameworks, implement ation 
processes, and resource needs.  
The status of enforcement of ex-ante legislation for digita l markets in the EU 
and UK is summarised below.  
EU 
The Digital Markets Act (DMA) of the European Union aims at 
comprehensively regulating the gatekeeper power of the large st digital 
companies. The Digital Markets Act (DMA) came into force on 1 N ovember 
2022 and became applicable on 2 May 2023.  
The European Commission designated six companies (Alphabet, Am azon, 
Apple, ByteDance, Meta and Microsoft) as gatekeepers on Sep tember 6, 
2023. These designated gatekeepers submitted their complia nce reports 
within the statutory deadline of six months in March 2024. Booking Holdings 
was designated as gatekeeper on 13 May 2024. It has submit ted its 
compliance report in November 2024.  
UK  
The Digital Markets, Competition and Consumers (DMCC) Act 2024 a ims to 
promote competition in fast-moving digital markets, while p rotecting UK 
consumers and businesses from unfair or harmful practices by the  very 
largest technology firms. The DMCC Act 2024 received the Ro yal Assent on 
24 May 2024 and the digital markets competition regime came into force on 
01 January 2025.  
It is also pertinent to mention that in Japan, the Act on Improving 
Transparency and Fairness of Digital Platforms, 2020 (TFDP Act), e ffective 
since February 1, 2021, operates as an ex-ante enforcement law  with a 
limited goal of ensuring transparency and fairness in the con duct of digital 
platforms. Under the Act, Specified Digital Platforms must make  certain 
disclosures to user providers and general users. As such, the Act  is not a 
comprehensive legislation for regulating digital markets.”  
  

21 
 
1.32 One of the stakeholders has suggested that the p assage of DCB is 
needed to identify and address Anti-Competitive Practices o f digital 
gatekeepers, specifically: (i) Self-referencing; exploitative pa yment policies, 
restrictive and exclusionary practices of app stores; Tying and b undling of 
services; Arbitrary deplatforming and lack of process transparency.  The Ministry 
has responded to this suggestion as follows:- 
“Views/Comments from the Ministry: 
The DCB recommended by CDCL includes specific provisions to d eal with 
anti-competitive behaviours like self-preferencing, tying a nd bundling and  
restrictive practices of app stores. 
 
1.33 Responding to one of the important suggestions recei ved from a 
stakeholder that inadequacy of existing ex-post enforcement mechanisms and the 
urgent need for a forward-looking, preventive (ex-ante) legisl ative framework, such 
as the proposed Digital Competition Bill (DCB), the Minis try in their written reply 
has stated as under:- 
“Views/Comments of the Ministry:- 
The Digital Competition Bill (DCB) recommended by the Commit tee on 
Digital Competition Law (CDCL) provides for an ex-ante ap proach to the 
regulation of digital markets. 
 
1.34 The National Competition Policy (NCP) was prepared in  2011, but the 
same has not been implemented yet. The Supreme Court in 2 018, in CCI versus 
Bharti Airtel Case, emphasised the need for NCP to enhance market efficiency and 
employment. On being asked the current status of the NCP, the Ministry in their 
written replies has submitted the following:- 
 
“Cabinet Note along with National Competition Policy was  sent to Cabinet 
Secretariat on 04.07.2014 seeking approval of the Cabin et on the National 
Competition Policy. The Cabinet considered the same in i ts meeting held on 
09.07.2014 and deferred it.” 
 
  

22 
 
D. CCI’s EXPERIENCE:  
1.35 The CCI has been instrumental in maintaining com petitive markets and 
ensuring that businesses operate fairly within the framework of the Competition 
Act, 2002. In its regulatory toolkit, the CCI employs a du al approach of 
enforcement and advocacy, which has been crucial in regulating  markets, 
particularly in the fast-evolving digital economy. While e nforcement ensures 
accountability and deterrence, advocacy fosters awareness an d voluntary 
compliance, creating a balanced regulatory environment. By l everaging these twin 
tools, the CCI has not only addressed existing competition  concerns but also laid 
the groundwork for a more competitive, innovative, and consu mer-centric digital 
economy. As markets continue to evolve, the CCI’s proactive and  adaptive 
strategies will remain critical in shaping India’s competition landscape. 
1.36 In this regard, the Chairperson, CCI has deposed befo re the Committee 
on 20 January, 2025 as follows:- 
“… Fair competition, as we know, ensures fair access and redu ce entry 
barriers. It provides a conducive environment for businesses to  thrive and 
bring huge benefits to the consumer in the form of choices, l ower prices. 
However, despite these widespread benefits, even in the l iberalized markets, 
competition may not happen on its own because of informatio n asymmetries, 
anti-competitive practices followed by the participants, cartelization and so 
on. Because of this, the requirement of a market regulator li ke CCI is felt. 
Therefore, in this backdrop, following the recommenda tions of the Raghavan 
Committee, Competition Act, 2002 was passed by the Parliamen t in 
December, 2002. It received the assent of the President of India on January 
13, 2003, thereby becoming the law of land from that da te. However, 
because of some legal challenges, there was a delay in the  substantive 
provisions getting notified, which eventually got noti fied only on May 20, 
2009, relating to prohibition of anti-competitive agre ements, and abuse of 
dominant position… 
…There were some legislative challenges. Although the body was set up, the 
substantive provisions could not be implemented. Effectively, f rom 2009, CCI 
started its functioning and the merger control regime came i nto being in 
2011. In between, there have been some amendments in 200 7, 2009 and 
2017. In 2023, there were some substantive amendments wh ich have 
strengthened the functioning of CCI. The objectives of t he Competition Act 
are to prevent practices having adverse effects on competi tion, to promote 
and sustain competition in markets, to protect the interest  of consumers and 
to ensure freedom of trade.  

23 
 
These are the various pillars on which the functioning of CCI rests. Firstly, 
there are enforcement functions which are covered under Sections 3 and 4 of 
the Act. Under the Act, anti-competitive agreements ente red between 
enterprises are prohibited. These agreements can be horizon tal agreements, 
vertical agreements or other kinds of agreements. Section 4 of  the Act 
prohibits abuse of dominant position by dominant enterprises.  This can take 
various forms in terms of imposition of unfair conditions, u nfair prices, 
discrimination, denial of market access, leveraging and so on.  
Sections 5 and 6 lay down the merger regime wherein the Co mmission 
regulates the mergers and acquisitions. The merger regime is e x-ante, 
mandatory and suspensory, which means that all amalgamatio ns, 
acquisitions and mergers which meet the thresholds in terms of assets, 
turnovers and deal value, which is laid in the Act, are re quired to be notified. 
The Commission assesses them for anti-competitive effects, if an y, and the 
Commission can either approve them without modifications, w ith 
modifications, and in appropriate cases, it can also block the mergers.  
Apart from that, there are advisory functions which have been vested with the 
Commission, wherein the Commission provides opinion on variou s policy 
formulations on the likely impact on competition of these policies. 
Lastly, the Commission, under Section 49(3) of the Act, has be en vested with 
advocacy functions, wherein it undertakes training, de velops a culture of 
competition compliance and does advocacy programmes…  
…the progress made since inception, the total number of ca ses received 
under the enforcement antitrust cases are around 1,300, o ut of which 1,168 
cases have been disposed of. In these cases, in around 500  cases where 
prima facie a contravention was found, these cases were referred  for 
investigation to the investigating arm of CCI, which is th e Director-General, 
and thereafter, on the basis of the findings of the inve stigation report, inquiry 
was conducted and appropriate orders  were passed. Cases whe re at the 
prima facie stage, no contravention was found, they were closed at the outset 
itself.  
On the merger control regime, so far around 1,200 cases ha ve been 
received, out of which 1,109 cases have been disposed of wi thout 
modification. In 31 cases, the approval was given with mod ifications to 
address anti-competitive effects, and as of now, only 14 cases are 
pending……..Advocacy serves as a proactive mechanism to foster a cu lture 
of competition in the country. Over the years, CCI has unde rtaken various 
initiatives to embed competition principles and enhance co mpliance through 
education, collaboration, and policy influence. To hi ghlight a few key 
initiatives, CCI runs the internship program under which we provide 
internships to around 15 students every month who are purs uing law, 
economic, and other fields in various universities across the co untry. In order 
to provide insights about the various provisions of the Act a nd to disseminate 

24 
 
information about latest developments, CCI publishes ad vocacy booklets, 
frequently asked questions, and newsletters. CCI also has a State resource 
person scheme, wherein retired officials are engaged to un dertake 
programmes at the State- level. Regional workshops are also  carried out by 
the Commission from time to time, and we engage with univers ities and 
educational institutions. Advocacy programmes with corporates,  trade bodies 
and associations are also undertaken on a regular basis… 
… More than 300 programmes every year are being conducted. As I 
mentioned earlier, State Resource Person Scheme, which was la unched in 
January, 2020, has been used for training State official s especially 
Procurement Officers on competition principles and their appli cation in 
governance and public procurement.  
CCI also conducts in-depth market studies to analyse competi tion dynamics 
in specific sectors. In fact, CCI has conducted market studie s in various 
areas. One of the prominent studies is the e-commerce market study, which 
provided key insights into the landscape of the e-commerce se ctor. In order 
to address information asymmetry and to ensure competition on  merits, CCI 
recommended various transparency measures in search rankings, da ta use, 
reviews and rating mechanism, revision of contracts, and discount policy. 
Given the increasing role that AI is likely to take in shap ing the digital 
economy, CCI has also pioneered a market study on cutting-ed ge topics of 
Artificial Intelligence and Competition. This was initiate d in 2024 and is 
underway. Through these kinds of studies, CCI has been con tributing to 
global discourse and enhancing India’s thought leadership  in competition 
policy. CCI is also leading a market study on renewable en ergy under the 
BRICS framework. 
In recent times, CCI has enhanced its global footprint. It has strengthened 
international ties through cooperation agreements and a ctive participation in 
forums like OECD, UNCTAD and ICN, reaffirming India’s role a s a global 
influencer in competition law and policy. CCI became a mem ber of ICN 
Steering Group in October, 2023. CCI executed MoUs with fore ign 
counterpart agencies of Russia, US, Australia, EU, Canada, BRI CS, Brazil, 
Japan and Mauritius. We have signed MoU with Egyptian Compet ition 
Authority also on 25th June, 2023 during the visit of the hon. Prime Minister of 
India. CCI is also a track lead for competition chapters in  bilateral and 
multilateral FTAs.  
Based on the experience gained and in light of the rapi d changes which were 
happening in the economy, and following the recommenda tions of the 
Committee which was set up to review the Competition Act, t he Competition 
(Amendment) Act, 2023 was enacted in 2023 and it has brough t about 
several changes. On the merger regime, a significant change has been that it 
has expedited the merger review timelines by reducing the ti me-limit for 
approval of combinations (Mergers and Acquisitions) from 210 da ys to 150 
days. Value of transaction has been introduced as anothe r criteria for 

25 
 
notifying combinations to CCI. If the value of transacti on in connection with 
acquisition of any control, shares, and voting rights, exceed s Rs. 2000 crore, 
with substantial operations in India, it would require f iling. Earlier, these kinds 
of transactions were falling through the gaps. There were certain transactions 
where low assets and turnover were there, and, therefo re, they were not 
getting captured in the earlier regime where the thresholds  were based only 
on assets and turnovers. But now, with this value of transacti on threshold 
introduced, such transactions will also get assessed for their competition 
impact. 
In order to develop a trust-based regime, and also, keeping  in mind that anti-
trust cases often take significant time because of multiple ap peals provision, 
which is there in the legislative framework, settlement an d commitment 
mechanisms have been introduced. They allow voluntary remedies to be 
offered in certain anti-competitive cases. The settlement/c ommitment 
mechanism, for instance, applies to certain anti-competitive  agreements and 
abuse of dominance cases. Settlement application can be  filed after a receipt 
of an investigation report but prior to passing of a final  order by the 
Commission. And commitment application can be filed after p rima facie order 
but prior to receipt of an investigation report. So, thes e mechanisms are 
expected to expedite resolution of cases.  
The Act has also increased regulatory oversight through ot her mechanisms 
such as leniency plus regime which allows a cartel participan t to make CCI 
aware about other cartels which may be going on and throug h this, they get 
additional discounts. Then, there are hub-and-spoke carte ls. These 
essentially cover those enterprises which may not be part of the horizontal 
agreements but facilitate these kinds of agreements, and now, they are within 
the net of the horizontal agreements. The Act has expand ed the scope of 
anti-competitive agreements beyond horizontal and vertical a greements and 
now, covers all types of agreements. Also, the parties who wi sh to avail 
appeals at the Appellate Forum need to deposit 25 per ce nt of the penalty 
amount before proceeding with the appeal, and the pena lties are now 
indexed to global turnover.  
In order to operationalise the Competition (Amendment) Act, CCI took upon 
itself in right earnest the drafting of regulations, an d these regulations were 
notified after extensive public consultation to ensure in clusivity and 
transparency. In fact, in the last year, a lot of work has b een done on this 
front and various regulations including General Regulations , Combination 
Regulations, Guidelines for Determination of Monetary Pena lty, 
Settlement/Commitment Regulations, Lesser Penalty Regulations, have been 
put in place, and now, the Act is fully functional with  the entire framework 
being there.  
Now, coming to the topic of digitalisation of markets. Th e Indian economy 
has been going through a transformative phase which has bee n 
characterised by rapid adoption of technologies, and these have redefined 

26 
 
market structures and introduced new business models and arrangem ents. 
Consumer behaviours have changed significantly with users adopting digital 
means to procure goods and services. On the one hand, it h as created huge 
opportunities, and on the other hand, they have posed  novel challenges. In 
this backdrop, CCI has been continuously adapting its app roach to respond 
in a dynamic and targeted manner. And CCI has followed a nuanced 
approach so as to ensure a balance between the need to have incentives of 
innovation and at the same time, address anti-competitive practices in the 
markets. 
To mention some of the opportunities, now, there are va rious innovations at 
high pace which are happening. Novel efficiencies have emerg ed. 
Businesses can use digital platforms to expand reach, reduce  operational 
costs, and enhance visibility. Consumers have benefitted mult i-fold through 
greater convenience and access to diverse products and services. COVID-19 
acted as a catalyst and accelerated digital adoption, an d as a result, 
businesses are leveraging technologies for market expansion  across 
borders.  
At the same time, this has led to various novel challenges.  One of the 
prominent challenges is the concentration of power in th e hands of a few 
large platforms that serve as intermediaries between consumers a nd 
businesses. These platforms have assumed the role of a g atekeeper, as a 
result of which, they are able to design the business environ ment, set the 
rules, and influence the market outcomes. Digital markets have expanded 
multi-product ecosystems which allow the platforms to leverage dominance 
across markets. Entrenched dominance creates insurmountable barrie rs to 
entry, stifling innovation and limiting competition.  
Our experience in digital markets has shown that there are s everal unique 
characteristics of digital markets which distinguish them from t he traditional 
brick and mortar markets. The first important, being the netwo rk effect, 
platforms like social media often thrive on user density wh ereby it makes the 
other competitors very difficult to achieve, scale and compete. 
It also confers huge data advantage by virtue of their abi lity to access, collect 
and process data. It results in development of ecosystem do minance with 
several interlinked products thereby foreclosing competitio n for competitors. 
Because of the gatekeeper position, they are conferred with h uge bargaining 
power as a result of which they act as intermediaries and impo se unfair 
conditions. Also, these markets are often characterised by zero price markets 
where consumers pay by way of data and this has led to ch ange in 
competition analysis where non-price factors such as innovation,  privacy and 
quality also assume significance. 
Because of these changes in the market dynamics, now several n ew anti-
competitive practices and strategies have been adopted by b ig tech. Self-
preferencing is one such strategy which has been widely exami ned across 

27 
 
jurisdictions whereby the platforms favour their own products and services at 
the expense of third-party products and services.  
They may enter into exclusive agreements thereby restrictin g partners for 
dealing with competitors and limiting their access to critic al input suppliers or 
distribution channels. They may indulge in predatory pricin g and selling 
goods and providing services at a price which is below the co st of production 
of goods or provision of services with a view to reducing co mpetition or 
eliminate the competitors. This may help the consumers in the  form of low 
prices in the short run, but in the long run it takes away th e choices and 
allows the dominant entities to raise prices.  
Tying and bundling is another very common strategy which is bein g adopted 
by mandating bundled product purchases and enhancing th eir presences 
across markets. These platforms, because of huge bargaining power which 
they possess, also exploit by imposing unfair terms on smaller businesses.  
In the last decade through its enforcement decisions, C CI has been 
instrumental in maintaining competitive markets and checking a nti-
competitive practices. We have looked into numerous cases pert aining to 
these activities like self-preferencing, exclusivity, leveraging of dominance 
etc. We have been tailoring our remedies, keeping in mind  the unique 
features like multi-sided markets and data-driven markets. CCI is c ommitted 
to ensure contestable and innovative digital markets.  
To mention a few significant cases which have been decided  by CCI in 
recent past, the first case was the Google search bias case where Google 
was found to be indulging in search bias in online gen eral search which 
deprived users of alternative choices. There, negotiated  agreements were 
entered which limited publishers’ ability to use competing  search services. 
Google was found to leverage its dominance and strengthe n its position in 
online syndicate search services. Based on the inquiry, CCI imposed a 
penalty of Rs.135 crore and directed Google to cease and de sist from anti-
competitive activities and directed it to carry out certain remedial measures. 
In the Google Android matter where Google was found to b e making 
mandatory pre-installation of Google Mobile Suit under its MADA agreement 
with prominent placement on Android mobile platforms, it  was found to be 
leveraging dominance in the online search market, denyin g market access to 
competing search app. It was found that through anti-for k agreements, it 
reduced OEM’s ability to develop and sell devices with Androi d forks and 
limiting innovation and harming consumers. Again, in this case, besides 
imposing a penalty of over Rs.1,000 crore, CCI issued cease an d desist 
directions and gave specific remedies to address anti-competitive conduct.  
In the Google pay matter, it was found that Google made  mandatory use of 
Google Play billing system for in-app purchases of digital g oods which was 
found to be anti-competitive. It imposed discriminatory condi tions on its own 

28 
 
apps like YouTube which bypassed GPPS fees. Google leveraged its 
dominance in the mobile operating system and app store marke ts to protect 
its position in downstream markets. After a detailed inquiry,  CCI imposed a 
penalty of more than Rs.900 crore and directed Google to ce ase and desist 
besides carrying out certain remedies.  
In the most recent case of WhatsApp, CCI found WhatsApp 2 021 policy 
update implemented on a take-it-or-leave-it basis to have un dermined user 
autonomy, leveraged network effects, and it constituted a buse of dominant 
position. Sharing of WhatsApp user data with Meta for no n-service-related 
purposes was found to have created entry barriers for competi tors in the 
display advertising market. So, CCI imposed a penalty of aro und Rs.200 
crore on Meta, directed Meta to cease and desist from these an ti-competitive 
activities and directed it to carry out certain remedial measures.  
Earlier, in a case involving MakeMyTrip in the hotel aggre gation services 
market, CCI found imposition of price and room parity oblig ations to be anti-
competitive. There were exclusivity conditions restricting hotel partners to list 
on other platforms and also denial of market access wherein t hrough 
commercial arrangements with OYO, others like Fab Hotels and Treebo were 
delisted from MMT.  In this case also, CCI imposed monetary p enalty of over 
Rs.200 crore and directed MMT to cease and desist and imposed  remedial 
measures.  
To maintain a competitive environment in dynamic economic s cenario, it is 
critical that rules and regulations evolve to keep pace with  the changes. The 
expost anti-trust framework is designed to cater to situations where the anti-
competitive conduct has already taken place. However, giv en the specific 
unique characteristics of the digital markets, it is found th at the markets tend 
to become concentrated in a very short period of time and th e anti-
competitive practices may irreparably harm the markets in a very short time.  
In order to address this situation, the Parliamentary Standi ng Committee had 
recommended to see whether ex-ante framework for digital markets can be 
introduced and, in this backdrop, a committee was set up to  review and see 
the need for the ex-ante regulations and suggest a framew ork. Based on the 
CDCL recommendations, a draft digital competition law fo r systematically 
significant digital enterprises has been put in place an d this aligns with the 
move towards ex-ante regulation of digital markets which is taking place 
globally.  
These are some of the challenges which we foresee because  of the 
technological complexity. Artificial intelligence, machine l earning, blockchain 
are reshaping markets and it is very important to understand th ese 
underlying technologies. Most of these digital platforms  transcend 
geographical national boundaries and there are global p ractices which 
require international collaboration. Many of these activi ties have interface 
with other sectoral regulators and other regulators such as data privacy and 

29 
 
cyber security regulators, thereby requiring a regular collaborati on with these 
agencies. 
In this backdrop, CCI's approach has been to have a proacti ve engagement, 
and we have already set up a Digital Markets Division i n CCI which is a 
dedicated unit for digital market challenges to ensure ag ility and 
effectiveness in regulating digital markets. This unit is a lso steering digital 
competition bill, and it is in the process of engaging d ata scientists, IT 
experts, etc. So going forward, we feel that understanding  technological 
advancements, and to adapt to challenges in the digit al economy are going 
to be extremely critical. CCI will continue to undertake advo cacy enforcement 
and regulatory actions to ensure a competitive marketplace and ensure that 
the markets are competitive, innovative, and consumer-friendly as we  go 
along….” 
1.37 When further asked as to can the CCI proactively foste r an environment of 
healthy competition in the market, rather than just reacti ng to anti-competitive 
practices, the CCI has submitted the following in their written replies as under:- 
“Efficient public procurement is critical for implementing po licies and 
programs that directly impact citizens, ensuring optimal utiliza tion of public 
funds. To achieve cost-effective procurement, it is esse ntial that the 
processes adopted by government agencies are designed to promo te 
competition. While the primary responsibility for fostering he althy competition 
in public procurement process lies with the procuring agency, CCI has played 
a pivotal role in ensuring a competitive procurement lands cape. As part of its 
enforcement efforts, CCI identifies and penalizes entitie s engaged in anti-
competitive practices such as cartelization and bid-rigging.  By imposing strict 
penalties, CCI deters potential offenders and ensures th at the procurement 
process is free from collusion.  
 
Additionally, CCI fulfils its advocacy mandate by equippin g procurement 
officers with tools and knowledge to prevent collusion an d design 
competition-efficient systems. In this regard, CCI has issued a  
comprehensive ‘Diagnostics Toolkit Towards Competitive Tenders - for 
Public Procurement Officers’ which helps agencies detect and mitigate bid-
rigging and assess procurement processes from a competition perspective.  
 
CCI also engages with Government departments through worksh ops and 
training sessions to educate officials on identifying cartel s and fostering 
competitive practices. In this regard, the State Resource Person  (SRP) 
outreach is an initiative undertaken by CCI to bolster competition advocacy at 
the state level. This program is designed to engage with ke y stakeholders, 
including state governments, public officials, and local in stitutions, to raise 
awareness about competition laws and their importance in  fostering a fair 
and competitive market environment.”  
-39) 

30 
 
1.38 To a specific query as to what steps have been taken to educate, engage 
and influence stakeholders to adopt pro-competitive practices voluntarily i.e. how 
many workshops, seminars, webinars etc. have been conducted i n the past three 
years and what has been the profile and participation in the same, the CCI has 
stated the following in their written replies:- 
 
”...Section 49 (3) of the Competition Act, 2002 (Act) mandates C CI to take 
suitable measures for promotion of competition advocacy or culture, creating 
awareness and imparting training about competition issues.  
 
Accordingly, CCI regularly engages with stakeholders such as j udiciary, 
industry, academia, central & state governments, central and sta te public 
sector undertakings (PSUs), professional bodies, apex industry 
chambers,trade associations, training academies etc.  
 
With the industry, competition advocacy is aimed at imparti ng training to 
ensure voluntary competition compliance, and is undertaken  through apex 
industry chambers such as CII, ASSOCHAM, FICCI, PHDCCI etc., tra de 
associations and professional bodies such as ICAI, ICSI etc.  
 
With the Government, at both Central and State level, t he issue of public 
procurement and competition issues therein, is addressed thro ugh 
conducting advocacy programmes for the procurement officers. Tra ining is 
imparted on important topics such as warning signals of bid ri gging, how to 
file Information/ Reference with CCI etc. 
 
With the Academia, focus is on creating awareness and building capacities in 
the field of competition law among students and faculty o f higher institutions 
in law, economics, business and finance. This is done th rough conduct of 
advocacy programmes, internships, sponsoring of moot court comp etitions, 
etc.  
 

31 
 
The details of advocacy events (workshops, seminars, webinars etc.), 
undertaken with diverse stakeholders during the past thr ee years, are as 
below:  
 
Years  Advocacy Events with State 
Government Departments/ 
PSUs etc. 
 
Advocacy Events with Industry 
Chambers/ Trade Associations/ 
Professional bodies/ Educational 
Institutions 
 
2022-23 232 153 
2023-24 245 120 
2024-25 192 47 
 
1.39 Hon’ble Minister of Corporate Affairs replied inter-alia to an unstarred 
question number 301 on 5 February, 2024 in Lok Sabha tha t the CCI had issued 
self-regulation advisories in two sectors, namely e-commerce secto r and cab 
aggregator industry. When the Committee desired to know th e exact dates when 
these two advisories were issued; and if the CCI had subseque ntly assessed the 
effectiveness of these advisories, particularly in light of  the evolving nature of the 
cab, bike, and taxi aggregator industry,  the CCI has subm itted the following 
written replies:- 
“The E-commerce Advisory was issued on 8 th January 2020 as part of the 
Study Report on E-commerce…….  
 
Based on the observations and recommendations of the Market St udy dated 
09.09.2022 on “Competition and Regulatory Issues Related to the Taxi and 
Cab Aggregator Industry: With Special Reference to Surge Pric ing in the 
Indian Context” and the mandate of the Commission, int er alia, to ensure fair 
competition and for overall well-functioning ecosystem, foll owing advisory 
was issued:  
 
While any anti-competitive conduct of Cab Aggregators (CAs) may a ttract 
enforcement action, the CAs are advised to adopt self-regu latory measures 
to address information asymmetry and transparency concerns, some  of 
which are illustrated below:  
 
Description and Calculation of Fares 
(i) Set out on the website and more importantly on CA mob ile 
platform/application (as this is what is largely utilised by both riders and 
drivers) a general description of various components/heads (in pla in and 

32 
 
easily understandable language) of total fare. Any chan ge thereof be 
reflected in a timely manner. 
(ii) Break up of total fare so as to appropriately reflect the surge component in 
the invoice generated on the App and sent to the riders and drivers. 
(iii) Set out a clear and transparent cancellation policy. In  the event of 
cancellation of ride by the rider, the sharing of the can cellation charge 
between driver and CAs be reflected in a transparent manner to the drivers. 
 
Surge Pricing 
(i) Formulate clear and transparent policy on surge pricing  and dissemination 
of the same to both riders and drivers, including adequate transparency with 
respect to the sharing of revenue on account of surge betw een the drivers 
and the CAs. Any change in policy be communicated, in a timely manner. 
 
(ii) The surge charged for each ride be reflected in the invoice. 
 
Collection, use, and data sharing 
 
(i) Set out a clear and transparent policy on data that is collected on the CA 
platform, the use of such data by the platform and also th e potential and 
actual sharing of such data with third parties or related  entities. The scope, 
extent and purpose for data collection be also set out cle arly. Any changes 
be disseminated, in a timely manner. 
 
Non-Discriminatory Allocation of Rides 
(i) Algorithm while allocating rides amongst various availab le cabs, should 
not give preference to the vehicle owned, directly or indirectly, by the said CA 
platform. 
 
The cab aggregator advisory is available on the followin g 
link:
https://www.cci.gov.in/economics-research/market-studies/details/40/1.  
 
Pursuant to the issue of Advisory, no information alleging a nti-competitive 
practices against cab aggregators has been received by CCI.”  
 
1.40 Regarding the CCI's role as a competition watchdog since its inception, 
the Committee seek to understand the specific metrics used to  assess its 
effectiveness in promoting a competitive culture and t o identify instances where its 
interventions have yielded demonstrably positive market outco mes, the CCI has 
submitted the following post-evidence written replies:- 
“CCI is an expert body established by the Competition Act 2 002 (‘The Act’). 
CCI has been established to prevent practices having adverse effect on 

33 
 
competition, to promote and sustain competition in markets, to  protect the 
interests of consumers and to ensure freedom of trade carrie d on by other 
participants in markets, in India, and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. The Act prohibits anti-competitive ag reements (Section 3), 
abuse of dominant position (Section 4) and provides for regulation of 
Combinations (Mergers and Acquisitions) (Sections 5 & 6). 
 
CCI in its journey so far has examined more than 1160 antitrust cases in 
varying sectors of the economy viz. automobile, railways, sports, di gital 
markets, transport, mineral extraction, entertainment, real-est ate, 
pharmaceuticals, etc. The Commission has been able to achieve  a 
remarkable performance in meeting its mandate.  
 
In pharmaceutical distribution chain, earlier, the chemists a nd druggists’ 
associations all over the country were mandating NOC from th e association 
for obtaining stockist licences, which acted as a barrier bet ween the 
pharmaceutical company and its stockists. Through intervention of the 
Commission in multiple cases, the pharmaceutical companies are now free to 
grant stockist licences depending on their business requirements rather than 
based on the discretion of the chemists and druggists’ associ ations. The 
consumers are having an increased access to medicines and that too at 
lower prices. 
 
Similarly, the interventions of the Commission in the Spo rts sector have 
resulted in removing restrictions on participation of players i n local 
tournaments and organization of such tournaments imposed b y various state 
level and national associations.  
 
The Commission has also examined various cases pertaining to the 
entertainment sector involving issues such as restriction on exh ibition of 
dubbed movies. The Commission found that such anti-competi tive conduct 
resulted in limiting production and supply of dubbed movi es and their 
screening in violation of Section 3(1) read with Section 3(3)(b ) of the Act, 
causing an appreciable adverse effect on competition. The C ommission 
directed the concerned parties to cease and desist from imposi ng such 
restrictions. 
 
In the automobile sector, the Commission examined the issue o f sale of 
spare parts and repair services. CCI issued an order directing th e automobile 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) to ensure easy availabil ity of 
spare parts and diagnostic tools in the market. Further, Ori ginal Equipment 
Suppliers (OESs) were permitted to sell spare parts freely in th e open market 
without restrictions. The Commission also directed the OEMs to di sclose 
spare parts pricing, warranty terms, and service provisions to enhan ce 
transparency and competition, while ensuring no barriers we re placed on 
independent repairers and garages.
 
 

34 
 
CCI has also examined multiple cases relating to cartelizati on/ bid-rigging in 
public procurement tenders issued by various Government autho rities 
including Indian Railways, wherein the erring parties were  penalised as well 
as cease & desist directions were issued.  
 
 With regard to combination (M&A) cases, it is submitted that since the 
combination review regime came into effect from June 2011, CCI has 
received a total of 1229 combination notices from diverse sector s such as 
financial markets, pharmaceutical and healthcare, Information Te chnology & 
Services, PVC & chemicals, auto & auto components, power, mining & 
metals, media & entertainment, food & refined oil etc. Out  of these, 1215 
caseshave been disposed of. 31 cases were disposed of with be havioural 
and structural modifications/remedies leading to ex-ante red ressal of likely 
adverse effect on competition in India due to the combin ations. The 
Commission's intervention to restore competition through effe ctive remedies 
has been demonstrated in several cases. Some of such cases are: 
 
i. In the combination involving Tata Sons Private Limited, T alace Private 
Limited, Singapore Airlines Limited, Air India Limited and  Tata SIA Airlines 
Limited (Vistara), a commitment to maintain minimum capacities on certain 
identified routes was required as a remedy to address competition concerns. 
 
ii. In Bayer Aktiengesellschaft and Monsanto Company matter , remedies 
included the divestiture of Bayer’s seed technology and glu fosinate-
ammonium (a herbicide) business. Monsanto was required to divest 26% 
indirect shareholding and rights in an Indian company in ord er to eliminate 
overlaps in Bt cotton seeds, hybrid rice and millet seeds. In addition to the 
divestiture, several behavioural remedies were also required to reduce the 
anti-competitive effects of the multiple overlaps. Amongst o thers, the 
remedies ensured farmers’ access to affordable agricultural inputs. 
 
iii. In Linde Aktiengesellschaft and Praxair, Inc. case, th e remedies included 
the divestiture of Linde’s and Praxair’s certain assets enga ged in the supply 
of industrial gases in India with a view to allow entry of a new player or afford 
an opportunity to existing competitors to scale up and pos e effective 
competitive constraints on the merged entity. 
 
iv. In ZF Friedrichshafen AG and WABCO Holdings Inc. case, the remedy 
included the divestiture of 49% shareholding, and all rights and arrangements 
thereof, in Brakes India Private Limited, by ZF, to preserve c ompetition in the 
overlapping product lines. 
 
v. In the combination involving Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Limited and 
Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited, the remedies were the divesti ture of certain 
molecules wherein the combined entity was gaining a positi on, which could 
have caused appreciable adverse effect on competition. The  remedy 
preserved competition and ensured that consumers continued to have 
access to affordable medicines. 
 

35 
 
vi. In Reliance Industries Limited; Viacom18 Media Pvt. Ltd.;  Digital 18 Media 
Limited; Star India Pvt. Ltd.; Star Television Productions Li mited matter, the 
remedy included the sale of certain TV channels. CCI also re quired 
behavioural modifications. 
 
vii. In the combination involving Holcim Limited and Lafarg e S.A. in the 
market for grey cement, the remedies required divestiture of en tire share 
capital of Lafarge India held by Lafarge S.A. As a result  of the intervention, a 
new player (Nirma Limited) entered into the market. 
 
viii. In the combination involving Agrium, Inc. and Potas h Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Inc. (PotashCorp) in the market for potash, t he remedies 
required divestiture of stakes held by PotashCorp in Arab Po tash Company, 
Sociedad Quimica y Minera and Israel Chemicals Limited with intent of 
creating three independent competitors in the market. 
 
It needs to be underscored that structural remedies by thei r very nature 
encourage/promote new entry or allow for expansion by ot her competitors in 
the market as these players can acquire business required to be divested by 
the merging parties. This in itself is demonstrative of positive market outcome 
for competition and consumers.   
 
Besides the above, in some other cases, CCI has also imposed  certain 
remedies including firewall measures to prevent anti-competiti ve behaviour, 
such as the exchange of sensitive information between merging  entities that 
could harm competition. Such behavioural remedies address the  concerns of 
market foreclosure, coordination etc. thereby reinforcing the  competitive 
nature of markets.” 
 
1.41 To a specific query of the Committee as to whethe r the CCI has a 
systematic approach for comparing its regulatory and enforcement capabilities with 
global best practices and those of other prominent antit rust authorities, the CCI 
has submitted written replies as below:- 
“CCI’s approach to both the substantive and procedural aspects  of 
competition law enforcement is continually aligned with international best 
practices. This extends to CCI’s advocacy initiatives and agen cy 
effectiveness strategies as well. In achieving this, the method followed by 
CCI rests on the following: 
 
Legal framework: The statutory framework under the Competition A ct, 2002, 
as amended by the Competition (Amendment) Act 2023, offers the flexibility 
to tailor CCI’s enforcement strategies to sector-specific needs and evolving 
market dynamics. It also equips the Commission with a robust  toolkit, 
including mechanisms such as leniency plus for cartels, settl ement and 
commitment procedures for anti-competitive agreements (other t han 

36 
 
cartels)& abuse of dominant position, and a deal value thre shold (in addition 
to traditional asset/turnover thresholds) for merger notificatio ns. The 
Commission strives to make optimal use of these instruments for  effective 
enforcement and speedy market correction. 
 
International cooperation: CCI actively engages with the g lobal antitrust 
community through multilateral forums like the Internatio nal Competition 
Network (ICN) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation  and 
Development (OECD), and holds bilateral dialogues with foreign competition 
authorities to exchange knowledge, experiences, and best practices. 
 
Research and trend analysis: The Research and Trend Analysis Di vision of 
CCI tracks and analyses global trends in competition enforcemen t, drawing 
insights from international case studies and decisions to unde rstand 
emerging challenges and best practices for addressing complex antitrust 
issues. 
 
Capacity building: CCI focuses on continuous building o f its institutional 
capacity by organizing training programs and workshops for its staf f in 
collaboration with foreign competition authorities. Secon dments to 
competition authorities in mature jurisdictions are also organised to equip the 
professional staff with the latest developments in antitrust  toolkit and 
regulatory practices. 
 
Periodic review and amendment of regulations: CCI conducts c ontinuous 
internal evaluations through proactive and regular engag ement with 
stakeholders. Regulations are periodically reviewed and upda ted, taking into 
account stakeholder inputs and global best practices, to stre amline 
processes, facilitate compliance, and ensure timely enforcement a nd merger 
reviews. 
 
By benchmarking itself against global standards, CCI aims to enhance the 
effectiveness of its enforcement and regulatory measures whi le promoting 
fair competition in the Indian market.” 
1.42 When further asked as to what international best p ractices does CCI 
consider most relevant for strengthening its regulatory capabi lities, especially 
within the dynamic landscape of digital market, the CCI  has submitted the 
following written replies:-
 
“As CCI strengthens its regulatory capacity in digital markets,  it considers 
several international best practices as relevant. These in clude a flexible, 
nuanced and dynamic regulatory approach that can appropri ately respond to 
emerging market circumstances and rapid technological advancements. 
Strong emphasis on evidence-based assessments ensures that decisio ns 
are grounded in robust analysis of market structure and conduct. Additionally, 

37 
 
cooperation with competition authorities in other juris dictions and sharing 
best practices helps address cross-border challenges posed by di gital 
platforms. Finally, following a transparent and consultati ve approach that 
includes views of various stakeholders helps foster a balanced and effective 
regulatory environment.”  
 
1.43 When asked to clarify as to whether the Production Li nked Incentive (PLI) 
scheme, which  has shown positive results for participating i ndustries, causing a 
concern about its anti-competitive nature, specifically by se lecting only a few 
beneficiaries in each sector and undermining broader mark et fairness, the CCI in 
their written replies has stated as follows:- 
“The Production-Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme is a policy initiat ive by the 
Government of India aimed at boosting domestic manufacturin g, enhancing 
exports, and making Indian industries globally competitive.  
 
As the statutory body responsible for promoting and sustainin g competition in 
markets, CCI remains committed to ensuring that competition principles are 
upheld. CCI, in its advocacy role, has been engaging with relevant 
stakeholders, including the Government, to highlight the importance of 
ensuring that schemes and policies do not inadvertently le ad to anti-
competitive outcomes. CCI provides inputs to the government in formulating 
policies, if sought. However, the ultimate policy decis ion rests with the 
Government.”   
 
1.44 Asked to clarify the specific role and authority of the  CCI in situations 
where external entities are threatened or deterred from p articipating in a tender, 
potentially impacting fair competition and market integri ty, the CCI has submitted 
the following written response:- 
“As regards threatening of outside players to not to participat e in a tender or 
to not to enter into a market despite allocation of ten der to them, the 
provisions of Section 3(3) of the Competition Act, 2002,  clearly prohibit any 
anti-competitive agreements which may lead to limiting or co ntrolling the 
supply of goods or provision of services in the market or lea d to allocation of 
geographical area(s) of a market amongst various competitors. A s such, 
anytime an  information has been received in this regard, th e Commission 
has examined the matter and taken action wherever required.”  
 
1.45 The evolving role of the CCI reflects the broader tra nsformation of India’s 
economy into a digital economy. The Competition Act provid es crucial tools to 

38 
 
address the unique challenges of digital markets. However,  continued vigilance, 
collaboration, and capacity building are essential to en sure that India’s digital 
economy remains competitive, innovative, and consumer friendl y. The CCI’s 
proactive stance will play a central role in shaping a fair  and inclusive digital 
landscape for the future. 
1.46 The Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs during the ora l evidence on 28 
April, 2025 has deposed before the Committee as follows:- 
.”.. the rapid transformation of digital markets demands an equally 
progressive and forward-thinking regulatory response. A proactive ap proach 
in regulating the digital economy including expanding t he scope of existing 
laws to address the control of consumer data, scrutinising merg ers or 
acquisitions that may harm competition and collaboration with  international 
counterparts to ensure consistency in regulatory actions needs  to be done. 
Moreover, quick adaptation to new digital trends, ensuring  a timely response 
to emerging anti-competitive practices and ex-ante evaluatio n of competitive 
behaviour in digital markets to pre-empt and prevent the e mergence of 
monopolistic structures is the need of the hour. It is also e qually important to 
understand the position of CCI in comparison with its in ternational 
competition authorities/regulators in dealing with the cha llenges in each 
sector...   
Now, we come to the Digital Competition Law. As you said , based on the 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee’s Rep ort, we 
constituted the CDCL to examine the adequacy of the exi sting competition 
framework and to look at a separate ex-ante competition law ke eping in mind 
the ongoing international practices as well as the Indi a’s needs. So, what are 
the key recommendations? The Committee has suggested for an  enactment 
of an ex-ante competition law to complement the existing  Competition Act. It 
does address the unique features of digital markets. It i s ex-ante. So, it is a 
disclosure-based framework. The first part is the applicability of the draft Bill, 
which looks at Systemically Significant Digital Enterprises a nd the Associate 
Digital Enterprises. These are those Enterprises who have been  identified or 
designated on the basis of their significant presence both  in financial terms 
as well as in quantitative and qualitative terms. On the quantitative terms, we 
look at the financial thresholds and user-based, and on  the qualitative terms, 
we look at certain other criteria. So, this is the applicability of the draft Bill. 
…….it identifies SSDEs and ADEs, providing Core Digital Services. A list of 
nine Core Digital Services have been identified and have been included in 
the Schedule. It is also based on the 53 rd Report of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee and international practices. Here, the re is an imposition 
of an ex-ante obligation on them to prevent anti-comp etitive harms in digital 

39 
 
markets, foster innovation, transparency, contestability, a nd Indian users’ 
welfare. So, there are different criteria.  
The CDSs have been identified on the basis of the market  concentration. 
There are nine of these. I will just name them out to yo u. They are: online 
search engines, online social networking, video sharing, in terpersonal 
communication, operating systems, web browsers, cloud services, 
advertising and online intermediaries. As of now, the maximum  number of 
orders which have been passed by CCI is essentially in the  line of online 
intermediation.  
In terms of the obligation, basically, all the ten ACPs -- wh ich have been 
identified by the Report of the Parliamentary Standing Commi ttee -- have 
been taken into consideration except for the Mergers and Acqui sitions one 
because that has come into the Amendment already. They have been 
incorporated. So, the others have been covered. We also clubbed certain of 
them. Fair and transparent dealing covers a lot of Anti-Comp etitive Practices. 
Then, there are self-preferencing -- which has been highlig hted -- anti-
steering, tying and bundling restrictions, data usage rest rictions, and 
restrictions on third-party applications.  
These are obligations which the SSDEs and ADEs, once designa ted, will 
have to meet and as per the draft Bill, they will have to come up with the 
details as and when the regulations are going to be framed .  They will come 
out with a disclosure on all these points as per the regulations.  
So, there is a disclosure regime and there is a designation regime. The 
penalty regime and taking action is as per the competition  Act which is right 
now. So, the settlement provisions, the remediation, the pe nalties, that is 
being more or less taken from the existing competition Act bu t this in terms is 
a new point which is coming up in the draft Bill.  So,  we published the report 
and the draft DCB between April to May, 2024. We got a bout 106 
stakeholder submissions and they are presently being examine d by MCA. I 
will be discussing some of these points in the next two sli des where I will 
explain what are the concerns or the issues which have been  raised by the 
stakeholders.  Separately, the MeiTY also held consultatio ns and they also 
got a lot of comments. But we have not officially got t heir response to the 
comments which they have received and their view, although  MeitY was a 
part of the CDCL. So, we did have some  views initially.  
Now, I will come to what are the key issues which are emer ging on the basis 
of the discussions, on the basis of the points raised by stakeh olders. I will 
point all of these out. First of all, the one major p oint here is that the list of 
core digital services as per stakeholders, they feel that the definition itself is 
very wide and a lot of these digital services have not reall y experienced 
concentration like social networking, video sharing, clou d services. They also 
say that the definition of online intermediaries and certai n definitions are too 
wide. So, they cover a gamut of activities which we do not know whether they 

40 
 
will come into the purview of the Digital Competition  Bill or not, like it covers 
right now, food delivery, cab aggregators, app stores. So, i t is very 
heterogenous. So, one point has been raised about this.  
Mostly Sir, wherever we have ex-ante regulations, there has been a study of 
market studies which has taken about sometime before they w ent out with a 
clear threshold. In our case, we have not had a formal marke t study to really 
quantify these guidelines. These quantitative thresholds as well as the digital 
services have been taken on the basis of whatever information we have as of 
now. But a formal specific market study has not been conducted . So, that is 
the first point which has been raised by stakeholders.  
The second point is the adverse effect of the SSDE designat ion. When we 
designate a particular entity as SSDE, then it has an impac t on them and Sir, 
here the right to contest the designation has not yet been provided in the 
draft Bill.  This has been raised in the stakeholder consult ation and in the 
other international jurisdictions before we designate an  enterprise as an 
SSDE, they are given the right to contest. That we had not provided for as of 
now.  
So, the issue of ADEs, if you remember, we had mentioned Associate  Digital 
Enterprises are the ones who will have obligations for them.  The obligations 
will be varied for different kind of digital services and w ithin the digital 
services market, for each kind of digital enterprises, the obliga tions shall be 
varied. The Act provides for that. The draft Bill provides for that and also, that 
will come through regulations. So, a lot of delegated legislation is envisaged. 
So, the definition of ADE suggests that it is directly or in directly involved in 
providing these digital services with the SSDEs. So, this kin d of a definition 
where indirectly or directly, they are involved,the point has been raised that it 
is quite ambiguous and it may also affect those enterprises, those start-ups in 
our system who are giving services to them and will not let th em grow, so, 
there is a lot of ambiguity regarding that.  
So, hence, innovation also gets effected by that. Then,  we come to the whole 
question of quantitative thresholds. So, on both the cri teria, that means the 
financial strength criteria which I have mentioned here, we have mentioned 
that turnover has to be more than Rs. 4000 crore or global turn over is to the 
tune of more than 30 billion dollars or gross merchandize va lue more than 
Rs. 16000 crore or gross market capitalisation of fair market value  more than 
75 billion USD. These are all there.  The SSDE has to sa tisfy any of the 
financial criteria and the users criteria and by users, we have mentioned that 
they should have end users of one crore or business users of 10,000 . So, 
this itself, the calculation of an end user is a challeng ing proposition. We did 
a study to find out which enterprises will come under this and the concert of a 
business user is coming for the first time in our context.  So, even the 
classification of business user will have to be seen.  

41 
 
Another point raised was that the business users  of 10,000 in India may be 
very low compared to the international. International is 10,000 crore. EU has 
10,000 but for India, it may be too low because of the  sheer size of our 
market, although the internet penetration is much lower. It is only 48%. We 
have almost 89 to 90 per cent abroad.  
Then, Sir, even the manner of calculation, there are certain challenges there 
in terms of how do you calculate global turnover from all p roducts and 
services. Then, the concept of gross merchandize value for digita l markets, 
how do you calculate that. So, this along with the low  threshold will pose 
some challenges. So, this is one concern which has been raise d by 
stakeholders.  
Then, the effect on MSME is another concern. I have already explained the 
point of those MSME or those start-ups who are part of ADE, b ut there is 
another impact which we had not thought about in that sense.  
Actually, MSMEs are also benefiting from targeted advertising whi ch they do 
through these platforms and the single sign on service whi ch is available to 
them through these platforms. So, this effect can also have a  negative effect 
on them. Sir, we have a small study which a party has done t o show that 
impact on that.  
Then, in terms for the user also because there is a consent -based 
mechanism which we have looked at and now, the new Data Pr otection rules 
have also come in. So, there is possibility of over-lapping a nd also, it has 
been pointed out that the consent-based framework and as king consent at 
every stage may also lead to a poorer experience on the use r interface and 
user experience. So, that also has been highlighted in that sense.  
Then,……..there are multiple regulators in multiple acts and  regulations 
which different Ministries are looking at. We have the FDI, we have the 
Consumer Affairs, we have the DPDP Act and its whole set of ru les, then we 
have, may be SEBI also at certain places and then, we come into the picture 
in the competition thing. So, it is possible that there would be overlaps, there 
would be parallel proceedings, there may be jurisdicti on overlaps which has 
to be ironed out little bit as we go further, Sir.  
Finally, the ex-ante regulation wherever it has come abo ut, especially it 
started mostly in Europe in May, 2024. The fall out of tha t or the implications 
of that is just being felt. So, that also needs to be studied a little more and Sir, 
at that time, when the Committee had framed its recommendati ons and also 
given its draft Bill, the quick commerce revolution or innovat ion was not really 
playing out. Now, that also started playing out. That  also needs to be 
considered. So, these are the areas which have been highl ighted by 
stakeholders. Some we are cognisant of, some we are getting mo re 
comments everyday almost on a regular basis.  

42 
 
So, as of now, CCI is doing its internal study. We, as a  Ministry, feel that 
before we go forward, we need some evidence-based found ation through 
some market studies so that we can look at all these aspects which have 
been raised, especially because the ex-ante regulation even internationally is 
at a nascent stage….” 
E. MONITORING OF DIGITAL MARKETS  
1.47 Self-preferencing is one of the most scrutinized practice s in digital markets 
where platforms prioritize their own products or services over t hose of competitors. 
When asked about the monitoring of self-preferencing; a nd guidelines or 
thresholds for when such practices cross the line into anti-co mpetitive behavior, 
the Ministry in their written replies has stated the following:-  
“CCI has been actively inquiring cases involving anti-competi tive practices 
including self-preferencing by Big Tech companies within th e framework of 
Section 3 (anti-competitive agreements) and Section 4 of the Act.  
Section 19(3) provides a list of factors to determine whethe r an agreement 
has an appreciable adverse effect on competition under Sec tion 3  viz. 
creation of barriers to new entrants in the market, driving e xisting 
competitors out of the market, foreclosure of competition, ben efit or harm to 
consumer, improvements in production or distribution of goods and services 
or promotion of technical, scientific and economic development by means of 
production or distribution of goods or provision of services. Sec tion 4 of the 
Act prohibits a dominant enterprise position from indulging  into abusive 
conduct such as self-preferencing. 
CCI, either based on Information filed or suo moto, can  look into the issue 
of self-preferencing practices in digital markets, particula rly when dominant 
platforms prioritize their products or services over those of competi tors. 
Such practices are examined under Section 4 of the Act. The Co mmission 
in recent times has looked into the following matters, where  the issue of 
self-preferencing has been examined: 
(i) Umar Javeed & Others against Google LLC & Others 
(ii) XYZ against M/s Alphabet Inc. & Others 
(iii) Kshitiz Arya & Ors AND Google LLC & Ors. 
(iv) Updated Terms of Service and Privacy Policy for WhatsApp users.” 
 
1.48 In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affai rs has added the 
following:- 

43 
 
.”. CCI is a very good market regulator in merger and acquisitio n sector. 
However, it is facing challenges in enforcement of Competi tion Law, 
especially in digital market. Some of the investigations i n major digital 
companies are stalled by courts, mentioning that CCI has not followed anti-
trust proceedings and shared their private data with others.” 
1.49 The Committee raised concerns that the rapid pace of t echnological 
development could render the CCI's enforcement actions obsolete. They asked 
how the CCI plans to address this, especially with the rise  of "Agnetic AI," and 
what framework it is developing to shift from a reactive "p ost-mortem" approach to 
a proactive "ante rephrase" strategy. This shift would allow  the CCI to anticipate 
and address potential anticompetitive issues before they bec ome entrenched, 
rather than acting only after the technology and market h ave already moved on. 
The Ministry in their post-evidence reply stated as under:- 
“Agentic AI is an evolving concept. In order to understand the  Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and competition framework, CCI has outlined  a 
comprehensive scope of work for its study on AI and competition. This study 
focuses on understanding AI's transformative impact on markets a nd its 
competition implications. The study is at advanced stage.” 
1.50 Asked to explain the CCI’s plan to balance enforcement  actions in digital 
markets with the need to preserve innovation incentives, especially for emerging 
Indian technology companies, the Ministry in their post-eviden ce replies has stated 
as follows:- 
“Through its enforcement actions against anti-competitive pr actices and 
regulation of mergers in all sectors including digital markets, CCI ensures 
that the markets remain competitive and contestable.  
CCI is aware of the unique characteristics, advantages and no vel challenges 
and competition concerns that digital markets pose. 
Keeping in view these aspects, the law is applied to new  age markets in a 
nuanced manner with an endeavour to retain incentives to i nnovate and grow 
while addressing anti-competitive practices.  
Under its Advocacy mandate, CCI also engages with stakehol ders to create 
awareness, build a culture of competition law compliance , so as to foster 
innovation and maintain healthy market competition, in l ine with the 
overarching objective of the Competition Act.” 

44 
 
1.51 The Committee has asked the CCI to explain how i t differentiates between 
dominance achieved through genuine innovation and that  resulting from anti-
competitive behavior, and whether the term "dominant posi tion" needs to be 
redefined to be more focused., the CCI in their post-evide nce replies has inter-alia 
stated the following:- 
 “…….  Dominant position of an enterprise is a reflection of the market power 
that a firm enjoys. Explanation to section 4 defines ‘dom inant position’ as 
under:  
“dominant position” means a position of strength, enjoyed by an enterprise, in 
the relevant market, in India, which enables it to – (i) op erate independently 
of competitive forces prevailing in the relevant market; or (ii) affect its 
competitors or consumers or the relevant market in its favour;” 
A firm’s dominance depends on an exhaustive list of factors provid ed in 
Section 19(4) of the Competition Act viz. market share of th e enterprise, size 
and resources of the enterprise, size and importance of the  competitors, 
economic power of the enterprise including commercial advantag es over 
competitors, vertical integration of the enterprises, dependence of consumers 
on the enterprise, entry barriers, countervailing buying powe r, relative 
advantage, by way of contribution to the economic develop ment, by the 
enterprise enjoying a dominant position having or likely to have appreciable 
adverse effect on competition, etc.  
Therefore, it may be seen that determination of dominan ce involves mix of 
qualitative and quantitative factors based on case specif ic parameters. The 
definition of ‘dominance’ and the related parameters grant sufficient guidance 
to CCI to examine dominance based on evolving market dynamics.”     
1.52 In this regard, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has s ubmitted the following 
post-evidence replies:- 
“Under Section 26(1) of the Act, the Commission may direct an inve stigation 
into matters, including those related to the digital marke t, where a prima facie 
violation is found by the Commission. The cases involving  digital markets 
investigated and penalised by CCI over the last five years and their outcome 
is as follows: 
Sl. Case No. 
1. Umar Javeed & Others against Google LLC & Others 
 
 Final Order passed on 20.10.2022. 
 Cease and desist directions as well as behavioural directions. 
 Penalty of Rs. 1337 crore(Recovered) 
2. XYZ against M/s Alphabet Inc. & Others 

45 
 
 
 Final Order passed on 20.10.2022. 
 Cease and desist directions as well as behavioural directions. 
 Penalty of Rs. 937 crore.Reduced penalty  amount of Rs 
216.69 Crores has been paid . 
3. Kshitiz Arya & Ors AND Google LLC & Ors. 
 
The Commission passed an order under section 48A (3) of the Act 
(Settlement Provisions) on 21.04.2025. 
The Final Settlement Amount, after applying a Settlement Discount 
of 15%, is Rs. 20.24 crore. 
(Recovered) 
4. Updated Terms of Service and Privacy Policy for WhatsApp users 
 Final order passed on 18.11.2024. 
 Monetary penalty of Rs. 213.14 crore imposed on Meta. 
Matter is pending in NCLAT. 
 Issued cease-and-desist directions and also directed Meta 
and WhatsApp to implement certain behavioural remedies 
within a defined timeline. 
 
1.53 To a specific query of the Committee as to how is t he CCI addressing 
concerns around bargaining power by dominant players in eme rging areas like 
artificial intelligence and cloud services, the Ministry in th eir post-evidence reply 
has stated as under:- 
“CCI is being equipped to address the challenges posed by AI systems, 
balancing their potential to drive innovation with risks like algorithmic 
collusion, data monopolization, and anti-competitive market d ynamics. The 
proposed DCB includes provisions to regulate SSDEs, which coul d 
encompass dominant AI platforms.” 
1.54 In response to concerns highlighted by the Committee a s to why are 
Indian startups still facing high commissions (around 20%) for app uploads and 
transactions on App Stores and Play Stores, unlike in the EU where the Digital 
Markets Act allows alternative app stores and side-loading wit h reduced 
commissions; and given that side-loading is permitted elsew here for major players, 
why hasn't this been implemented in India to allow smal l startups to distribute their 
apps directly via browsers; what are the barriers preventing th is, and why has the 

46 
 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) not been able to e nforce such changes on 
dominant platforms like Apple and Google in the India n context, the CCI has 
submitted the following post-evidence written replies:- 
“The Commission has examined the issue of side loading in mul tiple cases 
related to the digital ecosystem. In particular, in Umar Javee d & Others vs. 
Google LLC & Others, the Commission vide Order dated 20.10. 2022 directed 
that Google shall not restrict the ability of app develop ers, in any manner, to 
distribute their apps through side-loading.” 
1.55 To a specific query raised by the Committee that in a digital economy where 
large platforms control vast amounts of consumer data and market access, how 
does the CCI ensure that consumer protection is effectivel y integrated into its 
competition enforcement efforts; and looking ahead as d igital markets continue to 
evolve, what are the CCI’s explicit intentions and concrete plans for more deeply 
incorporating consumer welfare principles into the broader c ompetition law 
framework, the CCI in their post-evidence replies has stated the following:- 
“Competition Agencies have an important role in data regula tion. Access to 
data enables businesses to engage in data-driven innovati ons. This in turn 
helps them to better assess consumer demand, habits, needs and  
preferences. However, lower data protection standards can har m consumers 
by reducing the quality of services besides creating insurmounta ble entry 
barriers for potential competitors and distorting competition across various 
markets. The anti-trust law framework is an important regulatory t ool to 
address the exploitative and exclusionary behaviour arising ou t of data 
accumulation by the entities commanding market power. CCI as s uch does 
not look into data protection per se.  CCI’s role comes i nto play when usage 
of data as a non- price parameter leads to anti-competitive practices.   
One of the objectives enshrined in the Preamble to the Comp etition Act is to 
protect the interests of consumers. Benefit or harm to consu mers is also one 
of the factors in the framework provided under the Act for assessm ent of 
appreciable adverse effect on competition. Thus, consumer  protection and 
consumer welfare principles are embedded in the Competitio n Act and form 
an integral part of competition law enforcement including in digital markets.” 
1.56 The Committee while pointing out that storing and  transmitting digital data 
may increase the risk of breach of data, which may lead to fi nancial loss or 
penalties, asked the Ministry to clarify the measures that are taken by CCI to 

47 
 
prevent such data leak to ensure safety, particularly da ta safety and financial loss, 
the Ministry in their post-evidence replies has stated as under:-. 
“The Competition Act, 2002 read with CCI General Regulat ions 2024, 
provides for robust provisions to safeguard confidential in formation obtained 
during the proceedings before the Commission.” 
1.57 The shift to an ex-ante framework is intended to pre-emp t the rise of 
monopolistic structures in digital markets. In response to a specific query about the  
mechanisms to identify emerging anti-competitive trends or practices before they 
solidify into monopolistic behavior, the CCI has stated t he following in their written 
replies:- 
“The shift towards an ex-ante framework in digital markets re presents a 
major evolution in the CCI strategy. Traditionally, competi tion law 
enforcement has been ex-post, i.e., acting after anti-compe titive behaviour 
occurs. However, in fast-moving digital markets, monopolistic struc tures can 
solidify very quickly, making reactive enforcement too slow and ine ffective. 
Recognizing this, the CCI is increasingly developing mechanisms to identify 
and address potential anti-competitive trends early, before they cause 
irreversible harm to market dynamics. 
One key mechanism CCI is using is the tool of market studies, which allow it 
to understand market structure and inherent dynamics. By conducti ng 
detailed, forward-looking market studies on e-commerce and Artificia l 
intelligence. Through these studies CCI can map evolving competition in 
specific digital sectors.”  
1.58 In this regard, the Ministry in their post-evidence r eplies has added the 
following:- 
“As per its advocacy mandate under the Act, CCI commissions market 
studies from time to time to identify emerging anti-competi tive trends or 
practices. Market studies are a widely used tool for competitio n authorities 
worldwide to develop a better understanding of competiti ve conditions within 
one or more sectors. They can form a useful basis of compet ition advocacy 
leading to recommendations for governments, sector regulators , businesses, 
business associations.” 
 
1.59 The Committee while pointing out that  though new competition settlement 
rules simplify proceedings, allowing affected parties to clai m compensation directly 
from NCLAT post-settlement (where the order is non-appealable ) could still lead to 

48 
 
litigation delays. In light of this, the Committee asked as to how does the Ministry 
assess the adequacy of these new rules compared to the previo us framework and 
global legal standards; what specific impact do these cha nges have on reducing 
overall litigation and delays, and what further legislat ive or regulatory adjustments 
are deemed necessary to fully empower the CCI in effecti vely overseeing 
competition in the dynamic digital space, the Secretary, Mi nistry of Corporate 
Affairs has stated the following during the oral evidence of the Committee:- 
“… This is regarding the settlement in the new system which ha s been 
established.  It has just started.  In September, 2024 th is has been notified.  
This article, which you are referring to, we are also aware  of. I think, it has 
been just about five, six months since this new procedure o r mechanism has 
been played out.  So, let us just analyse it in the next f ive, six months to see 
what exactly is transpiring.  The applicant or the affect ed party, who they are 
and what they are?  After may be six, seven months, we wil l be in a position 
to relook this to prevent any appeal from any other side.  This is because at 
the same time, we also have to protect the interest of the  consumer.  So, 
mandating that one of them can appeal, the other party cannot appeal may 
not possibly stand the test of judicial scrutiny.  So, we wil l examine this in the 
new next few months and see how it does…” 
1.60 The Ministry has further added the following in their post-evidence 
replies:- 
“The Competition Act, 2002 (Act) was amended on April 11, 202 3, vide the 
Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023. Among other things, the A mendment 
Act introduced Section 48A in the Act to create a settlement me chanism. 
Section 48A of the Act enables an enterprise against whom a n inquiry under 
Section 26(1) of the Act is initiated for an alleged contra vention of Section 
3(4) or Section 4 of the Act, as the case may be, to apply fo r settlement 
before the CCI.  
.Section 53N (1) of the Act (as amended) allows the Central or State 
Government, local authorities, enterprises, or individuals to a pply to the 
Appellate Tribunal for compensation if they have suffered  loss or damage 
due to a violation of Chapter II of the Act or a settl ement order by the 
Commission. This claim for compensation can be based on findings or orders 
by the Commission, the Appellate Tribunal, the Supreme Cou rt, or under 
specific sections such as 42A, 48A, 53Q(2), or 53Tof the Act . The Tribunal 
may pass an order requiring an enterprise to pay compensation for any 
proven loss or damage suffered by the applicant.  A mechani sm of 
compensation, even after a settlement is reached, is an imp ortant check that 
balances the non-appealing nature of settlement orders. 

49 
 
Under the earlier regime, the Competition Commission of Ind ia (CCI) did not 
have any formal mechanism for settlement, meaning that onc e a prima facie 
case was formed, proceedings would continue to their full adjudicatory 
conclusion, often leading to prolonged litigation. The  new framework allows 
parties to settle before the completion of the inquiry /investigation, thereby 
enabling faster resolution. The intent of creating a procedure for settlement is 
driven by the need to reduce litigation and to ensure qui cker market 
correction. Globally, jurisdictions like the EU and the UK have long 
incorporated settlement procedures in competition law enforcement. 
In major jurisdictions such as the EU, UK, US, settlements typically happen in 
cartel cases and that too require an explicit admission of g uilt and a formal 
finding of infringement. This acknowledgment serves as a  foundation for 
aggrieved parties to pursue compensation claims, even thou gh specific 
statutory provisions for such claims may not be detailed in th e settlement 
procedures. 
As per EU directives concerning actions for damages arising from b reaches 
of national and EU competition laws, certain documents submit ted during the 
settlement process may be exempt from disclosure due to their se lf-
incriminating nature. However, these exemptions are carefully b alanced so 
as not to unjustly hinder the rights of injured parties to seek compensation.” 
1.61 When further asked as to how CCI is going to solve t he issue of facing 
challenges in enforcement of Competition Law, especially i n digital market as all 
big companies like Swiggy, Zomato Amazon are engaging big  lawyers, advocates 
and paying huge money and they are getting Judgment f rom the courts.; and the 
need for amending the rules and regulations or the law, the Ministry in their post-
evidence reply has stated the following:- 
“CCI has a panel of advocates to represent it before vario us fora. Further, in 
complex matters such as those related to digital markets, CCI e ngages 
Solicitor General, Additional Solicitor Generals to ensure tha t the matters are 
properly defended. In one of the cases before the Hon’ble  Supreme Court, 
the Attorney General of India appeared on behalf of CC I. Thus, by 
engagement of suitable counsels CCI ensures that the l egal challenges are 
appropriately dealt with.” 
1.62 Asked to reply as to whether the CCI had any interact ion with Amazon in 
restricting their way, if anti-competitive, the CCI has submi tted written post-
evidence replies as under:- 
“The Commission received an information in the month of Novembe r, 2019 
from Delhi Vyapar Mahasangh where allegations of anti-compe titive conduct 

50 
 
were levelled against Flipkart Internet Pvt. Ltd. and Amazo n Seller Services 
Pvt. Ltd. It was inter alia alleged that these marketplaces through vertical 
arrangements with their respective alleged ‘preferred selle rs’ were leading to 
foreclosure of other non-preferred traders or sellers from these  online 
marketplaces and that by having exclusive tie-ups in the relevant market with 
the smartphone companies, exclusivity through discounting and preferential 
listings were being provided. The Commission vide order dated 1 3.01.2020 
directed the DG to cause an investigation into the matter. 
 
DG submitted Investigation Report qua Flipkart Internet P vt. Ltd. and 
Amazon Seller Services Pvt. Ltd. on 12.08.2024. This case was bi furcated 
into two parts,one pertaining to Flipkart and the other, pertaining to Amazon. 
 
The Commission considered the Investigation Report qua each o f these OPs 
and decided to forward non-confidential version of the Investigation Report to 
the concerned entities (which included certain entities, which were arrayed as 
opposite parties). Aggrieved with the order of the Commission  by which it 
asked parties to file financial statements and objection s & suggestions, 31 
writ petitions have been filed in Hon’ble High Courts o f Karnataka, Punjab 
and Haryana, Delhi, Telangana, Madras and Allahabad. 
 
Vide order dated 06.01.2025, the Hon’ble Supreme Court o f India on the 
transfer petition filed by CCI, directed that writ peti tions pending in the 
Hon’ble High Courts of Delhi, Madras, Karnataka, Punjab &  Haryana, 
Telangana, Allahabad be transferred to Hon’ble High Co urt of Karnataka. 
The matter is sub-judice.”  
 
1.63 To a specific point raised by the Committee as to h ow does the CCI 
propose to address these recourse and capacity challenges to  remain effective in 
regulating digital markets, the CCI in their written replies has stated the following:- 
 
“The shift towards an ex-ante regulatory framework would nece ssitate a 
calibrated enhancement of institutional capacities, parti cularly in terms of 
human resources with specialized skill sets such as data science,  technology 
analysis, and market intelligence. 
In this regard, apart from building in-house capacities, C CI is collaborating 
with academic institutions, think tanks, and internatio nal counterparts to 
facilitate knowledge-sharing and capacity-building. 
Further, as stated above, the establishment of the Digita l Markets Division 
(DMD) marks a strategic shift in the CCI’s approach to digital  regulation, 
enabling it to address both current and emerging challenge s in the digital 
economy. 

51 
 
The DMD would have to be staffed with the specialized ma npower which 
would be decided upon, once the regulatory requirements un der ex-ante 
digital regulation become clearer. To enhance the capacity  of CCI, three 
technical Young Professionals (two Data Analyst and one Informa tion 
Technology Expert) have been engaged to meet the initial requirements.”  
F.  MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS (M&As) 
1.64 When the Committee sought clarification on several cri tical aspects of 
CCI's merger and acquisition (M&A) assessment, particularly conce rning rapidly 
changing technological industries as to how does the CCI differentiate between 
legitimate business strategies and anti-competitive practices  like bundling or 
leveraging when evaluating M&As, and what criteria are use d to determine if such 
consolidation stifles innovation or competition; given th at digital platforms often 
have low asset values but significant market influence, wh at mechanisms does the 
CCI employ to factor this into its Deal Value Thresholds,  which currently apply to 
M&As exceeding Rs. 2000 crore; and finally, considering the g lobal operations of 
many digital platforms, how does the CCI coordinate wit h international regulators 
to assess cross-border M&As, the CCI in their post-evidence replies has stated the 
following:- 
“CCI assesses the Mergers, Acquisitions and Amalgamations, between  
entities, which are notified based on thresholds in terms of assets, turnover 
and value of transaction, to see if they cause or likel y to cause Appreciable 
Adverse Effect on Competition (AAEC) in markets in India.   
As provided under Section 20(4) of the Act, for the assessment o f AAEC in 
case of a combination, CCI considers all or any of the foll owing factors: (a) 
actual and potential level of competition through impor ts in the market; (b) 
extent of barriers to entry into the market; (c) level of conce ntration in the 
market; (d) degree of countervailing power in the market; (e) likelihood that 
the combination would result in the parties to the combi nation being able to 
significantly and sustainably increase prices or profit marg ins; (f) extent of 
effective competition likely to sustain in a market; (g) e xtent to which 
substitutes are available or are likely to be available in th e market; (h) market 
share in the relevant market of the persons or enterprise in a  combination, 
individually and as a combination; (i) likelihood that the  combination would 
result in the removal of a vigorous and effective competitor or competitors in 
the market; (j) nature and extent of vertical integration i n the market; (k) 
possibility of a failing business; (l) nature and extent  of innovation; (m) 
relative advantage, by way of the contribution to the e conomic development, 
by any combination having or likely to have appreciable ad verse effect on 

52 
 
competition; (n) whether the benefits of the combination outweigh the 
adverse impact of the combination, if any. 
The new age markets (digital markets) bring with them new cha llenges due 
to use of technology. The Commission carries out assessment of 
Combinations (including digital markets) using the aforesai d factors given in 
Section 20(4) of the Act considering their characteristics & f eatures and 
specific challenges posed by them. 
If a proposed combination causes or likely to cause AAEC, the CCI may 
propose/accept suitable remedies and / or modifications to re store and 
maintain competition, thereby protecting the interests of the consumers.  
The Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023 introduced a specific p rovision 
relating to Deal Value threshold (DVT). With this enabling  provision, all M&A 
transactions involving smaller companies/enterprises with deal val ue 
exceeding INR 2000 crore and Target enterprise (i.e. enterpri se being 
acquired) also having substantial business operations in I ndia, will be notified 
to CCI. This provides an opportunity to CCI to review such  transactions 
(which may not breach asset and turnover threshold) and address l ikely 
AAEC in India, if any, due to such transactions. 
Further, CCI keeps tab on all M&A transactions, which are no t 
reported/notified to it. This ensures that reportable combi nations are notified 
to CCI and appropriate action be taken under the relevant provisions of the 
Act. 
The Commission engages in International Cooperation with other 
Competition Authorities including with respect to Combinati ons filed with the 
Commission and other authorities.” 
 
G.  REGULATION OF DUOPOLIES IN CRITICAL SECTOR 
1.65 There are large-scale technology firms which engage in predatory pricing, 
offering deep discounts that smaller competitions cannot  sustain, which has led to 
duopolies. In critical sector like telecom, only two major playe rs remain, and 
aviation. Now, the problem has shifted from monopolies to d uopolies. Therefore, 
the Committee when asked CCI's long-term strategy to regula te and mitigate the 
rise of duopolies in critical sector, and how can competitio n laws be enhanced to 
address these emerging challenges, the Ministry in their post- evidence replies has 
stated the following:- 

53 
 
“The conduct of duopolies can be examined under the frame work of Section 
3 of the Act which covers all anti-competitive agreements in cluding horizontal 
agreements and vertical agreements.”  
H. PROTECTION OF MSMEs AND SMALL BUSINESSES 
1.66  The Committee during the sitting held on 20 Janua ry 2025 had informed 
CCI  that the current "Deal Value Threshold" (DVT) rule, which sets a minimum 
merger and acquisition value of Rs. 2000 crore, appears count er-intuitive. In 
Tamil Nadu, for example, many businesses are being acquir ed by larger 
corporations without requiring Competition Commission of In dia (CCI) approval, 
precisely because their acquisition value falls below th is Rs. 2000 crore cap. 
Considering that Tamil Nadu accounts for 44% of India's MSMEs, this DVT rule 
creates an "inverted pyramid" effect. It enables large corporate s to easily acquire 
MSMEs without regulatory scrutiny, potentially harming the MSME sector . When 
asked as to is it possible to implement safeguards within the DVT rule to protect 
MSMEs from such acquisitions and ensure fair competition, the CC I has 
submitted written replies as follows:- 
“Consequent upon the recent amendment to the Competition Act, 2002 
(Act) in the year 2023, an additional notification thresho ld i.e., value of 
transaction or Deal Value Threshold (DVT) of INR 2000 Crore with 
Substantial Business Operations in India (SBOI) has been sti pulated 
under Section 5(d) of the Act.  
 
The objective of introducing this threshold was to fill the enforcement gap 
regarding the ability of CCI to review transactions particu larly, in digital 
markets. The acquisitions where the asset/turnover threshold cri teria were 
not met as is the case in zero priced digital markets were no t notifiable 
even though they may be strategic in nature and would ha ve implications 
with regard to the competitive landscape. Thus, DVT was d esigned to 
enhance the overall effectiveness of merger review regime in India. 
 
Lowering DVT would mean reviewing cases where target enti ties may not 
have any impact on competition due to their insignificant  presence in their 
areas of operations. Further, it may lead to inefficient u se of resources, as 
this involves evaluation of more transactions of little o r no significance 
from competition perspective. This may result in regulatory o verreach and 
may cause inefficiency in the system. 
 
With lower threshold, more transactions require filing and regulatory 
compliance. This would increase the legal and administrative  costs for 
businesses  and  can  be  onerous  for   companies,   particularly  MSMEs,                                                                                                                             
 

54 
 
 hindering their growth and access to potential M&A opportunities.”  
 
1.67 To a specific question as to what measures is the Mi nistry of Corporate 
Affairs going to take up to solve problems for survival of domestic industries, 
especially small industries and MSMEs, the Ministry has submitted  the following 
in their written replies:- 
“Ministry is cognizant of the unique challenges faced by M SMEs including 
limited access to resources and reliance on larger market platforms for 
market reach. Under Section 3 & 4 of the Act, CCI looks into matters relating 
to anticompetitive agreements and abuse of dominant posit ion by enterprises 
in digital markets.   Under Section 5 and 6 of the Act CCI  discharges its 
regulatory functions related to combinations and inquires wh ether the 
combination has caused or is likely to cause an appreciabl e adverse effect in 
India.   
Through its enforcement actions against such anti-competi tive practices and 
regulation of mergers under the framework of the Act, in all s ectors including 
digital markets, CCI ensures that the markets remain competiti ve and 
contestable thereby protecting MSMEs from anti-competitive pract ices of the 
enterprises 
CCI also conducts advocacy programs to help MSMEs understand th eir 
rights and obligations under Competition Act.” 
 
1.68 When asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry to address the 
control and misuse of data by large digital enterprises; to  ensure that smaller 
businesses have fair access to data and mechanisms in place  to assess whether 
data usage practices are anti-competitive, the Ministry has submi tted post-
evidence replies as under:- 
“The Competition Commission assesses data practices within the existing 
framework of the Act, particularly under Section 4(2), which dea ls with abuse 
of dominant position. Data-related conduct may be scrutinize d where it 
results in denial of market access (Section 4(2)(c)), leveraging d ominance 
across markets (Section 4(2)(e)), or imposition of unfair conditions (Section 
4(2)(a)). 
In addition, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Tec hnology (MeitY) 
plays a key role in shaping India’s data governance land scape. It is 

55 
 
responsible for implementing the Digital Personal Data Protect ion Act, 2023 
(DPDP Act), the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act), and t he 
Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Pro cedures and 
Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 (Privacy  Rules), to 
ensure the secure collection and processing of personal da ta. Further, 
through initiatives like the National Data Governance Fra mework Policy, 
MeitY aims to ensure that non-personal and anonymized data f rom both 
government and private entities are safely accessible to the  research and 
innovation ecosystem.” 
1.69 All India Consumer Products Distribution Federation ha s raised serious 
concern about the predatory pricing practices adopted by maj or commerce 
platforms like Blinkit, Swiggy, Zomato, etc. According to t hem, these platforms are 
offering deep discounts and selling products below cost pric e, which is significantly 
harming small retailers and traditional kirana stores, and threatening the very 
survival of traditional retail markets across the country.  In this regard, the 
Committee asked the CCI about the steps taken to protect  the interest of small 
retailers and traditional Kirana stores against predatory pricing practices and online 
platforms like issuing specific guidelines or regulatory frame work to prevent and 
control predatory pricing by these platforms, the Ministry has  submitted the 
following written replies:- 
“CCI can inquire into allegations of predatory pricing by on line platforms with 
market power, including e-commerce and quick commerce players. Under 
the provisions of the Competition Act, CCI enquires into su ch conducts that 
may amount to anti-competitive agreements under Section 3 or an abuse of 
dominance under Section 4. Predatory price, as per the Act, is a  price which 
is below the cost of production of the goods or provision of services, and is 
charged with a view to reduce competition or eliminate the  competitors. 
Predatory pricing, contravenes section 4(2) of the Act when i ndulged in by a 
dominant enterprise. An assessment of discounts for competit ion law 
purposes thus involves evaluation of market power of the ent erprise offering 
the discounts, the nature of discounts, duration and the intent/rationale 
behind the same. The issue of discounts may also be examine d as part of 
exclusive/preferential agreements under Section 3(4) of the Act  on a case-
by-case basis.  Where prima facie contravention of the provision of the Act is 
found, the Commission initiates investigations into complain ts concerning 
predatory pricing/ deep discounting to ensure that no pla yer gains undue 
advantage at the expense of competition.” 
 

56 
 
1.70 To a pertinent query asked by the Committee as to  what steps are being 
taken by the CCI to ensure that the large digital ent erprises do not abuse their 
market position or stifle local competition, especially MSMEs and start-ups, 
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs has deposed before the Committee as 
follows:- 
“…. the whole issue of digital markets and the best way for ward is something 
which is evolving and the right balance there  is very impor tant. I am sure the 
Committee would realize that we do not want to harm our own domestic 
industry, which is why I had raised all these issues. So, hope fully our market 
study which we are commissioning right now will come up with  some 
concrete answers and concrete solutions  of the kind of provisi ons which we 
shall be keeping in the draft Bill so that we are able to do the balancing act 
I would definitely like to mention that India's market is different. So, while we 
do follow the international practices in certain cases, bu t in certain positions 
our domestic market has very unique features like the entire qu ick commerce 
thing is something which is very, very homegrown in India. It is not there in 
the international arena. So, that is something which hopef ully the market 
study will throw up, and we will share the results of that.”   
 1.71 The representative of the CCI has further added as  follows:- 
“CCI conducts and undertakes its mandate as per the provisions of the Act.  
 As per Section 3 of the Act, it prohibits anti-competitive a greements. Section 
4 prohibits abuse of dominant position.  
 Section 5 provides for regulation of combinations.  So, CCI discharges its 
functions within this framework.  Predatory pricing and deep di scounting –an 
issue was raised – by entities, including by online platforms ca n also be 
examined if the conduct amounts to anti-competitive agree ments under 
Section 3 of the Act or abuse of dominant position under Se ction 4 of the 
Act.  Recently, in one of the cases, an information was received alleging anti-
competitive practices like deep discounting by some quick commerce 
companies, for which the Commission asked the informant to p rovide 
evidences to substantiate the allegation so that a pr ima facie view can be 
taken to inquire the matter within the framework of the law.”   
 1.72 When the Committee asked CCI to clarify as to has t here been an 
evolution in policies to penalize app stores for anti-compe titive practices, thereby 
opening them up for more startup benefits, the CCI in their written replies has 
stated the following:- 

57 
 
“CCI examines each case on its own merits. Therefore, CCI may impo se 
penalties and direct implementation of behavioural remedie s to address the 
competitive harm. The remedies are a critical component of en forcing 
competition law in cases of abuse of dominance so as to  ensure that anti-
competitive conduct is effectively addressed. Remedies are intended to not 
only correct past behaviour but also prevent future abuses, mai ntain market 
fairness and safeguard competition moving forward. The ultimate aim is to re-
establish conditions that revive the competitive process, an d allow rivals to 
compete on merits. Thus, the competition authority has the i nherent powers 
to direct necessary measures to restore and promote competition in the 
relevant market. Recognising these principles, Section 27(g) of  the Act also 
empowers the Commission to issue such other orders or direction s, as it may 
deem fit.”  
 
1.73 Regarding the possible impact of India-US bilate ral negotiations on the 
domestic market competition, Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affa irs has stated 
the following:- 
“Regarding the India and US bilateral impact, that is stil l an area which is 
under negotiation, so we really do not know what is going to come out of that. 
But  I definitely would like to submit before the Committee  that the mandate 
of the Competition Commission and the Competition Act and that of the other 
regulatory Acts is different. While data privacy, data security an d sharing of 
data do come into the competition aspect when it impacts competition, but 
the data privacy and data security issue is basically governed by the DPDP 
Act,  and the rules which have come right now where a differe nt set of 
regulatory framework and a Board has been set up. So that will be taken care 
of by them.”  
1.74 In this regard, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs i n their written replies has 
stated that as of now, there appears to be no impact. 
I.  MARKET STUDY  
1.75 One of CCI’s notable advocacy initiatives was its Marke t Study on E-
Commerce in India, published in January 2020. The study provi ded a 
comprehensive analysis of the e-commerce ecosystem and ident ified emerging 
competition issues. As part of its advocacy mandate, the CC I encouraged e-
commerce platforms to put in place transparency measures in the areas of search 
ranking, collection, use and sharing of data, user review and rating mechanism, 
revision in contract terms, and discount policy. These recommendati ons aimed to 
address concerns while maintaining the innovative potential of the sector. 

58 
 
1.76 Asked about the key recommendations and findings fro m CCI’s market 
study on e-commerce and status of its implementation, the Min istry in their post-
evidence replies has stated the following:- 
“Under its advocacy mandate, a Market Study on E-commerce in India  (‘the 
study’) was conducted by the Competition Commission of India in 2019-20 
with a view to better understand the functioning of e-co mmerce in India and 
its implications for markets and competition. Bargaining power imbalance and 
information asymmetry between e-commerce marketplace platforms and 
their business users were found to be at the core of many issue s that came 
up in the market study. It was observed that improving transpar ency over 
certain areas of the platforms’ functioning can reduce info rmation asymmetry 
and can have a positive influence on competition outcome s. In view of the 
foregoing, the report enumerated certain areas for self-regul ation by the e-
commerce marketplace platforms. These were advocated with a vi ew to 
reduce information asymmetry and promote competition on the merit s. The 
Commission urged the e-commerce platforms to put in place t ransparency 
measures in the areas of search ranking, collection, use an d sharing of data, 
user review and rating mechanism, revision in contract terms, and discount 
policy.  
The study can be accessed at market-study-on-e-commerce-in-india-key-
findings-and-observations1653547672.pdf 
Any alleged anti-competitive practices by the E-commerce entitie s are 
examined within the framework of Section 3 and 4 of the A ct.  Wherever 
violations under the Act are established, Commission directs re medies, 
besides levying penalties, to address competition concerns.”   
 
1.77 The CCI had also done a detailed study on diagn ostic medical equipment 
industry in India, and they have recommended a series of step s to promote 
medical device manufacturing in India. When the Commi ttee asked as to what 
definite steps does the Ministry taking to address the persisten t unethical 
practices and existing monopolies that make basic diagnosti c services 
unaffordable for the common man so as to ensure that fa ir-trade practices are 
consistently followed, the Ministry has submitted the following written replies:- 
“The Commission has proactively addressed competition concerns in the 
medical diagnostic industry through its comprehensive Market S tudy of the 
Diagnostic Medical Imaging Equipment Industry in India, focu sing on MRI 
and CT scan equipment. This study provides an in-depth an alysis of the 
industry's structure and competitive dynamics. 

59 
 
Key findings from the study highlight significant market c oncentration, with 
five Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) commanding over 90% of  the 
MRI and CT scan equipment market. High entry barriers such as 
technological complexity, brand loyalty, and import depend ence further 
entrench this concentration. The after-sales service market also e xhibits 
limited competition, often bundled with equipment sale s, leading to potential 
customer lock-in.  
To foster fair competition and prevent monopolistic practic es, the 
Commission has recommended: 
(i) Promotion of Local Manufacturing : Encourage Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) to increase assembly operations in India, with a 
strategic shift towards full-scale local production. This initi ative aims to 
reduce import dependency and foster competition in the dom estic 
market.  
(ii) Development of Strategic Partnerships : Facilitate collaborations 
between OEMs and local entities to enhance indigenous cap abilities, 
support startups, and develop a robust ecosystem for DMI equipme nt 
manufacturing and services.  
(iii) Enhancement of Transparency : Advocate for OEMs to adopt self-
regulatory measures that promote transparency in pricing, availab ility 
of spare parts, and after-sales services. This includes clear di sclosure 
of maintenance contracts and delivery timelines, enabling ho spitals 
and diagnostic centres to make informed procurement decisions.  
(iv) Open Market Access for Spare Parts : Recommend that OEMs 
provide open-market access to spare parts for Original Equipment 
Suppliers (OESs) and Independent Service Operators (ISOs). This 
measure is intended to foster competition in the after-sale s service 
market and reduce customer lock-in. 
These recommendations are designed to address the high con centration in 
the DMI equipment market, enhance competition, and ensure fa ir trade 
practices, ultimately benefiting healthcare providers and pa tients across 
India.” 
1.78 When the Committee asked as to has the CCI conduct ed any study 
specifically examining potential monopolies in the cement and airline industries, 
the CCI in their written replies has stated the following:- 
“From time to time, CCI has inquired into cases in the cemen t sector relating 
to cartelisation and imposed penalties wherever contraventio n was found 
apart from issuing cease and desist directions.  
 
CCI has also inquired into several cases in the aviation sector including those 
relating to price cartelisation, collusion in fuel surcharg e rates for cargo 
transportation by the domestic airlines and imposed penalti es wherever 
contravention was found apart from issuing cease and desist directions. 

60 
 
 
 
CCI has examined issue of collusion in fixing of Fuel Su rcharge (FSC) rates 
for cargo transportation by the domestic airlines in the case of Express 
Industry Council of India Vs. Jet Airways (India) Ltd. & Others w hereby CCI 
found Jet Airways (India) Ltd, IndiGo Airlines and SpiceJet  Ltd acted in a 
concerted manner in fixing and revising the FSC rates and th ereby 
contravened the provisions of Section 3(1) read with Section 3 (3)(a) of the 
Act. Besides imposing penalty, CCI also issued cease and desist o rder 
against these airlines. 
 
In another case, CCI examined allegations related to pri ce parallelism due to 
cartelisation in the civil aviation sector. However, the matt er was ordered to 
be closed as no evidence could be found during investigati on of such alleged 
cartelization. 
 
1.79 When the committee specifically desired to know as to ha s the CCI 
conducted any study focused on Netflix’s market practices an d its potential 
impact  on displacing the Indian OTT platforms from sma rt TVs, the CCI has 
submitted written response as follows:- 
“CCI has not conducted any market study on Netflix. However, CCI had 
conducted a market study on the Film Distribution Chain in  India 1 and its 
objectives included, inter alia, to understand the role of  multiplexes, Over-
The-Top (OTT), television, and other platforms in the exhibition of cinema, 
and the competition dynamics between exhibitors and upstre am players 
(producers/distributors).  
 
In the combination approved by CCI in 2024, relating to  Reliance 
Industries Limited; Viacom18 Media Pvt. Ltd.; Digital 18 Me dia Limited; 
Star India Pvt. Ltd. and Star Television Productions Limited,  it was 
gathered that in terms of monthly average users, Netflix (wi th less than 10 
crore users in FY23) lagged behind  Jiocinema and Hotstar+ (t hey are 
now part of a merged entity); and Amazon Prime Video and MX Pl ayer 
(MX Player and Amazon miniTV have merged into one service called 
Amazon MX Player). 
 
No combination matter or inquiry is pending against Netfl ix.Further, CCI 
has not received any information related to anti-competitive practices by 
OTT players.”  
 
 
 
1Market Study on the Film Distribution Chain in India (2022) 

61 
 
1.80 Furthermore, the CCI has launched a Market Study on Art ificial 
Intelligence (AI) and Competition, recognizing the transform ative role of AI in 
shaping the digital economy. This study underscores the CCI’ s forward-looking 
approach in addressing emerging challenges and ensuring that  AI-driven 
markets remain competitive and inclusive. On being asked t he reason behind the 
study on AI and competition, the CCI in their written re plies has stated as 
follows:- 
“CCI, as a market regulator, endeavours to keep pace with market 
developments and study relevant issues to upgrade its und erstanding and 
regulatory tools.  The broad objectives of the AI Study inter-alia are: 
 
i) To understand certain key AI systems and markets/ecosystems 
thereof, including AI actors/stakeholders, essential inputs/re sources, 
value chains, market structures and parameters of competition; 
ii) To understand the emerging and potential competition  issues in these 
markets/ecosystems, if any; 
iii) To study the scope and nature of AI applications/use ca ses, and 
assess associated opportunities, risks and ramifications from a 
competition standpoint; 
iv) To understand the existing and evolving regulatory/le gal frameworks 
governing AI systems and applications in India and other major  
jurisdictions; 
v) To reach out to all relevant stakeholders for a holistic u nderstanding 
of the issues at the intersection of AI and competition; 
vi) To understand trends and patterns of AI and to ascertai n enforcement 
and advocacy priorities of the Commission with respect to AI a nd its 
application in markets; 
 
Management Development Institute Society, Gurugram (MDIS) ma de a 
detailed presentation on the interim report in the spe cial meeting of the 
Commission held on 13.06.2025. The Commission directed MDIS t o submit 
the final report after incorporating the suggestions made  during the 
presentation. The said AI study is likely to be completed b y 30th September, 
2025.”  
 
1.81 The Committee further asked as to how does the CCI pl an to address the 
possibility of market giants monopolizing the AI space, an d what specific steps will 
it take to ensure fair competition for the numerous smal l AI startups, Secretary, 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has deposed before the Committee as follows:- 

62 
 
 
“… The other issue regarding the market studies happening on artificial 
intelligence. I think everybody is very seized of the matter be cause AI by 
itself is changing. You know, every day there is a new story coming. So they 
have done the right thing in commissioning that study. As an d when the 
studies report comes out, that will inform the policy intervention, both in terms 
of regulations or in terms of amendment in the Act, which we will look at.”  
The Ministry in their post-evidence replies has further added the following:- 
“The report of the Market Study being conducted by a leadin g management 
institute is still to be submitted to CCI.” 
 
1.82 When asked how is the CCI proposing to address comp etition concerns 
arising from artificial intelligence and algorithmic collusi on; and does the CCI 
believe that there is a need to strengthen the Competit ion Act to deal with such 
issues effectively, the CCI has submitted written replies as follows:- 
“It has been mentioned that ‘Digital markets often transcend national borders, 
with major players operating globally. Anticompetitive pract ices by these 
firms may have localized effects in India but originate fro m actions taken in 
other jurisdictions and addressing such cross-jurisdictional issues requires 
CCI to collaborate with international competition authorities.’ 
 
 
1.83 On market studies, a stakeholder has suggested the fo llowing:- 
“Deepening stakeholder engagement and expanding sector-specif ic market 
studies in the Digital Economy” 
The response of the Ministry on the above-mentioned suggest ion is given 
below:- 
“Views / Comments from the Ministry:- 
The MCA remains committed to deepening stakeholder engageme nt. 
Further, CCI has been expanding sector-specific market studies. 
 
 
  

63 
 
J. DISPOSAL OF CASES BY THE CCI: 
1.84 The details of disposal of anti-trust cases by the CCI:- 
(Since inception till 10.01.2025) 
No. of cases received 1303 
No. of cases referred for investigation 516 
Investigation Reports received 484 
No. of cases where Investigation Reports awaited 44 
No. of cases set aside/ quashed by Courts 05 
No. of cases disposed of 1168 
No. of cases under consideration before the Commission 86 
Total pending cases with the Commission 
(at prima facie, after receipt of Investigation Reports & 
pending investigation before the DG) 
130 
 
 1.85 The details of disposal of Combination (M&A) Cases by the CCI:- 
(Since inception till 10.01.2025) 
Notices 
Received 
Notices Disposed 
of without 
modification 
Notices 
Disposed of 
with 
modification 
Invalid/ 
Withdrawn 
Notices 
Notices 
Pending 
1229 1109 31 75 14 
 

64 
 
1.86 Performance of the CCI on select performance parameters:- 
S.No Particulars 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
1 No. of antitrust 
information received 
59 42 50 
2 No. of prima facie 
Orders passed in 
respect of alleged anti-
competitive conduct 
(orders passed under 
Section 26(1) and 
26(2)] 
64 39 36 
3 No. of investigations 
completed by DG 
22 24 18 
4 No. of matters in which 
Orders passed under 
Sections 26(2), 26(6), 
27 and 
Other/Misc.Orders 
passed with respect to 
anti-competitive 
conduct 
75 48 33 
5 Amount of penalty 
levied (Rs. Crore) 
1335.77 2672.48 2.55 
6 No. of proposed 
combinations 
approved/disposed of 
93 99 101 
7 Average no. of days 
taken to dispose of a 
combination notice 
17 21 16 
8 No. of advocacy 
programs 
340 385 365 
9 No. of employees (as 
on 31 st March of the 
respective FY) 
Commission 
DG Office 
 
 
 
106 
19 
 
 
 
 
100 
23 
 
 
 
94 
16 
10 No. of trainings 
organized for capacity 
building of officers 
(including overseas 
training) 
24 35 15 
 

65 
 
1.87 The committee inquired whether the CCI has suffici ent judicial and 
technical experts to handle the growing complexity of c ases, particularly those 
involving the evolving digital landscape. They also asked  if the Ministry has 
conducted any study on this matter to ensure the CCI is a dequately resourced for 
its diverse array of responsibilities, the Secretary, Ministry of C orporate Affairs 
during the oral evidence deposed before the Committee as under:- 
“In terms of personnel management, yes, there is a huge ga p between the 
sanctioned strength and the actual people who are in pl ace. Here, I think our 
experience right now has been that for the last three yea rs, there have been 
five drives which have been undertaken to recruit the peopl e. Recently, on 
the 18 th of October, 22 posts again were advertised for deputation . Then in 
February, the interview also was held and the appointment  has been issued 
to the selected candidates. Similarly, for the DG office a lso, an interview for 
four posts have been conducted. We have also given some relaxations in the 
essential eligibility criteria. On the short-term basis, wha tever shortage is 
there, they have a system of hiring young professionals and do main experts, 
which they do, which supplements their work. There is a revis ed cadre 
restructuring proposal which has been sent by CCI to us, on  which we are 
working with them… 
… in the Government, the remuneration patterns which we of fer to 
permanent cadre is a tad lower than what is there in the  market. The effort to 
be continuously updated with whatever is happening in th e current scenario, 
a lot of it will also come from the private sector. So, I th ink if we talk in a 
principle term, a kind of a balancing between a core cadre, permanent cadre, 
for which we are doing a cadre restructuring as well as we are doing existing 
recruitment drives, but simultaneously how we can better help CCI to tap into 
expertise outside the system on a short-term basis, maybe that can  also be 
looked at. We are looking at it, but now the Committee  also has guided us, 
we will do that further… 
… The point is that we can have that optimum kind of a b alance. So, this is 
what we are striving at to take into account in the ca dre restructuring 
proposal... “ 
1.88 In this regard, the Ministry has submitted the followi ng written replies:- 
“The inquiry and investigation process for anti-trust cases b efore the 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) is a multi-stage, det ailed procedure 
rooted in the principles of natural justice. Upon receiving i nformation under 
section 19(1) of the Competition Act,2002 (Act), the Commission  first forms a 
prima facie opinion based on available material and may seek additional 
input from the involved parties. If no case is found, the ma tter is closed under 

66 
 
Section 26(2) of the Act; otherwise, it is referred to the  Director General (DG) 
for investigation under Section 26(1) of the Act. The Commi ssion also has 
the power to take suo motu cognizance under section 19(1) of the Act. After 
the DG submits the report, the Commission undertakes a thoro ugh 
adjudication process—sharing reports, inviting objections, allowing hearings, 
processing settlement applications, and ensuring fair access to case 
records—all under the framework of the Act and the Competition  
Commission of India (General) Regulations, 2024.  There h ave been 
occasions where proceedings have been halted by orders of the  Hon’ble 
Courts or delayed due to incomplete pleadings (such as o bjections or 
suggestions from the parties) before the Commission. 
In the initial years of enforcement action by CCI, there wa s a need to 
proactively identify anti-competitive practices and spread awa reness among 
stakeholders. With 15 years of competition advocacy behind CCI, the need 
for suo moto cases by the CCI is lower and numerous formal compla ints and 
leniency applications are being received. The Commission als o focuses on 
proactive market surveillance through market studies in emergi ng sectors. 
This strategy enables the Commission to utilize its resources mo re efficiently 
and concentrate on cases supported by strong evidence, thereb y 
strengthening the enforcement of competition laws in India. 
Further it is to add that in order to harness the technical expertise, CCI is also 
looking to tap expertise outside the core cadre/permanent ca dre on short 
term basis.” 
1.89 The Ministry has further added the following in their post-evidence 
replies:- 
“The creation and operationalization of the Digital Markets Division (DMD) 
marks a strategic shift in the CCI’s approach to regulating di gital markets. 
CCI has taken a number of measures such as investing in sp ecialized 
manpower, fostering external collaborations, and building technical capacity 
to equip itself in terms of both judicial/ legal exper tise and technical expertise 
in light of the changing digital landscape.  
The DMD is tasked with addressing both current and emerging issues in 
digital markets, especially those related to the draft Digit al Competition Bill 
(DCB) and other specialized assignments. Its core functions in clude: 
facilitating knowledge exchange within CCI;connecting w ith external experts 
to bring in cutting-edge technical and judicial insights; engaging with industry 
stakeholders, academic institutions, other regulatory bodies, g overnment 
departments, and international agencies to stay abreast of  global best 
practices and trends; providing policy inputs and supporti ng the Commission 
in data analytics and management; etc.  
In addition, efforts have been made to streamline administ rative processes to 
maximize efficiency with the existing workforce. CCI also pla ces significant 

67 
 
emphasis on skill development, training programs, and capa city building. To 
further enhance its capabilities, CCI collaborates wit h academic institutions, 
research organizations, and international competition authorities.”  
1.90 The CCI has also added in this regard in their writte n replies as follows:- 
“Given the broad scope of antitrust law, encompassing both traditional and 
digital markets, the Competition Commission of India (CCI) h as 
undertaken measures to enhance and expand its profession al expertise 
across multiple domains, including law, economics, financial a nalysis, and 
data science. CCI has adopted a multi-pronged approach to ensure 
effective enforcement with the available resources. 
 
 Currently, 113 out of 195 sanctioned posts are filled i n CCI . CCI has 
undertaken proactive recruitment measures, including seven recru itment 
drives over the past four years, with an additional six specifi cally aimed at 
strengthening its investigative arm under the Director Genera l. To bridge 
short-term staffing limitations, CCI engages Young Professional s and 
Experts through a merit-based selection process to provide sp ecialized 
support in critical areas including digital markets, data analytics, etc. 
 
CCI recognizes the importance of structural improvements, incl uding 
increased budgetary allocations and additional manpower to fully address 
resource constraints. Therefore, cadre review and restructuring have been 
done from time to time since the year 2019. Recently, substan tive 
amendments have been made in the Competition Act 2002, w hich have 
reduced timelines and expanded the regulatory toolkit in t he form of 
introduction of commitment and settlement frameworks and a len iency 
plus regime. Therefore, CCI has sent a cadre restructuring p roposal 
including inter alia, an increase in manpower, which is requ ired for 
meeting the current requirements for effective discharge of t he mandate 
under the amended Competition Act, 2002, for approval of  the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs……….   
 
Given the increasing complexity of competition enforcement, t here is a 
need for continued institutional support, particularly in financial and human 
resource matters. For this, CCI continues to engage with t he Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs for strengthening the investigative arm and  for increase 
in human resources so as to continue to effectively addr ess emerging 
challenges.”  
  
1.91 As requested by the Committee, the CCI has furnished t he data for past 5 
years regarding sanctioned strength, actual strength and vacanc ies at various 
levels/posts in CCI at Annexure-I. 
 

68 
 
K. BUDGET OF THE CCI:  
1.92 Regarding budget allocation to the CCI, the CCI has submitted the following 
written replies:- 
“CCI is a statutory body under the Ministry of Corporate Affairs ( MCA) and 
receives Grants in Aid (GIA) from the MCA.  
 
As per Section 51 of the Competition Act, the Competition Fu nd is set up to 
meet the salaries/ allowances, administrative expenses and o ther expenses 
of the Commission in connection with the discharge of its fu nctions for the 
purposes of the Act. The credits into the Fund are by way of grants, fees and 
interest accrued thereon. 
 
CCI submits the Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates (RE) to  the 
MCA, based on the planned activities for financial year. Th e details of the RE 
(proposed by CCI), GIA allocated by the Ministry in the Financial Years 2021-
22, 2022-23, and 2023-24 are furnished below: 
 
(Fig. in Rs. crore) 
FY 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 
Particulars GIA 
Received 
Total 
Expenditure 
Expenditure 
met out of 
Internal 
Resources 
GIA 
Received 
Total 
Expenditure 
Expenditure 
met out of 
Internal 
Resources 
GIA 
Received 
Total 
Expenditure 
Expenditure 
met out of 
Internal 
Resources 
GIA Salaries 25.00 30.84 5.84 26.02 34.19 8.17 30.00 36.21 6.21 
GIA General 21.00 24.40 3.40 21.00 37.10 16.10 19.98 33.41 13.43 
Total 46.00 55.24 9.24 47.02 71.29 24.27 49.98 69.62 19.64 
 
The Competition Fund comprises of GIA received from Ministry an d internal 
funds generated through Fees and Interests. As can be seen  from the above 
table, funds allocated by the Ministry were insufficient to meet the expenditure. 
Therefore, the short-fall in the GIA is met from the accum ulated internal 
resources forming part of Competition Fund. For FY 2024-25 , Ministry has 
allocated Rs. 51.00 crore under BE.  CCI had proposed RE to t he tune of Rs. 
78.21 crore.  The allocation under RE is awaited”  
 
  

69 
 
1.93 The Committee has inquired about the reasons behi nd the seemingly 
insufficient allocation of funds to the CCI from fina ncial year 2021-22 to 2023-24 
especially given the CCI's critical role in the evolving digi tal economy. The 
Committee also desired to understand the rationale for th e CCI's budget remaining 
stagnant at Rs. 51 crore despite the rapid growth of the gl obal and Indian digital 
markets. Furthermore, the Committee asked for a comparison o f the funds 
allocated to the CCI over the last ten financial years against the CCI's actual 
budgetary demands during the same period. The CCI has sub mitted written post-
evidence replies as under:- 
 “Financial resources are critical for the effective functio ning of any 
competition authority. CCI continues to engage with th e Government for 
requisite resources and undertakes strategic prioritization of initiatives so as 
topro-actively pursue its mandate across sectors and expand into  emerging 
domains like AI, Data analytics, etc.  
 
The funds allocated to CCI in the last ten financial yea rs vis-à-vis demand is 
as per Annexure-II. 
Grants-in-Aid released by the Ministry is in commensurate with t he CCI’s 
Budgetary requirement considering the internal resources availa ble with CCI. 
The CCI collects fees from regulatory filings and gets in come from interest. 
Details of allocation of funds for Competition Commission of India (CCI), 
CCI’s income from fees & interest and the expenditure incurre d in last 5 
years are as below: 
(Rs in crore) 
Year BE RE 
RE 
(submitted 
by CCI) 
Grants Released 
by the Ministry 
 CCI’s income 
from Fees and 
Interest 
Expenditure 
2020-21 66.00 53.19 69.32 46.15 27.05   68.80 
2021-22 46.00 46.00 59.82 46.00 28.25 55.24 
2022-23 46.00 47.02 73.00 47.02 29.65 71.29 
2023-24 51.00 49.98 85.33 49.98 34.54 69.62 
2024-25  51.00 51.00 78.21 51.00 
44.67 
(upto 
31.3.2025-
excluding 
interest) 
64.75  
 
Hence, CCI has received sufficient Grants-in-Aid from Minist ry to effectively 
execute its mandate.  
 

70 
 
Beside this, Rule 229(iv) and 230(6) of General Financia l Rules 2017 
stipulates some provisions regarding Grants-In-Aid and Loans which is 
delineated as below: 
"Rule 229(iv): All autonomous organisations, new or already i n existence 
should be encouraged to maximise generation of internal resou rces and 
eventually attain self-sufficiency. 
 Rule 230 (6): The Grants sanctioning authorities should  not only take into 
account the internally generated resources while regulating the award of 
Grants but should consider laying down targets for int ernal resources 
generation by the Grantee Institutions or Organisations e very financial year, 
particularly where Grants are given on a recurring basis every year." 
 
1.94 When the Committee further asked about the Ministry's concrete plans for 
funding and equipping the CCI Digital Market Division  with the specialized 
technical expertise and sufficient human resources required to effectively regulate 
competition in the digital economy, Secretary, Ministry of C orporate Affairs has 
stated as follows:- … 
“….the funding which we have provided to them  also takes into account the 
fees which they anyway collect through regulatory filings a nd from their 
interests. For 2024-2025, their income from fees and intere st was Rs. 35.11 
crore. We gave them almost Rs. 51 crore. We gave the entire amou nt. So 
actually, there is an element of self-sufficiency in the wa y the CCI is running. 
As a matter of principle also, the Government would like to  encourage them 
to be self-sufficient. However, keeping that in mind, if a ny further requirement 
is sought from CCI in terms of undertaking a major shake-up or a  major 
restructuring of the way it functions, then at that time, t he Government will 
definitely provide the funds to it.” 
  

71 
 
L. PENALTIES IMPOSED BY THE CCI 
1.95 Monetary penalties imposed and realized by the CCI du ring the years from 
2021-22 and 2023-24 are given below:- 
(Rs.crore) 
Year No. of 
cases 
Penalty 
imposed 
Penalty 
realized 
Penalty 
refunded/ 
being 
refunded 
Net Penalty realized as on 
March 31, 2024 
Realized 
without 
resorting 
to Section 
39(2) 
Referred 
to IT 
Dept 
Realized 
by IT 
Dept 
2021-22 19 1335.77 177.23. -- 177.23 -- -- 
2022-23 19 2672.48 1340.41 -- 1340.41 -- -- 
2023-24 07 2.55 2.15 -- 2.15 -- -- 
 
1.96 When asked as to why penalty enforcement has been  weak despite the 
Supreme Court's 10% pre-deposit condition for appeals; whet her the 2023 
Amendment Act's new provision, which mandates a 20% pre-deposit , will 
significantly improve penalty recovery; and the monitoring mech anisms for 
realization of penalties, the Ministry in their written post-evidence replies has stated 
the following:- 
 “The Competition Amendment Act, 2023 provides for penalties up to 10% of 
global turnover of enterprises found to be contravening p rovisions of the Act. 
Thus, the Act provides significant penalties, benchmarked t o global turnover, 
for penalising enterprises indulging in anticompetitive  practices which also 
act as a deterrent for enterprises with global presence.   
The detailed penalty structure prescribed through Competitio n Commission 
of India (Detrmination of Monetary Penalty) Guidelines, 2024 ensures fair 
and proportionate punishment for violations. 
As on 30.04.2025, out of the total imposed penalty of Rs 20,350.46 crore, an 
amount of Rs. 18,512.28 crore has either been stayed or di smissed by the 
Appellate Courts. Thus, the amount realizable as on 30.04. 2025 is Rs. 

72 
 
1,838.19 crore only. An amount of Rs. 1823.57 crore has bee n realized. 
Thus, 99.20% of realizable amount has been recovered.  
As per proviso to Section 53B.(2) of the Act, no appeal by a pe rson, who is 
required to pay any amount in terms of an order of the Commis sion, shall be 
entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless the appell ant has deposited 
twenty-five per cent of that amount in the manner as direct ed by the 
Appellate Tribunal. 
Any amount as a deposit condition mandated by the appellat e court is 
deposited in the registry of respective appellate court. 
Case  Issues  Decision  
Google  
(Case Nos. 07 & 
30 of 2012) 
Search bias in online general 
search which deprived users of 
alternative choices. Agreements 
limited publishers' ability to use 
competing search services. 
Leveraged its dominance to 
strengthen its position in online 
syndicate search service. 
CCI imposed a penalty 
of Rs. 135.86 crore; 
directed Google to 
cease and desist from 
anti-competitive 
activities; and directed 
Google to carry out 
certain remedial 
measures. 
  
Google   
(Case No. 39 of 
2018) 
  
Mandatory pre-installation of 
Google Mobile Suite (GMS) under 
MADA with prominent placement 
on Android mobile phones  
  
Leveraged dominance in the online 
search market, denying market 
access to competing search apps 
  
Reduced OEMs' ability to develop 
and sell devices with Android forks, 
limiting innovation and harming 
consumers 
  
CCI imposed a 
provisional monetary 
penalty of Rs. 1337.76 
Crores; issued a cease-
and-desist order, and 
directed Google to carry 
out certain remedial 
measures. 
  
  
  

73 
 
Google  
(Case Nos. 07 of 
2020, 14 of 2021 
and 35 of 2021) 
Mandatory use of Google Play 
Billing System (GPBS) for in- app 
purchases of digital goods  
Discriminatory treatment of its own 
apps, like YouTube, which bypass 
GPBS fees 
Leveraged its dominance in the 
mobile OS and app store markets 
to protect its position in 
downstream markets 
CCI imposed a 
provisional penalty of 
Rs. 936.44 crore on 
Google; directed Google 
to cease and desist from 
anti-competitive 
activities and directed 
Google to carry out 
certain remedial 
measures  
WhatsApp/ 
Facebook (Meta) 
  
(Suo-Moto Case 
no. 01 of 2021)
   
  
WhatsApp's 2021 policy update, 
implemented on a "take-it-or-leave-
it" basis, undermined user 
autonomy, leveraged network 
effects, and constituted abuse of its 
dominant position  
   
Sharing of WhatsApp user data 
within Meta for non-service- related 
purposes created entry barriers for 
competitors in the display 
advertisement market 
CCI imposed penalty of 
Rs. 213.14 crore on 
Meta; directed Meta to 
cease and desist from 
anti-competitive 
activities and directed 
Meta to carry out certain 
remedial measures 
   
Federation of 
Hotel & 
Restaurant 
Association of 
India vs MMT 
with 01/2020 
Ruptub Solutions 
Private Limited 
vs MMT  
(Case no. 14 of 
2019) 
Imposition of price and room parity 
obligations 
 Exclusivity conditions: Restriction 
on hotel partners to list on other 
platforms.  
 Denial of market access (delisting): 
Commercial arrangement between 
OYO vide which Fabhotels, Treebo 
were delisted from MMT. 
CCI imposed monetary 
penalty of Rs 223.48 
crores; directed MMT-
Go to cease and desist 
from anti-competitive 
activities and directed 
MMT-Go to carry out 
certain remedial 
measures. 
 
1.97 The CCI in their written replies has inter-alia stated that Google Search Bias 
Case and Google Play Store Matter are sub-judice before the Hon’ble NCLAT; and  
Google Android Case  is being considered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
 

74 
 
1.98 To a specific query about the non- enforcement of C CI’s order for the last two 
years to levy a fine on Google to the tune of Rs. 980 cro re or Rs. 1,000 crore, 
steps being taken to ensure that Global giants like goog le, Amazon, Facebook do 
not abuse their market position to stifle local competitio n, especially MSMEs and 
startups; the effectiveness of penalties in curbing fut ure market abuse by them; 
and any study has been done or being contemplated to be d one on this issue, 
Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs has informed the Commi ttee during the 
oral evidence on 28 April, 2025 as follows:- 
“There is one important point which everybody has raised reg arding the 
penalty…..  the penalty imposed so far has been around to the tune of Rs. 
20,134 crore. About Rs. 3,745 crore has been set aside or remanded back by 
the appellate courts. About Rs. 14,770 crore has been stayed  by the 
appellate courts, and the remaining amount is about Rs. 1,616 crore, out of 
which they have realized a penalty of Rs. 1,605 crore. That is a penalty which 
they have realized. Yes, litigation is an issue,  but I t hink in a complex and 
commercial subject like competition,  we cannot do away wit h the litigation at 
the superior court  because a lot of times, a lot of jurispru dence comes out of 
that, which then further informs our strategy in terms of th e amendments in 
the Act and the rules. So, that is something which we wil l have to be looking 
at. Yes, a proper defence in the courts I think CCI is d oing. If anything further 
needs to be done in that regard, we will be working wit h them. I know 
recently, as of now, there was a current judgment which act ually according to 
us and them, misread or misinterpreted the provisions of merger a nd 
acquisition in a provision. Investigation is not necessary,  so t hey have gone 
for an SLP in that, and we have obviously supported the m in that particular 
aspect. So, that is something  which will go on.  
In terms of specific cases which CCI has done in the digital  market space, I 
think that information was provided. In case it has not r eached the 
Committee, I will make sure that it gets to them. The inf ormation which I have  
in terms of the penalties which have been levied on  Go ogle and Meta  in 
which I think in one of the cases of Google,  they have re alized the penalty of 
Rs. 1337 crore, and in Meta,  50 per cent of the penalty o f Rs. 213 crore, out 
of which 25 per cent has been paid and 25 per cent more is due to be paid. 
These are the two big ones which we were discussing, but I will request them 
to give other details to us and then we will pass it on to the Committee” 
1.99 The representative of the CCI has further added as follows:-. 
“… some of the recent interventions of CCI where orders have b een passed 
and we have shared with the hon. Committee.  If require d, we can provide 
greater details.  Apart from penalty, a lot of remedies and  directions have 
been given.  Those remedies have entirely been there keeping  in mind that 

75 
 
they allow other competitors to come in and big entities against which these 
orders have been passed, they do not foreclose competition for others.  They 
allow a fair opportunity for others to compete. The consume rs in the process 
get a choice. In fact, that is essentially the thrust of our interventions…” 
 1.100 The CCI has further add the following in their written replies:- 
“Since its inception, CCI has been enforcing the Act and promo ting fair 
competition in the markets. CCI plays a pivotal role in ensu ring fair 
competition and preventing anti-competitive practices in the markets. It has 
issued orders against various entities including those in e merging digital 
markets including big-tech companies that are found to have vi olated the 
provisions of the Act, imposing monetary penalties upon th em besides 
issuing other remedies, to address market distortions. CCI continues to refine 
its regulatory framework to foster competitive neutrality afte r considering the 
inputs from stakeholders. Further, CCI, through its enforce ment and 
advocacy mandate, seeks to promote and sustain competition in the markets, 
besides carrying out market corrections to eliminate distortio ns.CCI also 
conducts in-depth market studies in different sectors includin g emerging 
digital sectors to understand their dynamics, potential co mpetition issues, 
and evolving business practices.  
  
The Market Study on E-commerce (2020) examined platforms like Amazo n, 
Flipkart, Zomato, etc., identifying concerns around platform neutrality, search 
ranking, deep discounting, and exclusive tie-ups. Tying an d bundling 
arrangements, exclusive dealing agreements and exclusive distr ibution 
agreements fall under the purview of Section 3(4) of the  Competition Act, 
2002 (Act), which deals with anti-competitive vertical agree ments. On the 
other hand, unfair pricing including predatory pricing by do minant enterprises 
are examined under Section 4(2)(a) of the Act. CCI acti vely investigates and 
penalizes abuse of dominance and anti-competitive agreemen ts in digital 
markets including by any big-tech companies.” 
 
M. CROSS JURISDICTION,  GLOBAL COLLABORATION AND 
COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATORS 
 
1.101 On being asked the views of the Ministry on addressing  and tackling cross 
jurisdictional competition issues in digital markets given the global nature of 
many digital platforms and the localized effects of th eir practice, the Ministry/ CCI 
submitted their written replies as under:- 
“Under Section 32 of the Competition Act, CCI has the po wer to inquire into 
acts taking place outside India but having an appreciable  adverse effect on 
competition in India.  

76 
 
 
Given the cross-border nature of Big Tech operations, competit ion authorities 
(including CCI) are increasingly engaging in the exchange of knowledge and 
experience to create more coherent regulatory approaches that can ensure 
digital markets remain contestable and competitive, while  minimizing the risk 
of regulatory arbitrage. 
The legislative frameworks and institutional structures vary ac ross 
jurisdictions. Having due regard to the variances and jurisdicti onal 
specificities, competition authorities, through effective co operation and 
dialogue, are striving for greater alignment in regulato ry practices at an 
international level to address the shared concerns arising from anti-
competitive conduct of Big Tech.”  
 
1.102 One of the key issues that the Ministry highlighted is jurisdictional overlaps 
between CCI and other sector regulators.  On being asked about the 
coordination between CCI and other regulatory bodies, th e Secretary, MCA 
responded as follows during oral evidence of the Committee on 28 April, 2025:- 
“As regards the concern of the Committee regarding the jurisd ictional overlap 
and the kind of coordination mechanism which is available b etween the 
various regulatory agencies,  I would request her to give an  input. If you want 
further details from our side, we will definitely go back and look at it and see if 
that can be smoothened. I definitely know as a fact for  MCA, the data which 
we collect through regulatory filings, that we share on a reg ular basis with all 
the regulators, including all the enforcement agencies. W e are sharing the 
data on a regular basis. with the Income Tax Department, with the SFIO, with 
SEBI.  We have an MOU with them, so we share that data w ith them, so that 
everybody works in a cohesive fashion…”  
 
1.103 The representative of CCI has further added as follows:- 
“As regards the inter-regulatory coordination, as Madam has poin ted out, our 
focus is definitely on the competition issues that are ema nating from a 
matter.  Our law provides for a very comprehensive regulatory mechan ism 
under Section 21, which are twin sections which allow us to  make a 
reference to other authorities.  They can also make reference  likewise to us if 
there are issues which are overlapping in nature. Through  the use of these 
mechanisms, we try to ensure that there is harmony in action an d we do not 
transgress into each other’s jurisdiction…” 

77 
 
1.104 In this regard, the Ministry in their  post-evidence written reply stated as 
follows:- 
“The anti-trust law framework is an important regulatory tool t o address the 
exploitative and exclusionary behavior arising out of data  accumulation and 
degradation of privacy standards by the entities commanding market power. 
CCI as such does not look into data protection per se. CC I’s role comes into 
play when usage of data as a non-price parameter leads to anti-competitive 
practices.  
 The Competition Act provides for a robust architecture for inter -regulatory 
consultation and coordination through the twin mirror refl ection provisions 
provided in Sections 21 and 21A of the Competition Act.  
Further, as per proviso to Section 18 of the Act introduce d through 
Competition Amendment Act, 2023, the Commission may, for the p urpose of 
discharging its duties or performing its functions under the  Act, enter into any 
memorandum or arrangement with any statutory authority or depa rtment of 
Government.  
Thus, the legislature has provided for robust and harmonio us working of CCI 
vis-à-vis other regulators. This facilitates comity amongst the regulators 
which is so imperative for efficient working of markets and obvi ates 
regulatory arbitrage.” 
The Ministry has also submitted that:- 
“Inter-regulatory coordination between CCI and sectoral re gulators is vital. 
CCI actively consults and collaborates with other regula tors like TRAI, SEBI 
while examining sector-specific competition issues. The aim is to maintain 
open channels of communication to address competition concern s effectively 
while respecting other regulatory mandates.”  
1.105 Further asked about the global best practices in o vercoming the 
jurisdictional overlaps; and how does the Ministry propose to protect both 
competition and sectoral objectives without creating regul atory chaos, the 
Ministry in their post-evidence replies stated as under:- 
“The Competition Act provides for a robust architecture for in ter-regulatory 
consultation and coordination through the twin mirror refl ection provisions 
provided in Sections 21 and 21A of the Competition Act.  
Further, as per proviso to Section 18 of the Act, the Commissio n may, for the 
purpose of discharging its duties or performing its functions  under the Act, 
enter into any memorandum or arrangement with any statutory authority or 
department of Government.  

78 
 
Thus, the legislature has provided for robust and harmonio us working of CCI 
vis-à-vis other regulators. This facilitates comity amongst the regulators 
which is so imperative for efficient working of markets and obvi ates 
regulatory arbitrage. 
The position in India as per the Competition Act, 2002  and global best 
practices/position for co-operation and coordination between  competition 
agencies and sectoral regulators is annexed as Annexure-III.” 
1.106 On being asked about the mechanism and process b y which the CCI 
coordinate with international regulators on cross-border compe tition issues; and 
how can they be strengthened further and made more robus t, the CCI in their 
written replies has stated the following:- 
 
“The Competition Act, 2002, empowers CCI to enter into memora nda or 
arrangements with foreign antitrust agencies, facilitating cooperation in 
competition law and policy. Pursuant to this mandate, CCI  has established 
bilateral and multilateral Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with major 
competition authorities, including those of the Unite d States, the European 
Union, Australia, Canada, Brazil, Russia, Japan, Mauritius, Egyp t, and the 
BRICS nations. 
The MoUs envisage to set up an institutional partnership bet ween CCI and 
other competition authorities through a framework of bilat eral/ multilateral 
cooperation in the field of competition law and policy . Under the aegis of the 
MoUs, CCI engages in discussions with foreign competition authorities to 
exchange knowledge, experiences, and best practices. CCI also focuses on 
continuous building of its institutional capacity by org anizing training 
programs and workshops for its staff in collaboration with for eign competition 
authorities.  
Further, CCI actively engages with the global antitrust co mmunity through 
multilateral forums like the International Competition N etwork (ICN), United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) t o keep 
abreast of the international best practices on cross-border comp etition 
issues. 
In view of the growing cross-border competition issues, CCI has prioritized its 
global engagement and will continue to focus on forgin g effective 
international collaborations through dialogue, knowled ge sharing and 
technical cooperation.”
 
  

79 
 
1.107 The Ministry in their post-evidence replies has furthe r added as follows:- 
“…..List of Bilateral/Multilateral Memoranda of Understandin g (MoU) signed 
by Competition Commission of India (CCI) 
Sl 
no. 
Description Signing 
Date 
1 MoU between CCI and Competition Commission of 
Egyptian Competition Authority (ECA)  
25/06/2023 
2 MoU between CCI and Competition Commission of 
Mauritius (CCM)  
23/02/2022 
3 Memorandum on Cooperation (MoC) between CCI and 
Japan Fair Trade Commission (JFTC)  
06/08/2021 
4 MoU between CCI and the Administrative Council for 
Economic Defense of Brazil (CADE)  
18/06/2021 
5 MoU between the competition authorities of the Federative  
Republic of Brazil, the Russian Federation, the Republic of 
India, the People’s Republic of China and the Republic of 
South Africa.  
19/05/2016 
6 MoU between CCI and Competition Bureau Canada (CB)  01/12/2014 
7 MoU between CCI and the Directorate General for 
Competition of the European Commission (DG, 
Competition) 
21/11/2013 
8 MoU between CCI and Australian Competition and 
Consumer Commission (ACCC)  
03/06/2013 
9 MoU between CCI and United States Department of 
Justice (DOJ) and Federal Trade Commission (FTC)  
27/09/2012 
10 MoU between CCI and Federal Antimonopoly Service 
(Russia)  
16/12/2011 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Competition Act, 2002, as amended by the Competition  (Amendment) 
Act, 2007, follows the philosophy of modern competition l aws. The Act prohibits 
anti-competitive agreements, abuse of dominant position by  enterprises and 
regulates combinations (acquisition, acquiring of contr ol and M&A), which 
causes or likely to cause an appreciable adverse effe ct on competition within 
India.The objectives of the Act are sought to be achiev ed through the 
Competition Commission of India, which was established by the Central 
Government with effect from 14th October 2003. The Comm ission has been 
established to eliminate practices having adverse effect on competition, promote 
and sustain competition, protect the interests of consu mers and ensure freedom 
of trade in the markets of India 
1.  DIGITAL COMPETITION REGULATION 
The Committee note that since the early 1990s, India's ec onomic 
liberalization has been driven by market-based mechani sms. The rapid adoption 
of digital technologies, however, has introduced a new phase that presents both 
immense opportunities and significant challenges for com petition regulation. The 
Committee also note that the unique characteristics of digit al markets, such as 
network effects and data advantage, have led to a concentra tion of economic 
power in a few large technology platforms that act as " gatekeepers." This 
necessitates a nuanced regulatory approach to balance innovation incentives 

81 
 
with the imperative of maintaining fair competition. The C ommittee further note 
that while a National Competition Policy (NCP) was drafted i n 2011 to enhance 
market efficiency, it is yet to be implemented. The Comm ittee observe that the 
Competition Act, 2002, with its traditional ex-post enforcement, is less effective in 
the fast-paced digital economy. The Committee also speci fically observe the 
exclusion of Virtual Assistants from the Draft Digital Compe tition Bill, noting the 
need for their inclusion in line with global practices. Therefore, a fundamental 
shift from a reactive to a proactive, ex-ante regulatory fr amework is required to 
address the complexities posed by practices like sel f-preferencing, predatory 
pricing, and tying and bundling. The Committee, therefor e, recommend that a 
nuanced approach is adopted in the Digital Competition B ill (DCB), avoiding 
blanket prohibitions and allowing for context-specific a ssessments. Furthermore, 
the Committee emphasize that ongoing market studies on AI and other sectors 
should serve as foundational evidence for refining the D CB. The Committee 
stress the urgency for the CCI to remain agile and contin uously adapt its tools 
and strategies to keep pace with rapid technological a dvancements and ensure 
effective competition law enforcement in the evolving digi tal landscape. The 
Committee believe that NCP may act as a cross-sectoral fr amework to foster a 
unified competition culture and harmonize various laws a nd policies across 
Central and State governments. The NCP should also be de signed to empower 
the CCI, ensuring its autonomy and encouraging a coope rative relationship with 
other sectoral regulators to enhance coordination and e nsure consistent 
enforcement.  

82 
 
2. EVOLUTION OF THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK: EX-POST AND EX-ANTE 
The Committee note that the Competition Act, 2002, with its ex-post 
framework, is ill-equipped to handle the rapid concentra tion of power in digital 
markets. Recognizing this limitation, the Committee on Dig ital Competition Law 
(CDCL) proposed a separate ex-ante regulatory mechanism through a Draft Bill 
on Digital Competition Law (DCB).This framework aims to pr event anti-
competitive conduct before it harms consumer interests, s pecifically targeting 
Systemically Significant Digital Enterprises (SSDEs) based on quantitative and 
qualitative criteria.The DCB, which is currently under  public consultation, 
identifies nine Core Digital Services and imposes oblig ations on SSDEs to 
prevent anti-competitive practices.This move aligns with global trends, as seen in 
the EU's Digital Markets Act (DMA) and the UK's Digital Market s, Competition and 
Consumers (DMCC) Act 2024.However, stakeholders have raised concerns about 
the DCB's proposed thresholds potentially capturing India n companies 
prematurely, the absence of a rebuttal mechanism for SSDE d esignation, and 
potential overlaps with existing laws like the DPDP Act. 
The Committee observe that while the DCB and the EU's DMA  share the 
objective of regulating large digital enterprises, their approaches differ 
significantly. The DCB covers 9 Core Digital Services  (CDS), one less than the 
DMA, and uses more inclusive definitions. A key differe nce is the absence of a 
rebuttal mechanism in the DCB, which is a feature of the  DMA. Furthermore, the 
DCB's thresholds for SSDE designation are based on a "s pread test" using either 
end-user or business-user thresholds, unlike the DMA whi ch requires both. The 

83 
 
DCB also grants the CCI flexibility to specify distinct conduct obligations for each 
CDS through subordinate legislation, a difference from th e DMA's direct statutory 
obligations. To address stakeholder concerns, the Com mittee recommend that 
the Ministry refine the DCB's thresholds and designation  mechanisms to prevent 
inadvertent capturing of fast-growing domestic firms. The  Committee also 
recommend the introduction of a rebuttal mechanism in ex ceptional cases, for 
SSDE designation, similar to the EU's DMA, to ensure fairness  and provide 
regulatory certainty. 

84 
 
3. INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND RESOURCE GAPS 
The Committee note that the digital economy presents significant challenges 
for regulators, demanding continuous adaptation and agil ity. The complexity and 
scale of digital market cases strain the CCI's resources , demanding specialized 
skills beyond traditional economic and legal analysis . This includes the ability to 
analyze big data, understand algorithmic design, and e xpertise in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and machine learning to assess their im pact on competition and 
consumer welfare. The move towards ex-ante regulation, when fully implemented, 
will further necessitate an increase in specifically sp ecialized personnel such as 
data scientists, technologists, and market analysts, to c omplement the CCI's 
existing legal and economic expertise.  
The Committee observe that the CCI's ability to effectively r egulate India's 
dynamic markets, particularly the complex digital econ omy, is significantly 
influenced by its institutional capacity, especially in terms of human resources 
and specialized technical expertise. As of March 31, 20 24, only 113 out of 195 
sanctioned posts in the CCI were filled, indicating a significant vacancy rate. The 
Ministry acknowledges this "huge gap between the sanctio ned strength and the 
actual people who are in place." In the Director Gene ral Office, out of 41 
sanctioned posts, only 17 were filled in 2020-21, incre asing to 23 in 2022-23, but 
dropping to 16 in 2023-24, and further to 13 in 2024-25. 
  

85 
 
A strategic response to these challenges has been the es tablishment and 
operationalization of the Digital Markets Division (DMD) w ithin the CCI in 
September 2024. The DMD is a dedicated unit focused on d igital market issues, 
currently staffed with a core team of seven persons. The Ministry has noted the 
need to strengthen the DMD with technical experts and has a cadre restructuring 
proposal under consideration for the creation of 55 add itional posts to enhance 
the CCI's resource capacity.  
Financial resources are also critical for the effective functioning of any 
regulatory authority. While the CCI receives Grants-in-Ai d (GIA) from the MCA 
and generates internal funds, the allocated funds have c onsistently been 
insufficient to meet the total expenditure, with shortfalls covered by internal 
resources. For instance, in FY 2021-22, the total expend iture was Rs. 55.24 crore, 
with a GIA of Rs. 46.00 crore, and Rs. 9.24 crore met  from internal resources. In 
FY 2022-23, total expenditure rose to Rs. 71.29 crore, wi th GIA at Rs. 47.02 crore 
and Rs. 24.27 crore from internal resources. For FY 20 23-24, total expenditure 
was Rs. 69.62 crore, while GIA was Rs. 49.98 crore,  with Rs. 19.64 crore met from 
internal resources. For FY 2024-25, the Ministry allocat ed Rs. 51.00 crore under 
Budget Estimates, while the CCI had proposed Revised Es timates to the tune of 
Rs. 78.21 crore. 
  

86 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the following: - 
(i) Address Human Resource Gaps: The MCA, in collaborati on with the CCI, 
must expedite the cadre restructuring proposal and incre ase the sanctioned 
strength of the CCI, particularly for specialized roles in the Digital Markets 
Division (DMD). Efforts should be made to attract and retain top talent, 
including data scientists, technologists, and market an alysts, by exploring 
flexible engagement models (e.g., short-term contracts for experts). 
(ii) Ensure Adequate Budgetary Allocations: The MCA should ensure that the 
Grants-in-Aid (GIA) allocated to the CCI are sufficient to meet  its actual 
budgetary demands, rather than relying heavily on inter nal resources to 
cover shortfalls. Increased funding is critical for the CCI to effectively 
regulate the complex and rapidly evolving digital econ omy, invest in 
advanced analytical tools, and conduct comprehensive market studies. 
(iii) Strengthen Technical Expertise: Continuous investment in training 
programs and workshops for CCI staff on emerging technol ogies like AI, 
machine learning, and algorithmic modeling is essenti al. Collaboration with 
academic institutions and international counterparts shoul d be expanded to 
facilitate knowledge sharing and capacity building in these specialized 
areas. 
 
 
 

87 
 
4. ENFORCEMENT EFFECTIVENESS AND LITIGATION CHALLENGES 
The Committee note that the CCI employs a dual approach of  enforcement 
and advocacy to regulate businesses. While extensive  advocacy efforts—385 
events in 2022-23 and 365 in 2023-24—foster awareness, enforcement faces 
significant challenges, particularly in digital markets , where investigations are 
often stalled or orders are stayed by courts. Since its inc eption until January 10, 
2025, the CCI has received 1,303 antitrust cases and 1,229 merger control notices, 
disposing of 1,168 and 1,109 respectively. The averag e number of days to 
dispose of a combination notice was 17 in 2021-22, 21 in 2022-23, and 16 in 2023-
24, highlighting the CCI's efficiency in merger control. 
The Committee observe that the CCI has taken significant en forcement 
actions against major digital players, imposing subs tantial penalties, such as Rs. 
135.86 crore in the Google search bias case and a pr ovisional penalty of Rs. 
1337.76 crore in the Google Android matter. However, a  detailed analysis of 
penalty realization reveals a significant challenge. Whi le the CCI imposed Rs. 
1,335.77 crore in penalties in FY 2021-22 (realizing Rs.  177.23 crore) and Rs. 
2,672.48 crore in FY 2022-23 (realizing Rs. 1,340.41 c rore), a substantial portion of 
total imposed penalties has been effectively stalled by li tigation. As of April 30, 
2025, out of a total imposed penalty of Rs. 20,350.46 cror e, a massive amount of 
Rs. 18,512.28 crore has been either stayed or dismiss ed by appellate courts. This 
makes the remaining amount of Rs. 1,838.19 crore "real izable," of which the CCI 
has realized Rs. 1,823.57 crore, a high realization r ate of 99.20%. This data 

88 
 
indicates that while the CCI is effective at collecting pe nalties that are not under 
litigation, its overall enforcement is significantly unde rmined by legal challenges. 
The new provision mandating a 25% pre-deposit for appe als is a measure 
intended to address this problem. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the CCI, in coordina tion with the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), should explore measur es to reduce litigation 
delays and ensure the effective enforcement of its orders , particularly in complex 
digital market cases. This includes adopting robust le gal defense strategies and 
continuously assessing the effectiveness of new provisio ns like the 25% pre-
deposit for appeals. Addressing these legal challenges  is critical in ensuring that 
the CCI's enforcement actions translate into tangible deter rence and 
accountability. 
 
  

89 
 
5. PROTECTION OF MSMES AND SMALL BUSINESSES 
The Committee note that the digital revolution, while offeri ng immense 
opportunities, also brings significant risks for Micro, S mall, and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs). A key concern is the concentration of e conomic power in a 
few large technology platforms that act as intermediaries , which can stifle the 
growth and market access of smaller players. Practices like predatory pricing and 
deep discounting by major online platforms pose a dire ct threat to small retailers. 
The Committee observes that the Deal Value Threshold (DVT) o f Rs. 2000 crore, 
introduced to capture strategic digital transactions, has  raised concerns that it 
may allow large corporations to acquire MSMEs without reg ulatory scrutiny. The 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) acknowledged these chall enges and clarified 
that the CCI's enforcement actions are designed to protec t MSMEs from anti-
competitive practices. The CCI also conducts advocacy p rograms to help MSMEs 
understand their rights under the Competition Act and the  concerns persisting 
regarding predatory pricing and deep discounting by e -commerce platforms can 
be investigated under Section 3 or Section 4 of the Comp etition Act. The Ministry 
has emphasized that the ongoing market study will provide  evidence-based 
solutions for balancing competition and innovation, esp ecially for MSMEs and 
startups.  
The Committee, however, recommend that the Deal Value Thre shold (DVT) 
of Rs. 2000 crore should be reviewed by the MCA and CC I. This reassessment is 
crucial to ensure the threshold does not inadvertently fac ilitate the acquisition of 
MSMEs by larger corporations without regulatory scrutiny, thereby preventing the 

90 
 
creation of monopolies or duopolies that harm fair competition. A lower threshold 
for acquisitions involving MSMEs could be considered if m arket studies indicate 
so. Secondly, the CCI should continue its proactive inv estigations into predatory 
pricing and deep discounting by dominant online platf orms to prevent these 
practices from harming small retailers. Specific guide lines could be developed to 
clarify when such practices become anti-competitive. Finally, mechanisms should 
be put in place to ensure data access for smaller busin esses, enabling them to 
compete effectively against large digital enterprises tha t control vast amounts of 
data. 
 
 

91 
 
6. CROSS-JURISDICTIONAL AND INTER-REGULATORY COORDINATION 
The Committee note that digital markets transcend national borders, 
requiring the CCI to collaborate with international compe tition authorities to 
address anti-competitive practices that originate abroad but have local effects. 
Furthermore, the digital landscape involves overlappin g issues, such as privacy 
and data protection, which fall under the purview of var ious sectoral regulators. 
Effective coordination between the CCI and these other reg ulatory bodies is 
crucial to ensure a comprehensive and coherent approa ch, avoiding regulatory 
chaos and meeting both competition and sectoral objectives. 
The Committee observe that the Competition Act, 2002, empowe rs the CCI 
to inquire into acts outside India that have an appreciabl e adverse effect on 
competition within the country (Section 32). The CCI has acti vely strengthened its 
international ties by signing 10 bilateral/multilateral Memoranda of Understanding 
(MoUs) with competition authorities from countries like Egypt , Mauritius, Japan, 
and Brazil, as well as with BRICS nations, the EU, and  the US. The CCI also 
participates in multilateral forums like the ICN and OECD , becoming an ICN 
Steering Group member in October 2023. Domestically, the  Act provides a 
framework for inter-regulatory consultation through Sections  21 and 21A, and a 
proviso to Section 18, introduced in 2023, explicitly a llows for MoUs with other 
statutory authorities. The CCI actively consults with regu lators like TRAI and 
SEBI. Global best practices, such as the UK's Digital Reg ulation Cooperation 
Forum, also emphasize the importance of cooperation mec hanisms to overcome 
jurisdictional overlaps. 

92 
 
In view of the above, the Committee would like to recomme nd that, firstly, 
the CCI and the MCA should prioritize enhancing inter-regu latory harmony. This 
involves proactively collaborating with other sectoral regulators, such as the Data 
Protection Authority and MeitY, to identify and address juri sdictional overlaps. To 
achieve this, they may formalize Memoranda of Understandin g (MoUs) and 
establish clear protocols for information sharing and jo int action. Secondly, to 
strengthen its international cooperation, the CCI should continue to deepen its 
engagement with global competition authorities through bila teral MoUs and 
multilateral forums. Such collaboration is vital for shar ing enforcement 
experiences, aligning regulatory strategies, and effectiv ely tackling the global 
anti-competitive practices of digital platforms. Foreign J urisdictions are 
attempting to undercut regulatory oversight and remits by unilaterally trying to 
coerce regulations in other countries not to discharge  their statutory 
responsibility. The CCI must be vigilant and mindful of such efforts.   

93 
 
7. PROACTIVE MARKET MONITORING AND CONSUMER WELFARE 
The Committee note the critical need for the Competition Com mission of 
India (CCI) is to transition from a reactive "post-mortem" approach to a proactive 
strategy to effectively regulate the rapidly evolving digi tal economy. A 
fundamental objective of the Competition Act, 2002, is to p rotect consumer 
interests, and in digital markets, this harm extends bey ond price to encompass 
reduced service quality, diminished privacy, and en try barriers created by 
dominant firms' data accumulation. The Committee observe  that the CCI has 
already demonstrated a proactive shift by using market stud ies, such as the e-
commerce study in January 2020 and the taxi and cab ag gregator study in 
September 2022, which led to important advisories. Notab ly, no new information 
alleging anti-competitive practices has been received since the latter study's 
advisory. The CCI's forward-looking approach is furthe r evidenced by its ongoing 
Market Study on AI and Competition, initiated in 2024, with a report anticipated by 
the end of June 2025. This study is crucial for develo ping an evidence-based 
foundation for ex-ante regulation. The CCI has a commenda ble record, having 
examined over 1,180 antitrust cases and disposed of 1,2 15 M&A cases, with 
remedies in 31 instances, while assessing dominance  based on comprehensive 
factors from Section 19(4) of the Act. In light of these obse rvations, the 
Committee impress upon the CCI to expand its sector-specifi c market studies 
into emerging areas where new business models are di srupting traditional 
competition dynamics. The findings from these studies shou ld directly inform 
policy interventions.  

94 
 
Furthermore, the CCI should holistically integrate consumer welfare into its 
enforcement, focusing on non-price parameters like data privacy and quality of 
service, and should collaborate with the Data Protection A uthority to address the 
interconnected implications of data usage on both competiti on and consumer 
protection.  
  

95 
 
8. CONCLUSION 
The Competition Commission of India (CCI) has been effecti ve in 
promoting fair competition, even in the complex digital s ector. The CCI has 
adopted new tools such as the Deal Value Threshold (DV T) and Settlement and 
Commitment Mechanisms to address emerging challenges. H owever, the CCI 
continues to face issues like technological complexity , cross-jurisdictional 
matters, and a lack of resources, including staffing and funding. To combat these, 
the CCI has initiated measures like the Digital Markets D ivision (DMD) and is 
proposing cadre restructuring. 
The Committee are of the strong view that while the inclusi on of new 
provisions in the Digital Competition Bill (DCB) is vital  for fostering fair 
competition and aligning with global standards, its imple mentation must be 
carefully managed. The approach should be nuanced, p hased, and evidence-
based, taking into account the CCI's current capacity constraints. It is also crucial 
to address concerns from stakeholders regarding the po tential impact on 
innovation and the compliance burden for emerging In dian tech companies and 
MSMEs.  By proactively addressing the challenges like st ructural dominance of 
super-apps, need for interoperability, regulating AI-base d user interfaces etc by 
regular dialogue with the stakeholders and conducting  studies of emerging 
issues the CCI can establish itself as an agile and effec tive regulator, capable of 
promoting a competitive, innovative, and inclusive digita l landscape that benefits 
all stakeholders in India. 
NEW DELHI; 
06 August, 2025 
15 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                

96 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Details of sanctioned strength, actual strength and vacancies at various levels/posts in CCI during the last five years 
 
 
2020-2021 2021-2022 2022-2023 2023-2024 2024-2025 
Sl. 
 
Designation 
Sanctioned
Posts 
Filled
 
up 
Vacan
t 
 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Filled 
up 
Vaca
nt 
 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Filled 
up 
Vaca
nt 
 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Filled 
up 
Vaca
nt 
 
Sanctioned 
Posts 
Filled 
up 
Vacant 
 
1 Director General 1 1 - 1 1 - 1 1 - 1 1 - 01 01 - 
2 Additiona lDirector 
General 
4 3 1 4 3 1 4 2 2 4 2 2 04 01 03 
3 Joint Director General 8 5 3 8 3 5 8 2 6 8 1 7 08  01 07 
4 Deputy Director 
General 
21 4 17 21 6 15 21 12 9 21 8 13 21 09 12 
5 Assistant Director 
General(CS) 
3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 1 2 03 01 02 
6 Office Manager (CS) 4 2 2 4 4 - 4 4 - 4 3 1 04 - 04 
 Total  41 17 24 41 19 22 41 23 18 41 16 25 41 13 28 
 
  

97 
 
 
 
  
              ANNEXURE-II  
  
 
Data for the past 10 financial years regarding the amount sought for allocation by CCI vis-à-vis the actual amount sanctioned to 
CCI by the Ministry in the Budget 
                 
               (Rs in crore) 
 Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
   
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Releas
ed by 
Ministr
y 
 Total 55.00 211.25 180.24 84.00 132.00 92.10 165.00 126.95 119.27 216.99 245.86 
151.56 
79.60 97.15 55.49 
                 
               (Rs in crore) 
 Particulars 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
 
Grants in 
Aid 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Released 
by Ministry 
BE 
Proposed 
RE 
Proposed 
GIA 
Releas
ed by 
Ministr
y 
 Total 71.90 69.32 46.15 61.22 59.82 46.00 81.58 73.00 
47.02 
81.40 85.33 49.98 100.70 78.21 51.00 
                 
                 

98 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
Coordination Mechanisms between Competition Agencies and Sectoral Regulators 
 
The position in India as per the Competition Act, 2002 and global best practices/position for co-operation and coo rdination between 
competition agencies and sectoral regulators, as illustrated in the OECD Competition Policy Roundtable Background Note o n 
‘Interactions between Competition Authorities and Sector Regulators’, are given in the chart below: 
 
Jurisdiction Notable Features  
India The Competition Act provides for a robust architecture for inter-regulatory 
consultation and coordination through the twin mirror refle ction provisions 
provided in Sections 21 and 21A of the Competition Act.  
 
Further, as per proviso to Section 18 of the Act introduced  through Competition 
Amendment Act, 2023, the Commission may, for the purpose o f discharging its 
duties or performing its functions under the Act, enter into any memorandum or 
arrangement with any statutory authority or department of Government.  
UK In July 2020, the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), th e Information 
Commissioner’s Office (ICO) and the Office of Communication s (Ofcom) 
established the Digital Regulation Cooperation Forum (D RCF). Its goal is to 
foster greater co-operation between the three authoriti es with respect to 
regulation of digital markets. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) joined as a 
full member of the DRCF in April 2021. 
Australia Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACC C), the Australian 
Communications and Media Authority (ACMA), the Office of the Au stralian 
Information Commissioner (OAIC) and the Office of the eSafe ty Commissioner 
(eSafety) created the Digital Platform Regulators Forum (DP-REG) aiming to 
increase co-operation and information sharing between dig ital platform 
regulators.  

99 
 
Norway  In Norway, the competition authority has signed wri tten co-operation 
agreements with the telecommunications regulator (Nkom) and the financial 
regulator (FSA). The agreement with Nkom states that collab oration shall strive 
for expedient, efficient, and satisfactory handling of  cases where the two 
agencies have overlapping authority and responsibility. 
Malaysia In Malaysia the competition authority chairs the Sp ecial Committee on 
Competition, which includes nine regulators such as the communi cations 
regulator, the energy regulator and the central bank, an d has met once a year 
in recent years (Malaysia Competition Commission, 2020). 
South Africa The Competition Commission of South Africa (CCSA) h as entered into MoUs 
with 14 independent sector regulators. MoUs usually have a  duration of five 
years and aim at strengthening enforcement through the e xchange of 
information and the sharing of resources. 
Further there is a Joint Working Committee between the Co mpetition 
Commission of South Africa and the Ports Regulator. 
Belgium In Belgium, the competition authority (Belgian  Competition Authority) has formal 
co-operation agreements (Royal decrees) with the energy sector regulator 
(CREG) and the telecom and postal sector regulator (IBPT). The y cover 
information sharing between the authorities, includin g confidential information 
(except information obtained from European Competition Network authorities or 
leniency applicants).  
Indonesia In Indonesia, the MoU between the competition authority and the Financial 
Services Authority covers the exchange of data and information  
Peru In Peru, INDECOPI and all the regulatory agencies (e.g., water and sewage – 
SUNASS; energy and mining – OSINERGMIN; transport infrastructure  – 
OSITRAN) have agreements to facilitate the exchange of info rmation (Peru, 
2019).  
Chile In Chile, the competition authority (FNE) entered into MoUs with certain sector 
regulators, which include the exchange of public information.  
 

100 
 
Appendix-I 
 
 Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). The 
Committee sat on Monday, the 20 January, 2025 from 1100 hrs to 1315 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti 
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
6. Shri Kishori Lal 
7. Shri Harendra Singh Malik 
8. Thiru Arun Nehru 
9. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
10. Prof. Sougata Ray 
11. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12. Shri Manish Tewari 
13. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
15. Shri Sanjay Seth 
16. Smt. Darshana Singh 
17. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana - Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri T. Mathivanan  - Deputy Secretary 
 

101 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Competition Commission of India (CCI)  
1. Smt. Ravneet Kaur, Chairperson, CCI 
2. Shri Inder Pal Singh Bindra, Secretary 
3. Shri Ved Prakash Mishra. Adviser 
4. Dr. Bidyadhar Majhi, Adviser 
5. Smt. Jyoti Jindgar Bhanot, Adviser 
6. Dr. Sanjay Kumar Pandey, Adviser 
7. Smt. Sayanti Chakrabarti, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members  and the witnesses to the sitting of 
the Committee. Thereafter, a power-point presentation w as made by the representatives of 
Competition Commission of India (CCI) on the subject whi ch, inter-alia, covered overview about 
CCI, Competition (Amendment) Act, 2023, digitalizat ion of markets, enforcement experience in 
digital markets, global collaborations, ex-ante framewo rk for digital markets, future challenges, 
way forward etc. 
3.  The Committee, inter-alia, deliberated upon the fol lowing points with representatives of 
CCI: 
 Role of CCI in creating a culture of competition and need for progressive, proactive and 
forward-thinking regulatory response due to the rapid transformation of digital markets; 
 Status update on  the draft bill on Digital Competi tion; 
 Collaboration with international counterparts to ensure  consistency in regulatory actions 
and India’s approach to competition law and enforcemen t compared to global standards 
or frameworks;  
 Definition of the term ‘dominant position’ in the Com petition Commission Act and 
distinguishing features between a firm's dominance due to innovation and a firm's 
dominance resulting from anti-competitive conduct; 
 Outcome of the market study on artificial intelligence and competition launched by CCI in 
2024 and  trigger for that study; 
 Resource and capacity gaps of CCI,  expediting stalled i nvestigations and impact of 
reduction in budget of CCI in the recent financial years; 

102 
 
 Creation of safeguards to  protect Micro, Small and M edium Enterprises (MSMEs) and 
status of Open Network For Digital Commerce (ONDC); 
 Details about the functioning, nature of work, staf fing, recruitment and training of 
employees deployed in Digital Markets Division (DMD) and me chanism by which it 
collaborates with other regulatory bodies or Divisions within CCI; 
 Self-regulation advisories issued by CCI for e-commerce secto r and cab aggregator 
industry and its effectiveness; 
 Prevention of anti-competitive or monopolistic behaviour  by giant tech companies and 
supporting healthy competition without any misdeeds. 
 
4. Hon’ble Members also sought clarifications on various ot her issues relating to the 
subject and the witnesses responded to the queries raise d by the Members. The Chairperson 
then directed the representatives to furnish written repli es to the points raised by the Members, 
which could not be readily replied by them during the discussion to the Secretariat. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

103 
 
Appendix-II 
Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Finance (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 28 th April, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
4. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
5.  Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
6. Thiru Arun Nehru  
7. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
8. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
9. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
10. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
13. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
14. Shri Sanjay Seth  
15. Smt. Darshana Singh  
16. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
17. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T. Mathivanan                                  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

104 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
1. Ms. Deepti Gaur Mukerjee, Secretary 
2. Shri Balamurugan Devraj, Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Jyoti Jindgar, Adviser  
 
2.    At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, a power-point pres entation was made by the 
representatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) on the sub ject which, inter-alia, 
covered overview about Competition Act, 2002; functions of Competition Commission of 
India (CCI); role of the Ministry; salient features of Com petition (Amendment) Act, 2023; 
unique challenges of Digital markets; Committee on Digit al Competition Law; status of 
the Digital Competition Bill, 2024; key issues requiring further analysis, way forward etc. 
3.  The Committee, inter-alia, deliberated upon the following points with 
representatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs: 
 Optimal budgetary allocation of funds to CCI for ensuri ng  culture of competition 
and progressive; proactive and forward-thinking regulatory respons e due to the 
rapid transformation of digital markets; 
 Status update on  the draft bill on Digital Competiti on; 
 Creation of posts and timely filling of vacancies in CCI  to assist and adequately 
equip CCI in terms of both judicial expertise and tec hnical expertise in light of the 
changing digital landscape; 
 Measures being undertaken to protect Micro, Small and Mediu m Enterprises 
(MSMEs) and prevention of anti-competitive or monopolistic behaviou r by giant 
tech companies and supporting healthy competition without any misdeeds; 
 Resource and capacity gaps of CCI;  expediting stalled investigations and status 
and effectiveness of penalty imposition and collection by CCI; 
 Mechanism to monitor predatory pricing and control and use of data by large 
digital platforms among other challenges of digital market; 

105 
 
 Major outcomes of the market study on artificial intellige nce and competition 
launched by CCI in 2024; 
 Need for co-ordination with various sectoral regulators given  that digital markets 
often involve overlapping issues such as competition, data pro tection and 
cybersecurity; 
 Collaboration with international counterparts to ensure  consistency in regulatory 
actions, tackling cross-jurisdictional anti-competitive behavior and India’s 
approach to competition law and enforcement compared to global standards;  
 Assessment of adequacy of new rule for competition settlement ; possible 
litigation delays and need for further regulatory/ legis lative changes to further 
empower CCI in effectively overseeing competition in digital space. 
4. Hon’ble Members also sought clarifications on various ot her issues relating to the 
subject and the witnesses responded to the queries raised by  the Members. The 
Chairperson then directed the representatives to furnish wri tten replies to the points 
raised by the Members, which could not be readily replied b y them during the 
discussion to the Secretariat within 10 working days. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
* * * * * 
 
  

106 
 
Appendix-III 
Minutes of the Thirty First sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). The 
Committee sat on Wednesday, the 06 August, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1700 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5. Shri K. Gopinath  
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
7. Shri Kishori Lal  
8. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
9. Thiru Arun Nehru  
10. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
11. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
12. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
13. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
14. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
15. Shri Manish Tewari  
16. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
17. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
 

107 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
18. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
19. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
20. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
21. Shri Sanjay Seth  
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
23. Smt. Darshana Singh  
24. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
25. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members t o the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report on the subject ‘Evolving Role of Competition 
Commission of India in the Economy, particularly the Dig ital Landscape’ for consideration and 
adoption. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the a bove draft Report with minor 
modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise  and present the Report to the 
Parliament.  
PART II 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 

108 
 
PART III 
5.     XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
X - matter not related to this Report. 
 