 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)] 
 
  
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
39 

ii 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Thirtieth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)] 
 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 August, 202603.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 August, 202603 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 

iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
17 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
52 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
53 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
55 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06.08.2026  56 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
 59 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde*  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai#  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Manish Kumar Under Secretary 
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee vice Smt. Darshana Singh w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 02 April 2026 and re-nominated as Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-Ninth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of 
the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 12 March, 2026. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) on 03 July, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
06 August, 2026.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirtieth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
06 August, 2026      
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Thirty-Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of 
Planning which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2026.  
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 11 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation No. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10, and 11          
(Total 11)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
 NIL               (Total NIL )                          
(Chapter- III) 
 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 NIL 
 (Total NIL)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
 NIL 
(Total - NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that the replies to the recommendations/observations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
 

2 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
 Viksit Rajya @ 2047 
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
 
“The Committee note that the Viksit Rajya @ 2047 initiative has been started by 
NITI Aayog for aligning state-specific goals with the national vision of a developed 
India by 2047 and mandate of cooperative federalism of NITI Aayog is being 
effectively institutionalised. NITI Aayog has so far launched the vision documents 
in nine states including states like Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, and Odisha 
demonstrating a proactive commitment to socio-economic transformation of states 
and a nation as a whole. The socio-economic and demographic diversity of these 
states is suggestive of the flexibility of the initiative enough to accommodate 
varied regional priorities. The Committee further note the varying stages of 
preparation in states like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Maharashtra highlighting the 
dynamic implementation pace. The core strength of this initiative lies in NITI 
Aayog’s role as a knowledge partner, providing technical expertise to bridge the 
gap between ambitious long-term aspirations and actionable, time-bound 
implementation roadmaps. However, the Committee would like NITI Aayog to 
ensure that these vision documents do not merely remain static policy papers and 
that the growth envisioned for 2047 is both inclusive and sustainable. Therefore, 
NITI Aayog should establish an interoperable Real-time Monitoring Dashboard to 
track the progress of short-term and medium-term goals and milestones, where 
"Best Practices" across states similar to Viksit Bharat Strategy Room model may 
be showcased and documented for other states to follow to ensure inclusivity. The 
Committee also want that ‘visioning’ exercise should be completed for remaining 
states/UTs at the earliest.” 
 
1.6. In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning has submitted as follows:- 
“Following the initiative of Viksit Bharat@2047, various States and UTs have 
released their Viksit Rajya@2047 Vision documents, including Andhra Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana and Tripura. Further, various States 
and UTs are currently preparing their Vision documents, including Assam, Bihar, 
Goa, Haryana, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh. 
NITI Aayog has worked with the States and UTs that have sought its collaboration 
for preparing their Viksit Rajya@2047 Vision documents. NITI Aayog also 
supports the States in preparing implementation roadmaps. Most of the State and 
UT Vision documents are available on their respective official websites. 
With the proposed continuation of the State Support Mission (SSM), support to 
States/UTs for preparation of medium- and long-term Vision Documents aligned 

3 
 
with the objectives of Viksit Bharat @2047 will be further strengthened. The 
Mission will continue to provide assistance for monitoring and evaluation, data 
analytics, and development of dashboards/portals for real-time tracking of Vision 
implementation, as demonstrated by State initiatives such as Swarna Andhra 
@2047 portal, monitoring the progress of vision implementation by the State. 
Further, a Planning Seed Fund has been proposed for the Centre Sector 
Scheme–State Support Mission (SSM) to enable States/UTs to undertake 
structured visioning exercises, including analytical studies, stakeholder 
consultations, expert engagement, policy blueprint preparation, and digital 
monitoring portals/systems. 
The Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) at NITI Aayog has also documented 
State Vision initiatives, and provision has been made in the proposed EFC to 
support similar institutional mechanisms and Strategy Rooms in interested 
States/UTs, subject to the approval of proposed EFC.” 
 
1.7  The Committee note that preparation of Viksit Rajya@2047 Vision 
Documents is reflecting a steady programmatic momentum, with 12 States/UTs 
having released their blueprints and 8 more currently drafting them. NITI Aayog’s 
technical collaboration, driven by the State Support Mission (SSM), has 
successfully transitioned several regions from conceptual design to digital 
execution, as evidenced by real-time tracking platforms like the Swarna Andhra 
@2047 portal. However, the Committee also take note of the operational gaps in 
uniform adoption across the remaining unlisted States/UTs for earnest planning.  
 
 The Committee further note that proposals for a “Planning Seed Fund” and 
the replication of the Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) at the sub-national level 
are critical interventions needed to institutionalize data-driven governance and 
sustain long-term implementation pace. The Committee, in this regard, 
recommend Ministry of Planning to accelerate Strategy Room deployment and 
seek Fast-track Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) approvals to establish 
physical Strategy Rooms in early-adopter states.  The Committee further 
recommend for deployment of the proposed Seed Fund rapidly to lagging states to 
finance structured visioning exercises, analytical studies, stakeholder 
consultations, expert engagement, policy blueprint preparation, and digital 
monitoring portals/systems stakeholder consultations.  Additionally, for ensuring 
universal onboarding, targeted outreach for the remaining States and UTs that 
have not yet started or requested collaboration for their 2047 visions must also be 
initiated. 

4 
 
Recommendation/Observation (Serial No. 8) 
 
  
Digital & Financial Inclusion 
 
1.8  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
 
“The Committee note that NITI Aayog and NIIT Foundation, has signed a 
Statement of Intent in January 2026, for achieving 100% digital and financial 
Inclusion in India's most underserved regions, i.e., Aspirational Blocks. By 
targeting beneficiaries in these regions, the initiative would directly address the 
"last-mile" connectivity gap in the Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP). The 
Committee also note that the phased pilot approach would result in an evidence-
based scale-up and implementation, ensuring that the model will be refined and 
customised for diverse needs across Districts/Blocks before a nationwide rollout. 
Further it has been informed that the initiative is also in alignment with National 
priorities and ABP indicators, showcasing convergence by bringing together NITI 
Aayog, NIIT Foundation and district/block administrations, for collaborating in 
promotion of data-driven improvement and healthy competition among 
Aspirational Blocks in the areas of digital literacy, financial inclusion and Skill 
Development. Considering that pilot project has to be implemented in a fixed 
timeline of approximately two years, the Committee recommend the Ministry of 
Planning to work expeditiously towards finalizing/selection of the Aspirational 
Districts/Blocks.” 
 
1.9.  In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning has submitted as follows:- 
“The selection of Districts & Blocks has been completed. In the pilot phase, 20 
Aspirational Districts from 11 states & 19 Aspirational Blocks from 9 states have 
been identified. The list of these Districts & Blocks is given below :-  
  Aspirational Districts 
Sl.NO STATE DISTRICT 
1 Bihar Jamui 
2 Bihar Muzaffarpur 
3 Chhattisgarh Korba 
4 Chhattisgarh Mahasamund 
5 Himachal Pradesh Chamba 
6 Jharkhand Bokaro 
7 Jharkhand Hazaribagh 
8 Jharkhand Latehar 
9 Jharkhand Ranchi 
10 Karnataka Raichur 
11 Karnataka Yadgir 
12 Madhya Pradesh Vidisha 
13 Maharashtra Gadchiroli 
14 Maharashtra Nandurbar 
15 Nagaland Kiphire 
16 Odisha Kandhamal 
17 Odisha Malkangiri 

5 
 
18 Odisha Nuapada 
19 Rajasthan Jaisalmer 
20 Uttarakhand Haridwar 
 
  Aspirational Blocks  
 
S.NO STATE DISTRICT BLOCKS 
1 Bihar Gaya Wazirganj 
2 Bihar Nawada Kashichak 
3 Bihar Nawada Pakri Barawan 
4 Chhattisgarh Korba Korba 
5 Chhattisgarh Surajpur Pratappur 
6 Haryana Palwal Hathin 
7 Haryana Rewari Nahar 
8 Jharkhand Ranchi Mandar 
9 Karnataka Raichur Maski 
10 Karnataka Raichur Sirivara 
11 Madhya Pradesh Ratlam Bajna 
12 Madhya Pradesh Vidisha Basoda 
13 Maharashtra Amravati Chikhaldara 
14 Maharashtra Amravati Dharni 
15 Maharashtra Yavatmal Pusad 
16 Rajasthan Churu Rajgarh 
17 Rajasthan Hanumangarh  Sangaria 
18 Rajasthan Udaipur Kherwara 
19 Uttar Pradesh  Bijanaur Kotwali 
” 
     
1.10 The Committee note that the Government has finalized the selection of 
locations for the pilot phase for digital and financial Inclusion in Aspirational 
Districts and Blocks, identifying 20 Aspirational Districts across 11 states and 19 
Aspirational Blocks across 9 states. A review of the geographic distribution 
reveals that Jharkhand has the highest representation in the district category 
with 4 districts and states like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Rajasthan are included in both the District 
and Block pilot lists. Further, certain regions like Korba, Ranchi, Raichur and 
Vidisha feature in both lists, enabling deep, multi-tiered developmental 
interventions at both district and block levels simultaneously. The Committee 
acknowledge that this would also facilitate focus on the overlapping regions to 
understand and improvise district and block-level schemes to make them 

6 
 
complement each other. The Committee in this regard recommend Ministry of 
Planning to ensure immediate resource allocation to prevent administrative 
bottlenecks across the selected sites for smooth implementation of the pilot 
drive. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should also create 
clear performance benchmarks to help decide the scale up of the project, to the 
remaining Aspirational Districts and Blocks across the country. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
1.11 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
 
“The Committee appreciate that India’s composite SDG score has improved 
significantly from 57 in 2018 to 71 in 2023-24, reflecting the success of NITI 
Aayog’s monitoring tools like the SDG India Index and the National 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI). The establishment of 32 State Institutions 
for Transformation (SITs) as of 2026 further demonstrates a robust commitment to 
institutionalizing sustainable development at the state level. However, the 
Committee expresses serious concern regarding the stagnancy in SDG 2 
pertaining to Zero Hunger/Nutrition and SDG 5 i.e. Gender Equality, with the latter 
remaining in the "aspirant" category with a score of 49. While the Committee 
acknowledges the 37.25% increase in the Gender Budgeting and the rise in 
female workforce participation to 40.3%, it is also of the opinion that enhanced 
budget allocations have not translated more effectively into improved social 
outcomes. The Committee are concerned to note that in spite of there being 
number of welfare measures formulated at Centre and State level for women as 
well as deprived sections of the society, these SDG goals still lag behind 
considerably. The Committee recommend that for improving SDGs 2 and 5, along 
with other measures, the Ministry of Planning must also conduct impact 
assessment surveys of Government’s various welfare and upliftment programmes 
to actually have ground level inputs about the efficacy and impediments in the way 
of effective implementation of various Programmes.” 
 
1.12   In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Planning has submitted as follows:- 
“The SDG India Index is the nation's principal tool for measuring and monitoring 
national and subnational progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). Spearheaded by NITI Aayog, the Index serves a twin mandate: 
overseeing the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and promoting competitive and 
cooperative federalism among States and Union Territories (UTs). NITI Aayog has 
released four editions of the Index - 2018 (baseline), 2019–20 (2nd), 2020–21 
(3rd), and 2023–24 (4th, released in July 2024). 
  India’s performance on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has 
steadily improved over time. The SDG India Index 2023–24, based on 113 
indicators, reflects this progress, with the country’s composite score rising from 57 

7 
 
(2018) to 60 (2019–20), 66 (2020–21), and 71 (2023–24)—showing strong gains 
in recent years. 
  Since 2018, notable improvements have been seen across several key 
goals. The sharpest rise is in Goal 13 (Climate Action), which increased from 54 to 
67 between 2020–21 and 2023–24, followed by Goal 1 (No Poverty), which 
improved from 60 to 72. Significant progress is also evident in Goals 8 (Decent 
Work and Economic Growth) and 15 (Life on Land), indicating broad-based 
development gains. 
  Progress in Goal 2 and Goal 5 have been modest. To address Goal 2 (Zero 
Hunger), NITI Aayog has undertaken various pilot studies to understand 
application of behavioural interventions to identify key barriers and enablers to 
improve nutrition outcomes. For accelerating progress in SDG 5 (Gender 
Equality), NITI Aayog has collaborated with the Gender Centre at the Indian 
Institute of Management Ahmedabad (IIM-A) to develop a comprehensive district-
level analysis of SDG-5 indicators for identification of priority gender gaps and 
improved data-driven decision making. Under the partnership, IIM-A acts as a 
knowledge partner to handhold the States/UTs for action plans and scheme 
convergence.”  
                                           
1.13   The Committee note that NITI Aayog's SDG India Index 2023–24 reports a 
steady increase in the national composite score to 71, driven by significant 
improvements in climate action and poverty reduction, alongside continued, yet 
modest, progress in gender and nutrition goals. The Committee note that while 
fostering competitive federalism with the data-driven framework, the Ministry is 
addressing slower-paced social sectors with accelerated action plans and 
scaling up pilot interventions developed with partners like IIM-Ahmedabad. The 
Committee in this regard, desire Ministry of Planning to go for targeted, 
aggressive interventions in lagging social sectors while strengthening financial 
discipline, ensuring strict and optimal fund utilization. Besides, measures like 
scaling up of successful nutrition pilots and integrating them into national 
guidelines, mandatory district-level gender action plans and rewarding high-
performing districts should also be undertaken. 
 
 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
ANALYSIS OF BUDGET 
 The budget analysis of the Ministry of Planning reveals that  Rs. 1203.38 crore 
has been sought as Budget Estimates 2026-27 as compared to BE of Rs. 1006.06 crore 
for the fiscal year 2025-26, which is an increase of around 22%. However, the Actuals for 
the FY 2023-24 were at Rs 290.81 crore against a BE of Rs. 824.39 crore, which is 
around 35% of the BE. Likewise, the Actuals for the FY 2024-25 were only Rs. 282.61 
crore only, against a BE of Rs. 837.26 crore i.e. just about 34% in percentage term. The 
scrutiny further reveals that the Actuals for the following fiscal i.e., 2025-26 are to the 
tune of Rs. 666.32 crore, i.e. 66.23% of the BE.  
After overall scrutiny of estimates, allocations and utilization of the budget grants 
during financial years under reference, the Committee are of the view that there has 
been continuous underutilization of the earmarked funds by the Ministry of Planning. 
Though it has improved its utilization percentage in the FY 2025-26, but nonetheless it is 
three percentage points more than half of the allocated funds. With only a narrow window 
of two months remaining in the FY under reference, the Committee are not very 
optimistic.  Strikingly enough, despite there being continuous underutilization during 
multiple fiscal cycles the BEs still saw a hike of 20% and 22% respectively in the 
preceding years. The Committee in their previous reports have time and again 
emphasized the need for more realistic planning and financial management for optimal 
use of available financial resources. The Committee therefore strongly recommend 
Ministry of Planning to ensure that 2026-27 budget is utilized effectively and to avoid any 
idling and blocking of funds in the non-responsive Heads. The Committee hope that the 
Ministry of Planning would be more fiscally prudent in assessment of their projected 
expenditure and targets in the future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Planning acknowledges the observations made by the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding the budget estimates, actual expenditures, and associated trends 

9 
 
over the past fiscal years.  Agreeing with the Committee’s emphasis on the need for 
greater fiscal prudence, realistic forecasting, and optimal utilization of resources, all 
efforts are being made to strengthen the mechanisms for expenditure forecasting and 
financial planning to ensure more accurate budget projections, efficient utilization of 
allocated funds and minimize the spill-overs. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2) 
 
QUARTERLY EXPENDITURE PLAN (QEP) 
The analysis of NITI Aayog’s Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) reveals a 
persistent and significant underutilisation. In FY 2023-24 and 2024-25, actual spending 
was strikingly low i.e. at approximately 35% and 33% of the total BE, respectively. This 
indicates flaws in planning as there is dismal implementation of the plans on the ground.  
The Committee further note that throughout the four quarters, notably during FY 2023-24 
and 2024-25 utilization percentage has dropped to as low as  20.34% of the planned 
target. While FY 2025-26 shows a positive trend with improved utilization (56.46%), the 
surge in Q4 expenditure remains a concern. A projected spending of ₹139.17 crore in Q4 
2025-26 appears to be a disproportionate rush to exhaust funds, risking a violation of 
the 15% of monthly spending cap. The Committee also note that this spending pattern is 
suggestive of administrative bottlenecks hindering a steady fiscal flow. The Committee 
are of the firm view that there is need to adhere to strict Quarterly Expenditure 
Percentage norms and NITI Aayog should conduct  internal reviews to synchronize 
administrative sanctions with the QEP. It should also be ensured that the first two 
quarters are earmarked not less than 50% of the fiscal targets.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations/recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee are noted for 
compliance. All efforts are being made to strengthen the mechanisms for efficient 
utilization of allocated funds, follow the norms of expenditure as per the Quarterly 
Expenditure Plan (QEP) during the Financial Year, specifically allocating not less than 

10 
 
50% of the fiscal target during the first two quarters i.e. Q1 & Q2 and preventing the 
violation of 15% monthly spending cap during the last quarter i.e. Q4 of the FY 2026-27.  
 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.3) 
 
VIKSIT RAJYA @ 2047  
The Committee note that the Viksit Rajya @ 2047 initiative has been started by 
NITI Aayog for aligning state-specific goals with the national vision of a developed India 
by 2047 and mandate of cooperative federalism of NITI Aayog is being effectively 
institutionalised. NITI Aayog has so far launched the vision documents in nine states 
including  states like Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, and Odisha demonstrating a proactive 
commitment to socio-economic transformation of states and a nation as a whole. The 
socio-economic and demographic diversity of these states is suggestive of the flexibility 
of the initiative enough to accommodate varied regional priorities. The Committee further 
note the varying stages of preparation in states like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and 
Maharashtra highlighting the dynamic implementation pace. The core strength of this 
initiative lies in NITI Aayog’s role as a knowledge partner, providing technical expertise to 
bridge the gap between ambitious long-term aspirations and actionable, time-bound 
implementation roadmaps. However, the Committee  would like  NITI Aayog  to ensure 
that these vision documents do not merely remain static policy papers and that the 
growth envisioned for 2047 is both inclusive and sustainable. Therefore, NITI Aayog 
should establish an interoperable Real-time Monitoring Dashboard to track the progress 
of short-term and medium-term goals and milestones, where "Best Practices" across 
states similar to Viksit Bharat Strategy Room model may be showcased and documented 
for other states to follow to ensure inclusivity. The Committee also want that ‘visioning’ 
exercise should be completed for remaining states/UTs at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following the initiative of Viksit Bharat@2047, various States and UTs have 
released their Viksit Rajya@2047 Vision documents, including Andhra Pradesh, 

11 
 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana and Tripura. Further, various States and UTs 
are currently preparing their Vision documents, including Assam, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh. 
NITI Aayog has worked with the States and UTs that have sought its collaboration 
for preparing their Viksit Rajya@2047 Vision documents. NITI Aayog also supports the 
States in preparing implementation roadmaps. Most of the State and UT Vision 
documents are available on their respective official websites. 
With the proposed continuation of the State Support Mission (SSM), support to 
States/UTs for preparation of medium- and long-term Vision Documents aligned with the 
objectives of Viksit Bharat @2047 will be further strengthened. The Mission will continue 
to provide assistance for monitoring and evaluation, data analytics, and development of 
dashboards/portals for real-time tracking of Vision implementation, as demonstrated by 
State initiatives such as Swarna Andhra @2047 portal, monitoring the progress of vision 
implementation by the State. 
Further, a Planning Seed Fund has been proposed for the Centre Sector 
Scheme–State Support Mission (SSM) to enable States/UTs to undertake structured 
visioning exercises, including analytical studies, stakeholder consultations, expert 
engagement, policy blueprint preparation, and digital monitoring portals/systems. 
The Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) at NITI Aayog has also documented 
State Vision initiatives, and provision has been made in the proposed EFC to support 
similar institutional mechanisms and Strategy Rooms in interested States/UTs, subject to 
the approval of proposed EFC. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4) 
 
ATAL INNOVATION MISSION 
The Committee note that financial performance of the Atal Innovation Mission 
(AIM) across FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26 highlights how administrative and systemic 
transitions can severely derail high-priority schemes like AIM. In FY 2024-25, the 
utilization was abysmal, with only ₹27.08 crore spent against a BE of ₹155 crore which is 
approximately 17% of the BE. The Ministry’s attribution of this to a late Cabinet approval 
and the shift to the  fund flow system reveals a lack of transition planning. These 
procedural lapses effectively froze the progress for considerable part of the year. 
Thereafter, situation in FY 2025-26 was a repeat of preceding fiscal cycle. 
Notwithstanding, an ambitious BE of ₹400 crore, the RE was slashed to ₹110 crore, 
citing the need for "fresh due-diligence" of beneficiaries. A massive mid-year cost cutting  
suggests that the initial budget targets were disconnected from the mission's operational 
readiness. Furthermore, the Capital expenditure remained nearly negligible to Rs. 0.06 
crore only, indicating NIL tangible  gains or infrastructure  creation.  
 
The Committee nevertheless, acknowledge that Cabinet approval for continuation 
of AIM was given in Nov 2024 only, which left a window of approximately four months for 
execution of plan, making it harder to reach the set targets. The Committee however, in 
regard to the underutilisation which occurred due to changes in fund flow mechanism 
recommend that future migrations to new fund flow system or procedures or changes 
affecting fund flow towards the schemes must be adequately taken in account at the 
Planning stages itself. The Ministry must ensure all administrative prerequisites including 
renewals and beneficiaries due diligence are finalized in advance itself to prevent the 
massive RE cuts seen in previous years. 
The Committee further note that there is stark divergence between ambitious 
physical targets and actual ground-level delivery under Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), 
primarily driven by a three-year fiscal slump.  Since FY 2023-24, actual expenditure has 
plummeted from 62% to a low of 17% in 2024-25, before slight recovery in 2025-26. This 
financial paralysis is directly reflected in the performance of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) 
and Atal Incubation Centres (AICs) that saw a 50% drop in grant disbursements 
compared to targets in FY 2024-25, while critical new initiatives like  LIPI Centres,  
Frontier Region ATLs, and Industrial Accelerators recorded zero progress against their 
2025-26 targets. The recurring justification of "pending Cabinet Approval" highlights a 

13 
 
significant failure in pre-emptive policy planning. The delay until November 2024 for a 
scheme continuation effectively created a zero growth year in 2024-25, stalling the 
establishment of Atal Incubation Centres (AICs) and Community Innovation Centres 
(ACICs). While 2025-26 showed a slight improvement in spending, the massive revision 
of BE of Rs.400 crore to RE  Rs.110 crore indicates that the mission is operating at 
only one-fourth of its intended capacity.  Further, the gap in disbursements of 
"subsequent tranche"  is indicative of liquidity crunches, potentially stifling the innovation 
ecosystem AIM seeks to establish and nurture. The Committee are of the opinion that 
NITI Aayog must move for "In-principle" approvals sufficiently ahead and if feasible in the 
previous fiscal cycle to ensure that Cabinet approvals do not stall the progress and 
cessation of fund flow. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee are acknowledged. The underutilisation in FY 
2024–25 and FY 2025–26 is noted to have arisen from a combination of delayed Cabinet 
approval, transition to the revised fund flow mechanism, and the need for fresh due 
diligence of beneficiaries, which collectively constrained timely expenditure.  In response, 
the following corrective measures have been undertaken: 
 
 Improved Transition Planning: Future changes in fund flow systems and procedures 
are now being factored into the planning cycle, with parallel preparedness to avoid 
disruption in releases.  
 
 Realistic Budgeting: Budget estimates are being aligned more closely with 
operational readiness and absorptive capacity to avoid sharp BE–RE variations.  
 
 Strengthened Fund Flow Coordination: Close coordination with the Internal 
Finance Division and streamlined internal processes are being ensured for timely 
releases without compromising due diligence. 
  
These steps are aimed at ensuring continuity in fund flow, minimizing procedural 
disruptions, and improving overall financial and physical performance of AIM going 
forward.  

14 
 
The Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) also acknowledges the observations of the 
Committee regarding the divergence between physical targets and ground-level delivery 
under Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) The Committee’s concerns regarding the impact of 
the fiscal slowdown, delays in approvals, and consequent effects on programme 
implementation are well noted.  The following actions have been taken and are proposed 
to address the issues raised: 
 
 Realistic Budgeting: FY 2026–27 allocations have been aligned with 
implementation readiness to ensure efficient utilization rather than aspirational 
targeting.  
 
 Improved Fund Flow: Close coordination with the Internal Finance Division and 
streamlined internal processes are being undertaken to ensure timely release of 
funds, while maintaining the necessary due diligence.  
 
 Disbursement Reforms / Proactive Due-Diligence: Proactive diligence for 
milestone-based tranche releases and strengthened monitoring mechanisms have 
been introduced to expedite disbursement. In addition, periodic monitoring of 
actual spending of all beneficiary institutions is also being done. 
 
 Revival of New Initiatives: Implementation pipelines for LIPI, Frontier ATLs, and 
Industrial Accelerators have been activated. Preparatory work (guidelines, partner 
identification, and institutional onboarding) is already underway and be rolled out 
in a phased manner to ensure quality and sustainability.  
 
 Active Recruitment: AIM had been operating with ~ 40% capacity w.r.t approved 
headcount in 2025-26. Recruitment has been taken as a priority so that programs 
are optimally staffed and run in a time-bound manner. 
 
Overall, AIM has recalibrated its hiring, planning, approval, and financial 
processes to ensure continuity, improve delivery, and operate at optimal capacity going 
forward. 
 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 

15 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5) 
 
ASPIRATIONAL DISTRICTS PROGRAMME 
  The scrutiny of the allocated grants under the scheme Official Development 
Assistance (ODA) From Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for SDGs/ 
Aspirational District Programme(ADP) revealed that during FY 2024-25 the BE of Rs 433 
crore remained unutilized due to high Central Nodal Agency Balance and only a 
negligible sum of Rs. 8.07 crore has been the overall utilization against an RE of Rs. 
208.55 crore. Thereafter,  the "token demand" of Rs.0.01 crore for both FY 2025-26 and 
FY 2026-27 indicates that administrative delays in scheme approval/extensions 
completely halted the scheme progress. Simultaneously, the ADP Phase III, approved in 
March 2025, although showed a better trajectory with an expenditure of ₹105.27 crore by 
February 2026, the allocations from the Contingency Fund for initial sustenance 
highlights a lack of synchronized budget planning, as it was not a new scheme, rather an 
extension of the ongoing scheme. The Committee therefore recommend that in future 
Ministry of Planning must strive not to resort to allocations out of Contingency Fund and 
ensure that Full Budget Estimates for ADP Phase III are locked in at BE stage itself to 
avoid late-stage sanctions of Supplementary grants. 
 
 The Committee further note that under Aspirational Blocks Programme there is 
system of giving monetary rewards to the top performer Districts.  Now, It has been 
informed that now among these, 30 star performer Districts,  who have outperformed 
even the other normal Districts as well, will be put in separate category and  instead of 
simply giving away reward money, the districts would be rewarded money on doing 
something innovative i.e. these outperforming Districts  would be getting ‘Innovative 
fund’. The Committee desire Ministry of Planning to expedite working out the modalities 
in this regard to incentivise innovations and further desire that these rewarded Modals, 
innovations and best practices must be given sufficient publicity to inspire other States/ 
UTs to emulate and create new milestones. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee’s recommendations have been duly noted. The Aspirational 
Districts and Blocks Programme division is currently working on the recommendations 
and observations made by the Committee. In addition, the division is compiling best 

16 
 
practices and is available on the NITI for States platform (https://nitiforstates.gov.in/best-
practice-explore) 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6) 
 
ASPIRATIONAL BLOCKS PROGRAMME 
 The Committee note that  in case of ABP the Budgetary Planning does not appear 
so strong a forte of the Ministry of Planning. There is continuous underutilization of the 
allocated grants during the FY 2024-25 & 2025-26. At the initial stages of scheme, there 
is NIL utilisation and thereafter in the FY 2025-26, there is  curtailment at RE stage and 
underutilization of the already curtailed BE, which stood at 45.51%. 
 
The Committee further note that Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office 
(DMEO), currently examining and evaluating the ADP/ABP to assess their impact  on 
underdeveloped regions and analyse the relevance, efficiency and effectiveness of these 
schemes in achieving various  enshrined  objectives and SDG-linked  outcomes. The 
final report was expected to be out by end of February. The Committee would like the 
Ministry of Planning to share the evaluation report of Development Monitoring and 
Evaluation Office (DMEO) with the Committee. 
 
 Further, observing the budgetary allocation and utilisation thereof towards ABP, 
the Committee are of the firm view that there is a need to address the issue of 
underutilization of allocated grants, which require better planning, improved coordination 
and stronger monitoring mechanisms. There also appears a need of review of the 
administrative procedural complexities and simplification of the same. The Committee 
recommend Ministry to proactively work towards addressing these issues for improved 
implementation and utilization of the allocated resources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
      The evaluation of both schemes has been completed, and the report can be 
accessed at 
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1qt8xemOjXb87ZyaRmpWPQwaTDMkHLYMA. 
The Aspirational Blocks Programme was approved outside the budget cycle, and the 

17 
 
funds were made available at the supplementary stage. Since ABP operated under the 
TSA Hybrid model, sanctions could be issued only after the funds were made available. 
The sanction under ABP was issued in the last week of March 2025, leaving very limited 
time for the districts/blocks to utilise the sanctioned amount. Further, as the TSA Hybrid 
model was newly introduced, the ADP/ABP division oriented the districts/blocks on the 
TSA Hybrid model. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.7) 
 
SAMPOORNTA ABHIYAAN 
The Committee note that during FY 2024-25, NITI Aayog had launched 
Sampoornta Abhiyaan to priortise the saturation of few selected indications in the limited 
time period of three months. The Abhiyaan aimed to achieve saturation in six Key 
Performance Indicator (KPIs) related to health & nutrition, education, agriculture, social 
development and basic infrastructure. 
 
The Committee note that these time bound interventions proved to be quite 
successful, where 91 Aspirational blocks and 23 Aspirational Districts saturated  all 6 
indicators. The Committee in their 4th Report (18th LS) had also recommended the 
Ministry to organise more such campaigns, to achieve saturation in more Key 
Performance Indicator (KPIs). The Committee are pleased  to note that based on the 
success of Sampoornta Abhiyaan 1.0, the next phase 2.0 has already launched in Jan 
2026. 
 
The Committee in this regard   like to further recommend that beside organizing 
fresh rounds of Sampoornta Abhiyaan, the Ministry of Planning must also do Post-
Campaign monitoring so that the achievements under the three-month drive continues as 
part of regular governance systems. The Committee also wish to be intimated regarding 
the outcomes of the Sampoornta Abhiyaan 2.0. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee, Sampoornata Abhiyan 2.0 was 
successfully organized in all the Aspirational Districts (ADs) and Aspirational Blocks 
(ABs) across the country. The 3-month campaign was conducted from 28th January to 

18 
 
14th April 2026, to undertake a sustained effort towards saturation of 5 Key Performance 
Indicators in Aspirational Districts and 6 Key Performance Indicators in Aspirational 
Blocks. Under the Abhiyan, 89 Districts out of 112 and 390 Blocks out of 484 have 
submitted their achievement report. 
Key achievements/Outcomes of Sampoornata Abhiyan 2.0 
 During the campaign, 46 Aspirational Districts and 131 Aspirational Blocks 
achieved 100% saturation across all the identified indicators.  
 
 Among the Aspirational Districts, 63 Districts achieved 100% saturation in 4 & 
more indicators, 80 Districts achieved 100% saturation in 3 & more indicators.  
 
 Among Aspirational Blocks, 219 Blocks achieved 100% saturation in 5 & more 
indicators, 279 Blocks achieved 100% saturation in 4 & more indicators and 327 
Blocks achieved 100% saturation in 3 & more indicators. 
 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8) 
 
DIGITAL & FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
The Committee note that  NITI Aayog and NIIT Foundation, has signed 
a Statement of Intent in  January 2026, for achieving  100% digital and financial 
inclusion in India’s most underserved regions i.e., Aspirational Blocks. By targeting 
beneficiaries  in these regions, the initiative would  directly address the "last-mile" 
connectivity gap in the Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP). The Committee also note 
that the phased pilot approach would result in an evidence-based scale up and 
implementation, ensuring that the model will be  refined and customised for diverse 
needs across Districts/Blocks before a nationwide rollout. Further it has been  informed 
that the initiative is also in alignment with National priorities and ABP indicators, 
showcasing convergence by bringing together NITI Aayog, NIIT Foundation and 
district/block administrations, for collaborating in promotion of data-driven improvement 
and healthy competition among Aspirational Blocks in the areas of digital literacy, 
financial inclusion and Skill Development. Considering that pilot project has  to be 
implemented in a fixed timeline of approximately  two years, the Committee recommend 

19 
 
the Ministry of Planning  to work expeditiously towards finalizing/selection of the 
Aspirational Districts/ Blocks. 
Reply of the Government 
The selection of Districts & Blocks has been completed. In the pilot phase, 20 
Aspirational Districts from 11 states & 19 Aspirational Blocks from 9 states have been 
identified. The list of these Districts & Blocks is given below :-  
Aspirational Districts 
Sl.NO STATE DISTRICT 
1 Bihar Jamui 
2 Bihar Muzaffarpur 
3 Chhattisgarh Korba 
4 Chhattisgarh Mahasamund 
5 Himachal Pradesh Chamba 
6 Jharkhand Bokaro 
7 Jharkhand Hazaribagh 
8 Jharkhand Latehar 
9 Jharkhand Ranchi 
10 Karnataka Raichur 
11 Karnataka Yadgir 
12 Madhya Pradesh Vidisha 
13 Maharashtra Gadchiroli 
14 Maharashtra Nandurbar 
15 Nagaland Kiphire 
16 Odisha Kandhamal 
17 Odisha Malkangiri 
18 Odisha Nuapada 
19 Rajasthan Jaisalmer 
20 Uttarakhand Haridwar 
 
Aspirational Blocks  
S.NO STATE DISTRICT ASPIRATIONAL BLOCKS 
1 Bihar Gaya Wazirganj 
2 Bihar Nawada Kashichak 

20 
 
3 Bihar Nawada Pakri Barawan 
4 Chhattisgarh Korba Korba 
5 Chhattisgarh Surajpur Pratappur 
6 Haryana Palwal Hathin 
7 Haryana Rewari Nahar 
8 Jharkhand Ranchi Mandar 
9 Karnataka Raichur Maski 
10 Karnataka Raichur Sirivara 
11 Madhya Pradesh Ratlam Bajna 
12 Madhya Pradesh Vidisha Basoda 
13 Maharashtra Amravati Chikhaldara 
14 Maharashtra Amravati Dharni 
15 Maharashtra Yavatmal Pusad 
16 Rajasthan Churu Rajgarh 
17 Rajasthan Hanumangarh Sangaria 
18 Rajasthan Udaipur Kherwara 
19 Uttar Pradesh Bijanaur Kotwali 
 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.9) 
 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS   
The Committee appreciate that India’s composite SDG score has improved 
significantly from 57 in 2018 to 71 in 2023-24, reflecting the success of NITI Aayog’s 
monitoring tools like the SDG India Index and the National Multidimensional Poverty 
Index (MPI). The establishment of 32 State Institutions for Transformation (SITs) as of 
2026 further demonstrates a robust commitment to institutionalizing sustainable 
development at the state level. However, the Committee expresses serious concern 
regarding the stagnancy in  SDG 2 pertaining to Zero Hunger/Nutrition and SDG 5 i.e. 
Gender Equality, with the latter remaining in the "aspirant" category with a score of 49. 

21 
 
While the Committee acknowledges the 37.25% increase in the Gender Budgeting and 
the rise in female workforce participation to 40.3%, it is also of the opinion that enhanced 
budget allocations have not translated more effectively into improved social outcomes. 
The Committee are concerned to note that in spite of there being number of welfare 
measures formulated at Centre and State level for women as well as deprived sections of 
the society, these SDG goals still lag behind considerably.  The Committee recommend 
that for improving SDGs 2 and 5, along with other measures, the Ministry of Planning 
must also conduct impact assessment surveys of Government’s various welfare and 
upliftment programmes to actually have ground level inputs about the efficacy and 
impediments in the way of effective implementation of various Programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The SDG India Index is the nation's principal tool for measuring and monitoring 
national and subnational progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
Spearheaded by NITI Aayog, the Index serves a twin mandate: overseeing the adoption 
of the 2030 Agenda and promoting competitive and cooperative federalism among States 
and Union Territories (UTs). 
NITI Aayog has released four editions of the Index - 2018 (baseline), 2019–20 
(2nd), 2020–21 (3rd), and 2023–24 (4th, released in July 2024). 
India’s performance on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has steadily 
improved over time. The SDG India Index 2023–24, based on 113 indicators, reflects this 
progress, with the country’s composite score rising from 57 (2018) to 60 (2019–20), 66 
(2020–21), and 71 (2023–24)—showing strong gains in recent years. 
Since 2018, notable improvements have been seen across several key goals. The 
sharpest rise is in Goal 13 (Climate Action), which increased from 54 to 67 between 
2020–21 and 2023–24, followed by Goal 1 (No Poverty), which improved from 60 to 72. 
Significant progress is also evident in Goals 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth) and 
15 (Life on Land), indicating broad-based development gains. 
Progress in Goal 2 and Goal 5 have been modest. To address Goal 2 (Zero 
Hunger), NITI Aayog has undertaken various pilot studies to understand application of 
behavioural interventions to identify key barriers and enablers to improve nutrition 
outcomes. For accelerating progress in SDG 5 (Gender Equality), NITI Aayog has 

22 
 
collaborated with the Gender Centre at the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad 
(IIM-A) to develop a comprehensive district-level analysis of SDG-5 indicators for 
identification of priority gender gaps and improved data-driven decision making. Under 
the partnership, IIM-A acts as a knowledge partner to handhold the States/UTs for action 
plans and scheme convergence.  
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10) 
 
STATE SUPPORT MISSION  
The Committee note that the  State Support Mission (SSM) is transitioning from a 
nascent pilot phase into a robust institutional framework by institutionalised engagements 
with States and UTs.  They have informed that as on date, 32 States/UTs have been 
onboarded under the Mission while 4 States, namely, Odisha, Kerala, West Bengal & 
Jharkhand are yet to establish State Institution for Transformations (SITs) and the 
Ministry is in continuous engagement with these States to bring them under the umbrella 
Mission.  To bring expertise and sectoral domain knowledge to support the SITs, 16 Lead 
Knowledge Institution (LKI) such as IIMs/ IITs/ Central and State Universities/ any 
research-based organisation of excellence in the State/UT/region have also been 
officially onboarded.  
 
The Committee also note the momentum shift in the scheme  evidenced by 
the 117.83% increase in the Revenue Budget for FY 2026-27. While previous years  saw 
modest allocations and high utilization of Rs. 40.90 crore against  Rs. 43.70 crore RE in 
2024-25, the succeeding year witnessed an underutilisation of even the curtailed RE of 
Rs.39 crore. The steep hike in BE 2026-27 has been attributed to the  "demand-driven," 
nature of the mission indicating towards the dependence on the readiness of the states 
to engage and execute projects. The projected demand of the budget for 2026-27 would 
be utilised for integrating new components like data-driven governance, state-level 
visioning for 2047, and the monitoring of flagship schemes (ADP, ABP, and AIM) etc. 
The Committee further note that alignment of the next phase of SSM with the 16th 

23 
 
Finance Commission cycle (2026–2031) signals a long-term commitment of NITI Aayog's 
engagement with state governments beyond the approved time span of the Mission.  
 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of planning must put all efforts to 
bring in loop the remaining  four states viz Odisha, Kerala, West Bengal & Jharkhand as 
well for establishing SITs and encourage all States/UTs to assign LKIs in the remaining 
States/UTs. The Committee are hopeful that the dynamic situation based response 
strategy can motivate the States. The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry 
should  move towards incentivisation and reward system,  beside spreading awareness 
about the benefits of establishing SITs/LKIs. The Committee also wish the Ministry of 
Planning  to ensure the optimum utilisation of  2026-27 budget, specifically  so in view of 
the multifold  increase in the budget estimates 2026-27. 
 
Reply of the Government 
All the States have been nominated under the Mission except Kerala and efforts 
are being made to onboard the State of Kerala for establishment of State Institution for 
Transformation (SIT) and empanelment of their Lead Knowledge Institution (LKI). The 
suggestions of the Committee have been duly acted upon. 
In the proposed EFC for the Mission, States/UTs may be supported to undertake 
breakthrough innovative or special projects in critical sectors/sub-sectors, integrating 
technology, community participation, and sustainable practices to address priority 
challenges in alignment with the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047. Provisions have also 
been envisaged for promoting data-driven governance through initiatives such as 
awards, hackathons, and other capacity-building measures at various levels. These 
activities would be taken up in the next Finance Cycle, subject to approval of the 
proposed EFC. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11) 
 
RESEARCH & NETWORKING 
The Committee note that NITI Aayog has taken measures like  established a 
dedicated Research and Networking (R&N) Division in 2024, and notification of  the 

24 
 
revised RSNA Guidelines in 2024, establishment of a comprehensive dashboard to 
facilitate systematic monitoring of RSNA-supported research studies and NITI Aayog 
logo support to workshops and seminars etc.  to streamline NITI Aayog's research 
framework. The success of the measures taken is mirrored in the transition from an 
achievement of 13 research studies to 16 and then to an achievement of 25 approved 
studies during the FY 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 indicating enhanced institutional 
capacity and research activities.  
 
It has been further observed that there is a clear upward trajectory in the approved 
research studies during FY 2024-25 to 2025-26, and the Aayog surpassed even its target 
of 20 proposals by approving 25 new studies in the last fiscal cycle.  However, given the 
consistent over-achievement of physical targets and the projected hike in  budget 
utilization in FY 2025-26, the Committee recommend that NITI Aayog should consider 
proposing higher Budget Estimates (BE) alongside higher physical targets for including 
more research studies for the upcoming fiscal years to sustain this momentum. The 
Committee further recommend that while the number of approved studies has increased, 
the R&N Division should also ensure that these research studies/projects are not merely 
academic but remain strictly aligned with the National Development Goals.  Further, as 
we know that in today’s world Data has gained center Stage of governance  and 
government is  keen on evidence based policy making on the basis of several Primary 
and Secondary Data sets, therefore,                                                                                  
the Ministry must also approve more research studies pertaining to Data sciences 
covering key areas like  artificial intelligence,  big data analytics, data mining, data 
privacy and security,  and AI ethics etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The standardised formats and appraisal mechanisms introduced for processing 
proposals under Research Scheme of NITI Aayog (RSNA) have strengthened the 
evaluation and monitoring framework, contributing to the achievement of higher physical 
targets during FY 2025-26. Given the growing number of ongoing and proposed projects 
under RSNA, the number of approved proposals is expected to continue increasing going 
forward. 

25 
 
FY 2025-26 has witnessed a rise in proposals aligned with key national priorities 
and developmental objectives, including themes relating to Viksit Bharat @ 2047, Net 
Zero @ 2070, skilling, employment generation, digital governance, and MSME 
development in India. Similar policy-oriented and nationally relevant studies will continue 
to be encouraged and pursued in the forthcoming financial years under RSNA. 
Efforts are already underway to encourage a greater number of proposals in the 
areas of AI and Data Sciences under RSNA. Recent initiatives in this direction include AI 
integration within the National Data and Analytics Platform (NDAP) to facilitate evidence-
based access to datasets and analytics. Further, it is proposed to initiate studies relating 
to frontier technologies, AI governance, digital ecosystems, and emerging technology 
policy under RSNA. 
[Ministry of Planning O.M. No. 18/7/2026-Parliament (Part) dated 23.06.2026] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

28 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
06 August, 2026      
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

29 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
 
Minutes of the Forty-Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee on                       
Finance (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 06th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1710 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘62’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Thiru Arun Nehru  
10. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
11. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
12. Prof. Sougata Ray  
13. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
14. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
15. Shri Manish Tewari  
16. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri P. Chidambaram  
18. Shri Praful Patel  
19. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
20. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  

30 
 
21. Shri Sanjay Seth  
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
23. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal     - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja  - Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rathore  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
i) Thirty-Eighth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report 
of the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Performance 
Review of National Statistical Commission’ of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
ii) Thirty-Ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
iii) Fortieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
iv) Forty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Planning. 
 

31 
 
v) Forty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present 
the Reports to the Parliament. 
PART II 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
 

32 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 34TH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF PLANNING  
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
11  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
and 11) 
 
11 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
 
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
 
 
Nil 0.00 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 