 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
  
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 24 

ii 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)] 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 August, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
10 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
32 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
33 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
34 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025 35 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ 
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services). 
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Yugma Malik Under Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Twenty-Fourth Report on action taken by the Government 
on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services).  
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 19 March, 2025. The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) on 09 July, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July 
2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services) which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 19 March, 2025.  
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the eight Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report on 09 July, 
2025. These have been analyzed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 
       Total - 08 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
                  Total - Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
       Total - Nil 
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. Nil                 
Total - Nil  
(Chapter- V) 
 

2 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on their 
recommendations. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
ATAL PENSION YOJANA (APY) 
1.5 The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 308 crore has been made for FY 
2025-26 for the Atal Pension Yojana (APY). The Committee observe that for the target 
number of subscribers to be enrolled vis-à-vis the actual number of subscribers 
enrolled, 89.80% and 74.19% has been achieved for FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 
(upto 10.02.2025), respectively. The target for FY 2025-26 has been set at 
1,45,00,000. Similarly, the achievement for the target for release of funds and the 
actual funds released for FY 2023-24 is 92.32% and only 29.19% for FY 2024-25 upto 
10.02.2025. The Committee strongly believe that to enhance the effectiveness of the 
Atal Pension Yojana (APY) and ensure its long-term sustainability, a strong emphasis 
must be placed on increasing persistency among existing subscribers and expanding 
outreach of the Scheme. The Committee desire that a multi-pronged approach 
focused on subscriber retention and awareness enhancement is essential to increase 
the uptake of the Scheme. The Committee feel that financial literacy campaigns 
especially in rural and semi-urban areas should be intensified to highlight the long-
term benefits of continued participation. The Committee further feel that given the 
current enrollment trends and financial allocations, continued focus on awareness, 
ease of access and subscriber retention will be essential for APY to meet its physical 
and financial targets. The Committee suggest that a periodic review of implementation 
strategies, backed by data-driven insights be done for the Scheme to continue to 
provide financial security to the informal sector. 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has furnished the following written submission: 

3 
 
The suggestions/observations of the Committee are noted, and further, the following 
is submitted: 
“The target groups are enrolled physically as well as digitally through the 
extensive network of branches of public sector banks, private sector banks, 
regional rural banks, small finance banks, payments banks, cooperative 
banks, Department of Posts. The monitoring is done with the support of State 
Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs)/ Union Territory Level Bankers' 
Committees (UTLBCs) in each state and Lead District Manager (LDM) in 
each district, who in turn not only utilize the individual and corporate BCs but 
equip them with scheme details and financial literacy sessions in vernacular 
languages. 
A focused approach to enhance persistency has been adopted. Constant 
endeavours are made to continuously encourage the APY-SPs, 
SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs and the subscribers to ensure persistency of the 
accounts opened. The efforts are made through the medium of conferences, 
workshops and meetings organised with senior officials of banks, 
SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs, State Governments, RBI, NABARD, SRLMs, bankers, 
banking correspondents. Calls are made on the registered mobile numbers 
of the APY subscribers through our dedicated call centres for informing the 
subscribers of the implications of non-persistent accounts and the 
advantages of having a persistent account vis-à-vis the guaranteed pension 
and other benefits. 
Majority of the subscribers are from rural areas, and 45.34% of total 
subscribers belong to age group of 18-25. The subscribers are mostly from 
low-income households, migrant populations and men or women who may 
not have joined the workforce or are not in regular employment. Given that it 
is possible to upgrade the contribution for higher pension slabs subsequently, 
it is the constant endeavour to nudge the subscribers to enrol for higher 
guaranteed pension available (>1000). The same is impressed upon in all 
meetings and interactions with the APY-Service Providers (SPs) and 
SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs. Further, all efforts are being made to improve the 
scenario in all online meetings as well. 
 In this regard, the following actions/efforts were undertaken by the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA): 
1. Thirty-two APY Outreach programs were organised for the Financial 
Year 2024-25, marking an increase from the previous Financial Year. 
These programs were attended by senior officials from PFRDA, banks, 
SLBCs, State Governments, RBI, NABARD, SRLM, bankers, banking 
correspondents, and others. During these programs, persistency, 
enrolments in higher pension slabs, and exits were discussed in detail, 
and banks were sensitized to address these issues. Further, in order 
to encourage the APY-SPs/SLBCs/UTLBCs/LDMs, various 
campaigns are organised to reward and recognise their efforts. The 
Committee’s suggestions on intensifying outreach and financial 
literacy have been noted. 
2. Performance review meetings were conducted with the Nodal Officers 
and SLBCs/UTLBCs on a regular basis wherein the progress of APY 

4 
 
enrolments in their bank/state/UT was discussed. PFRDA guided the 
APY-SPs and shared new strategies and best practices of other banks 
with them. All possible support related to media content, training, MIS, 
etc., was provided to the Banks to ensure enrolments in higher pension 
slabs and bringing the non-persistent subscribers to persistent again. 
3. Mass-media campaigns in TV, Radio, Print, Social-media and theatres 
using regional languages for better publicity and awareness. 
4. To promote the scheme in regional languages, PFRDA has designed 
a one-page flyer describing the features and benefits of APY and made 
it available in English and all 22 languages, which are part of the 8th 
Schedule of the Constitution of India. 
5. To extend APY’s reach in less urbanized regions, PFRDA promoted 
the scheme through 30-second advertisements in Hindi and 10 
regional languages including Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, 
Marathi, Malayalam, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu, in single-screen 
theatres in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, covering 2,849 theatres across the 
country. These campaigns also utilized the National Film Development 
Corporation (NFDC) network to ensure that rural and semi-urban 
populations are aware of APY.          
6. Subscriber Awareness Programs in vernacular languages are being 
organized for APY subscribers and Banks through training agencies 
appointed by PFRDA and CRA. In these programs, importance of 
persistency and the benefits of higher pension slab are 
showcased/discussed. 
7. Banks are encouraged to use the services of Business 
Correspondents (BCs) and Self-Help Group (SHG) members—key 
points of contact for underserved populations in the unorganized 
sector—to help enrol people into the APY. Special efforts are made to 
engage beneficiaries of various government schemes such as 
PMJDY, PMJJBY, PMMSBY, PMSVANidhi, PM VISHWAKARMA, 
UDYAM, KCC, MUDRA, and others.        
8. PFRDA also works closely with the National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM), State Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLMs), and NABARD to 
raise awareness about APY among rural populations. These 
organizations serve as key touchpoints for reaching the most 
underserved and financially excluded segments of the population 
9. In the meetings with bankers, PFRDA is sensitising the bank officials 
on hand holding the subscribers who request to exit the scheme. 
Efforts have been made to promote pension penetration within the target 
groups/population under schemes and programmes catering to skilling, 
training, employment generation, entrepreneurship, etc., by the concerned 
ministries such as M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, M/o Social 
Justice and Empowerment, M/o Housing and Urban Affairs, M/o Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare, M/o of Rural Development and M/o Labour & 

5 
 
Employment. The scheme details have been shared for further dissemination 
to beneficiaries of various other schemes such as PM SVANidhi, UDYAM, 
skill trainees, etc..To host e-APY link on e-Shram portal for enablement of 
digital enrolment in APY, necessary efforts have been taken in coordination 
with Ministry of Labour and Employment.” 
1.7 The Committee take note of the various ongoing efforts being undertaken 
to expand outreach and improve subscriber persistency in the Atal Pension 
Yojana (APY). However, the Committee express concern regarding the stark 
discrepancy between the impressive subscriber enrollment for FY 2024-25 
(74.19% of the target achieved as of 10.2.2025) and the alarmingly low fund 
utilization for the same period (only 29.19% released as of 10.2.2025). This sharp 
contrast, particularly in light of robust fund utilization of 92.32% in FY 2023-24 
raises critical questions about the efficiency of implementation, the timely 
disbursement of funds and the underlying operational challenges, especially 
those faced by Business Correspondents. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their emphasis on enhancing financial security for the informal sector and, to 
that end, underscore the urgent need for the department to (a) institutionalise 
outcome-based monitoring of awareness campaigns, (b) disclose the specific 
challenges contributing to low fund utilisation and outline corrective measures; 
(c) publish periodic impact assessments that provide data-driven insights into 
the scheme’s effectiveness and (d) integrate feedback from beneficiaries to 
refine outreach and enrollment strategies based on ground realities. From the 
Annual Report (2024-2025) of the RBI, the Committee observe with deep concern 
the sharp reduction in the number of Business Correspondent (BC) outlets in 
villages from over 15.92 lakh in December 2023 to 13.55 lakh in December 2024. 
The urban locations Business Correspondents (BCs) rose slightly to 3.67 lakh 
in December 2024 from 3.58 lakh in the previous year. BCs are not merely an 
expansion mechanism for APY; but they are an essential component designed 
to cater to the fundamental banking needs of customers in the hinterland. This 
decline directly impedes last-mile access to financial services, and by 
extension, the sustained participation in APY. The Committee believe this 
reduction is likely a symptom of underlying issues affecting Business 
Correspondents (BCs) viability and, therefore, strongly recommend that 

6 
 
appropriate measures be undertaken to encourage their growth including a 
comprehensive re-evaluation and upward revision of their commission rates to 
ensure their economic sustainability. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC GRIEVANCES  
1.8 The Committee note that a large number of grievances/complaints concerning 
banking and insurance sectors are received. The Committee observe that as per 
Annual Report (2023-24) of Council for Insurance Ombudsman, all 17 Insurance 
Ombudsman Centres received a total 52575 complaints and disposed of 49705 
complaints out of which 12855 were treated as non entertainable.  Further, the 
Committee note that number of complaints received under RBI’s Integrated  
Ombudsman Scheme have increased at a compounded average growth rate of almost 
50% over last two years to 9.34 lakhs in 2023-24 and number of complaints processed 
increased from 2,35,000 in 2022-23 to almost 2,94,000 in 2023-24. The Committee 
understand that the  postal grievances are also digitized and processed through 
Centralised Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) for its 
onward transmission to the designated Nodal officials for its redressal within a 
maximum time limit of 21 days by all organisations under the Department of Financial 
Services. The Committee further note that the petitioner, if not satisfied with the kind 
of disposal by the concerned banks/insurance company, can file complaint with the 
concerned Ombudsman for settlement of grievance through mediation and passing of 
awards. The Committee feel that the issue of adherence to the prescribed time limit 
for resolution and decisions being binding and enforceable are vital and essential for 
effective redressal of grievances. The Committee also desire that mechanisms be put 
in place for resolution of grievances spanning multiple sectors as in today’s economy 
the sectors are not in silos but have mingled; for instance banking sector also offers 
insurance products. The Committee also believe that a study of the best practices from 
across the globe can help provide constructive insights for improvement and 
betterment of the grievance redressal mechanism. Further, the existing regulations 
should be reviewed to strengthen the grievance redressal mechanism and to 
eliminate/reduce the causes of grievances in the banking and insurance sector. To 

7 
 
enhance the customer satisfaction and protection, regular awareness programmes 
and publicity drives about the available redressal mechanisms and the procedure to 
file complaints should  also be carried out frequently. The Committee would also like 
to highlight upon the importance of adequate training to personnel handling the 
grievance redressal in various organisations of the Department to ensure swift and 
efficient resolutions. The Committee feel that proper training can also reduce 
categorization of complaints as ‘non-entertainable’ and maximize consumer 
satisfaction and redressal.  
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has furnished the following written submission: 
“As per the comprehensive guidelines for handling public grievances issued 
by DARPG on 23rd August 2024, the timelines for effective grievance 
redressal have been reduced to 21 days. Necessary steps are taken to 
provide comprehensive resolution to customers' grievances lodged in 
CPGRAMS well within prescribed Turn Around Time (TAT) ie; 21 days. 
Weekly follow up is undertaken with Banks & Insurance Companies in respect 
of grievances pending beyond TAT, for quick resolution. For the year 2024, 
the TAT of Banking Division is 19 days and for Insurance Division is 11 days. 
Where multiple sectors like banking/SPARSH/pension/insurance are involved, 
the Banks and Insurance Companies have been advised to refer the 
grievance to Department of Financial Services (DFS) to take up the matter 
with other sector (Banking/insurance/SPARSH) to provide effective redressal 
to the complainants through CPGRAMS Portal. In addition to Government 
grievance redressal portals, all Banks/Insurance Companies have developed 
their own grievance redressal mechanism which allow customers to select 
the category of grievances while lodging complaints. 
CPGRAMS is recognized as a state-of-the-art grievance redressal system 
and a best practice of smart government by the Commonwealth Secretariat. 
Artificial Intelligence (Al) and Machine Learning (ML) are incorporated to 
revolutionize grievance management on the CPGRAMS platform. The 
Regulators/Banks/Insurance companies also deliberate on the best practices 
from across the globe to improve their grievance redressal mechanism. 
Further, Reserve Bank Integrated Ombudsman Scheme (RB-1OS) and 
insurance Ombudsman is a testament to our commitment to good 
governance and the protection of citizens' rights. 
Root cause Analysis is conducted at Department level as well as by 
Regulators/Banks/Insurance companies to identify and address underlying 
weaknesses. In order to review the quality of resolution of grievances on 
CPGRAMS, twenty (20) grievances selected on random basis are being 
reviewed on regular basis by Secretary (FS) through video conferencing. 
Such an exercise has helped in building greater customer trust in the financial 

8 
 
sector. In addition to periodic review meetings, some randomly selected 
public grievances are reviewed at the level of Additional Secretary and Joint 
Secretary in DFS. All organizations in BFSI sector have been advised to 
review grievances regularly at the top Management level to assess the quality 
of resolution and bring in systemic improvements for effective redressal of 
grievance. 
RBI undertakes various awareness programmes under Public Awareness 
Campaigns. These campaigns include newspaper advertisements in print 
media, hoardings & billboards, thematic multimedia campaigns including TV 
Commercials, SMS etc. Information on avenues of lodging complaints is one 
of the themes in these campaigns. Recently RBI has launched a WhatsApp 
channel also to promote public awareness. 
 IRDAI from time to time has been conducting insurance awareness 
campaigns in audio and video formats on All India Radio (AIR), private FM 
channels and Television channels. 
IRDAI has created print material in the form of booklets on various topics of 
insurance, in a simple, policyholder friendly language in 14 languages of 
India, which are available on the portal www.policyholder.gov.in. The portal 
is intended to serve as a single point reference for the dissemination of 
information on consumer guidance and protection to the policyholders as well 
as the general public. 
Banks/Insurance companies also create awareness through social 
Media/Newspapers and also through their web site. 
DFS has conducted workshops in some banks on "Effective Grievance 
Redressal Mechanisms" to sensitize the Grievance Redressal Officers about 
the importance of timely and qualitative redressal of grievances so as to 
improve customer satisfaction and operational efficiency. Knowledge sharing 
programs and need-based trainings are organized by the regulated entities 
from time-to-time.” 
 
1.10 The Committee note the comprehensive range of initiatives and 
established procedures governing grievance redressal within both banking and 
insurance sectors. The Committee observe that existing referral mechanisms 
for inter-sectoral grievances, where banks and insurance companies have been 
advised to refer the grievances to Department of Financial Services (DFS) for 
resolution with other relevant sectors (Banking/Insurance/SPARSH) to ensure 
effective redressal to the complaints. The Committee also observe a significant 
disparity in grievance resolution Turn Around Time (TAT), with the banking 
sector taking 19 days compared to the insurance sector’s 11 days. The 
Committee while commending initiatives like Centralised Public Grievance 
Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS), digitization, multi-language 
awareness campaigns, and training for grievance redressal officers, 

9 
 
recommend the following measures to empower consumers and further 
improve the system:-  (i) establishing integrated or unified redressal mechanism 
for cross-sector grievances, thereby eliminating delays inherent in the current 
multi-step referral process; (ii) instituting a robust impact assessments of the 
measures undertaken; (iii) regular review and refinement of the grievance 
redressal mechanism to tackle the root causes of complaints and to improve the 
quality of resolution; (iv) standardisation of training initiatives specifically to 
reduce arbitrary classification of cases as “non-entertainable” and (v) 
enhancing enforcement and penalties for non-compliance, alongside efforts to 
speed up resolution and reduce pendency to further elevate grievance redressal 
system to global best practices. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
DEMAND NO. 32 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES (DFS) 
The Committee note that the Budget Estimate (BE) for 2025-26 for the Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) stands at Rs. 1,688.15 crore, reflecting a reduction of Rs. 
2,497.69 crore from the Revised Estimate (RE) for 2024-25, which was Rs. 4,185.84 
crore. The Committee are informed that the demands are primarily for recapitalisation, 
gap funding or credit guarantee and for FY 2025-26; but there is no requirement of 
recapitalisation from the organisations of DFS to maintain regulatory liquidity 
provisions and also there is no requirement from credit guarantee funds to replenish 
funds to meet demands from Member Lending Institutions. The Committee feel that 
while the allocations for FY 2025-26 reflect an optimised funding approach, continuous 
monitoring and mid-year reassessments are essential to ensure that necessary 
financial support is provided where required. However, that being said, the Committee 
would like to highlight on the need for advanced forecasting techniques and strategic 
financial planning to maintain fiscal prudence and enhance budgetary accuracy. The 
Committee would like to emphasise on the need for  strengthening budgetary foresight 
to ensure that funds are optimally allocated; utilised as per Monthly Expenditure 
Plan/Quarterly Expenditure Plan; thereby avoiding surrenders at the RE stage. 
Reply of the Government 
The observation of the Committee is noted for compliance. It will be ensured that funds 
are optimally allocated; utilised as per Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP)/Quarterly 
Expenditure Plan (QEP); thereby avoiding surrenders.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
 
 

11 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
ATAL PENSION YOJANA (APY) 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 308 crore has been made for FY 2025-
26 for the Atal Pension Yojana (APY). The Committee observe that for the target 
number of subscribers to be enrolled vis-à-vis the actual number of subscribers 
enrolled, 89.80% and 74.19% has been achieved for FY 2023-24 and FY 2024-25 
(upto 10.02.2025), respectively. The target for FY 2025-26 has been set at 
1,45,00,000. Similarly, the achievement for the target for release of funds and the 
actual funds released for FY 2023-24 is 92.32% and only 29.19% for FY 2024-25 upto 
10.02.2025. The Committee strongly believe that to enhance the effectiveness of the 
Atal Pension Yojana (APY) and ensure its long-term sustainability, a strong emphasis 
must be placed on increasing persistency among existing subscribers and expanding 
outreach of the Scheme. The Committee desire that a multi-pronged approach 
focused on subscriber retention and awareness enhancement is essential to increase 
the uptake of the Scheme. The Committee feel that financial literacy campaigns 
especially in rural and semi-urban areas should be intensified to highlight the long-
term benefits of continued participation. The Committee further feel that given the 
current enrollment trends and financial allocations, continued focus on awareness, 
ease of access and subscriber retention will be essential for APY to meet its physical 
and financial targets. The Committee suggest that a periodic review of implementation 
strategies, backed by data-driven insights be done for the Scheme to continue to 
provide financial security to the informal sector. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions/observations of the Committee are noted, and further, the following 
is submitted: 
The target groups are enrolled physically as well as digitally through the extensive 
network of branches of public sector banks, private sector banks, regional rural banks, 
small finance banks, payments banks, cooperative banks, Department of Posts. The 
monitoring is done with the support of State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs)/ 
Union Territory Level Bankers' Committees (UTLBCs) in each state and Lead District 
Manager (LDM) in each district, who in turn not only utilize the individual and corporate 

12 
 
BCs but equip them with scheme details and financial literacy sessions in vernacular 
languages. 
A focused approach to enhance persistency has been adopted. Constant endeavours 
are made to continuously encourage the APY-SPs, SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs and the 
subscribers to ensure persistency of the accounts opened. The efforts are made 
through the medium of conferences, workshops and meetings organised with senior 
officials of banks, SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs, State Governments, RBI, NABARD, SRLMs, 
bankers, banking correspondents. Calls are made on the registered mobile numbers 
of the APY subscribers through our dedicated call centres for informing the subscribers 
of the implications of non-persistent accounts and the advantages of having a 
persistent account vis-à-vis the guaranteed pension and other benefits. 
Majority of the subscribers are from rural areas, and 45.34% of total subscribers 
belong to age group of 18-25. The subscribers are mostly from low-income 
households, migrant populations and men or women who may not have joined the 
workforce or are not in regular employment. Given that it is possible to upgrade the 
contribution for higher pension slabs subsequently, it is the constant endeavour to 
nudge the subscribers to enrol for higher guaranteed pension available (>1000). The 
same is impressed upon in all meetings and interactions with the APY-Service 
Providers (SPs) and SLBC/UTLBCs/LDMs. Further, all efforts are being made to 
improve the scenario in all online meetings as well. 
 In this regard, the following actions/efforts were undertaken by the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA): 
1. Thirty-two APY Outreach programs were organised for the Financial Year 2024-
25, marking an increase from the previous Financial Year. These programs 
were attended by senior officials from PFRDA, banks, SLBCs, State 
Governments, RBI, NABARD, SRLM, bankers, banking correspondents, and 
others. During these programs, persistency, enrolments in higher pension 
slabs, and exits were discussed in detail, and banks were sensitized to address 
these issues. Further, in order to encourage the APY-
SPs/SLBCs/UTLBCs/LDMs, various campaigns are organised to reward and 
recognise their efforts. The Committee’s suggestions on intensifying outreach 
and financial literacy have been noted. 

13 
 
2. Performance review meetings were conducted with the Nodal Officers and 
SLBCs/UTLBCs on a regular basis wherein the progress of APY enrolments in 
their bank/state/UT was discussed. PFRDA guided the APY-SPs and shared 
new strategies and best practices of other banks with them. All possible support 
related to media content, training, MIS, etc., was provided to the Banks to 
ensure enrolments in higher pension slabs and bringing the non-persistent 
subscribers to persistent again. 
3. Mass-media campaigns in TV, Radio, Print, Social-media and theatres using 
regional languages for better publicity and awareness. 
4. To promote the scheme in regional languages, PFRDA has designed a one-
page flyer describing the features and benefits of APY and made it available in 
English and all 22 languages, which are part of the 8th Schedule of the 
Constitution of India. 
5. To extend APY’s reach in less urbanized regions, PFRDA promoted the 
scheme through 30-second advertisements in Hindi and 10 regional languages 
including Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Marathi, Malayalam, Odia, 
Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu, in single-screen theatres in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, 
covering 2,849 theatres across the country. These campaigns also utilized the 
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) network to ensure that rural 
and semi-urban populations are aware of APY.          
6. Subscriber Awareness Programs in vernacular languages are being organized 
for APY subscribers and Banks through training agencies appointed by PFRDA 
and CRA. In these programs, importance of persistency and the benefits of 
higher pension slab are showcased/discussed. 
7. Banks are encouraged to use the services of Business Correspondents (BCs) 
and Self-Help Group (SHG) members—key points of contact for underserved 
populations in the unorganized sector—to help enrol people into the APY. 
Special efforts are made to engage beneficiaries of various government 
schemes such as PMJDY, PMJJBY, PMMSBY, PMSVANidhi, PM 
VISHWAKARMA, UDYAM, KCC, MUDRA, and others.        

14 
 
8. PFRDA also works closely with the National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM), 
State Rural Livelihood Missions (SRLMs), and NABARD to raise awareness 
about APY among rural populations. These organizations serve as key 
touchpoints for reaching the most underserved and financially excluded 
segments of the population 
9. In the meetings with bankers, PFRDA is sensitising the bank officials on hand 
holding the subscribers who request to exit the scheme. 
10. Efforts have been made to promote pension penetration within the target 
groups/population under schemes and programmes catering to skilling, 
training, employment generation, entrepreneurship, etc., by the concerned 
ministries such as M/o Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, M/o Social 
Justice and Empowerment, M/o Housing and Urban Affairs, M/o Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, M/o of Rural Development and M/o Labour & Employment. 
The scheme details have been shared for further dissemination to beneficiaries 
of various other schemes such as PM SVANidhi, UDYAM, skill trainees, etc..To 
host e-APY link on e-Shram portal for enablement of digital enrolment in APY, 
necessary efforts have been taken in coordination with Ministry of Labour and 
Employment.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
STATUS OF BANKING SECTOR 
The Committee note the improved financial health and robustness of the banking 
sector. However, given the shift in household deposits from banks to market-linked 
financial products and its subsequent impact on the sector, the Committee feel that a 
comprehensive, multi-faceted approach is necessary for the banking sector. The 
Committee understand that the decline in financial savings presents a liquidity 
challenge for banks, limiting access to low-cost funds. In response to the decline in 

15 
 
Current Account Savings Account (CASA) deposit ratio, the Committee feel there is a 
need for banks to diversify funding sources, optimise operations and leverage AI-
driven automation to enhance efficiency, reduce costs and drive digital banking 
innovations. The Committee opine that the adoption of advanced technologies, 
including AI and Machine Learning, will not only improve operational efficiency but also 
enhance competitiveness and customer engagement. The Committee would like to 
emphasise that by fostering a secure banking ecosystem and prioritising technological 
advancements, banks can position themselves as forward-looking institutions that 
balance security with innovation. The Committee thus urge for proactive addressing 
of liquidity concerns, enhancing customer attraction especially in underserved areas 
and leveraging technology for operational efficiency so that banks can mitigate the 
impact of declining CASA ratios and maintain their role as stable and reliable financial 
institutions in the future. 
Reply of the Government 
Banks play a vital role in providing credit to productive sectors of the economy by 
mobilizing household savings and channelizing them into credit. However, with a 
growing preference among households for capital market-linked investment products 
over traditional bank deposits, banks are formulating a range of fund-raising strategies. 
These approaches are aligned with their unique competitive strengths, market 
positioning, and strategic business priorities. 
Large banks with an extensive branch network have access to low-cost, stable retail 
deposits. On the other hand, banks with a more pronounced urban presence are 
targeting affluent customer segments, offering high-value deposit products tailored to 
high-net-worth individuals (HNIs) and corporate clients. Additionally, some banks with 
advanced technology stacks leverage digital platforms to enhance customer 
acquisition and streamline liability sourcing, providing a competitive edge in attracting 
both retail and corporate deposits. On the other hand, different banks are seen to have 
a higher reliance on inter-bank deposits and wholesale funding. This diversity in 
funding profiles presents unique challenges in ALM, as each business strategy 
introduces its own complexities in managing liquidity, cost of funds, and risk alignment. 
Some banks are increasingly leveraging technology across multiple dimensions, such 
as for CASA mobilization and also improving their operational processes, sales and 
marketing, risk management, know your customer (KYC) related processes and 

16 
 
customer engagement and service. This adoption of technology for processes such 
as digital onboarding through e-KYC, biometric authentication, and instant account 
activation platforms has significantly reduced friction in new account acquisition. 
Banks’ partnerships with fintech companies, digital payment platforms, e-commerce 
players, and corporate ecosystems to embed CASA products within their applications 
have also helped in tapping customer base. Banks’ initiatives to adopt Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) to analyze transaction behavior, lifestyle 
preferences, and financial needs, enabling hyper-personalized product offerings, 
dynamic rewards, and proactive balance retention strategies are also helping in 
creating long lasting customer relationships. 
With a view to enhance CASA deposits, banks are taking various measures, including, 
inter- alia, established new business vertical and specialized branches for CASA 
mobilization, opening new branches in rural and semi urban areas to channelize low 
cost deposits, tailored saving accounts products for niche customer segments – self-
employed, women, senior citizen, high net-worth individuals (HNIs), putting in place 
dedicated teams to acquire accounts of Government, corporate salary, trusts & 
associations, bundled with customized offerings. Additionally, banks have been 
conducting campaigns to increase customer awareness about unclaimed deposits and 
following various measures to reach out to customers for the revival of these accounts, 
and tailor-made deposit products are devised to boost CASA. Banks are targeting 
districts with high deposit potential and implementing appropriate strategies to further 
deepen deposit mobilization. Banks are easing the customer onboarding process as 
well as implementing video KYC facilities to provide 24x7 banking facilities. The recent 
Banking Laws (Amendment) Act 2025 facilitates both simultaneous or successive 
nominees which is going to further reduce unclaimed deposits and may positively add 
to CASA. 
Banks have been investing in digital technologies and platforms to enhance customer 
experience, streamline processes, and offer innovative banking solutions tailored to 
evolving customer needs and mobilise low-cost deposits. Digital advancements and 
their adoption have not only improved the overall customer experience but have also 
ensured that banks remain competitive in an increasingly competitive and dynamically 
evolving environment. 

17 
 
While banks are accelerating the adoption of advanced technologies to drive growth 
and efficiency, these innovations also introduce new dimensions of risk, including 
cybersecurity threats, data privacy challenges, operational vulnerabilities, and third-
party concentration risks. Consequently, banks pursue a strategy of responsible 
innovation, balancing the benefits of technological advancement with the imperative 
of robust governance, risk management, operational resilience and compliance. As 
per RBI’s Financial Stability report of December 2024, Cloud computing and AI/ML are 
the two widely adopted emerging technologies used by banks. 
Banks are strategically partnering with Fintech counterparts, aiming to enhance 
security in digital transactions. Banks have been partnering with fintechs to access 
agile tech development, plug-and-play digital solutions, and automated compliance 
tools to make banking better for their clients at a fraction of the cost. Most importantly, 
banks and fintechs are teaming up to strengthen security in digital transactions. This 
collaboration allows banks to leverage fintech innovations like AI-driven fraud 
detection, blockchain for secure transactions, and multi-factor authentication to 
enhance cybersecurity. Fintechs, in turn, benefit from banks' regulatory expertise and 
customer trust, creating a more secure financial ecosystem. Banks have been 
leveraging fintech vendor management to optimize operations, enhance security, and 
foster innovation. By maintaining a strategic approach to fintech vendor management, 
banks are ensuring scalability, innovation, and long-term success in an evolving 
financial landscape. 
The evolving Indian banking landscape is increasingly becoming innovation and tech-
driven with artificial intelligence (AI), embedded finance, and robotics playing an 
instrumental role in its transformation. Our banking sector is leveraging transformative 
technology to streamline processes, enhance security, and deliver superior customer 
services. Banks are actively using technology to boost digital security. With digital 
banking platforms, banks are integrating their platforms with pre-built enterprise-grade 
features like multi-factor authentication, biometric identification, and automated alert 
systems that flag unfamiliar logins. To protect customer data, ensure regulatory 
compliance, and maintain trust in their systems in an environment where digital 
banking transformation is gaining momentum, banks are embracing advanced 
technology as advanced security measures. 

18 
 
RBI has been playing a proactive role in facilitating this responsible adoption of 
technology, by issuing frameworks on various aspects such as guidelines on IT 
governance, digital lending, IT outsourcing, and operational resilience. Through 
initiatives such as the regulatory sandbox, an Innovation Hub, committee for 
developing Framework for Responsible and Ethical Enablement (FREE) AI framework 
and others, RBI has been enabling a structured and safer adoption of new 
technologies across the banking sector. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
CREDIT FLOW TO MICRO SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (MSMES) 
The Committee acknowledge the introduction of digital footprint-based loan 
sanctioning for Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), which enhances 
financing accessibility to the sector with an average processing time for loan approvals 
being approximately 15 minutes. The Committee further note the initiatives taken by 
the Government to facilitate the flow of credit to MSME sector such as Pradhan Mantri 
MUDRA Yojana (PMMY), establishment of Empowered Committees at Regional RBI 
offices, involving State Governments, State Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs), 
Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), banks and industry 
representatives, adoption of advanced technologies, collaboration with Account 
Aggregators and FinTech firms and leveraging of  MSME data from sources like Goods 
and Services Tax Network (GSTN), digital transaction trails etc. The Committee would 
like to highlight the importance of sustained and sincere efforts to ensure seamless 
and affordable credit flow to MSMEs due to the sector's critical role in economic 
growth, employment generation and entrepreneurship. The Committee believe that a 
well-supported MSME sector will not only drive inclusive development but also 
reinforce the nation’s overall economic framework. 
Reply of the Government 
A progressive and vibrant MSME sector and its substantive share to manufacturing 
output and exports is significantly contributing to the growth of Indian economy. The 

19 
 
Government of India (GoI) has consistently supported the sector in terms of flow of 
credit at affordable rates through various initiatives. Comments on the initiatives 
mentioned in the 13th Report of Standing Committee are as follows: 
i. Digital footprint-based loan sanctioning for MSMEs provides fast processing of 
loan based on digitally sourced data points which is a significant improvement 
over the traditional assessment of credit eligibility based only on asset or 
turnover criteria. The new model covers MSMEs without a formal accounting 
system and facilitates objective decisioning for all loan applications and model-
based limit assessment for MSME borrowers. As on 30.04.2025, total amount 
sanctioned and disbursed on the basis of digital footprint stood at ₹ 55,854 
crore and ₹ 46,974 crore respectively, covering 1.70 lakh loan accounts. 
ii. Under Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY), loans are provided through 
Banks, Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs), Micro Financial 
Institutions (MFIs), other financial intermediaries, in four categories namely, 
‘Shishu’, ‘Kishore’, ‘Tarun’ and ‘Tarun Plus’ which signify the stages of growth 
for development and funding needs of the borrowers. As on March 28, 2025, 
the cumulative amount of loans sanctioned under PMMY stood at ₹ 33.80 Lakh 
crore, covering 52.51 crore loan accounts. 
iii. Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has informed that Empowered Committees have 
been established at Regional RBI offices, involving State Governments, State 
Level Bankers Committees (SLBCs). This initiative helps in better 
understanding of financial needs of MSMEs for effective policy making and 
implementation of schemes. It is understood that this initiative is a facilitator in 
the identification of MSME clusters, which results in better utilization of financial 
resources i.e. allowing the opening of bank branches.    
iv. Regulatory Sandbox (RS): The Regulatory Sandbox framework allows entities 
to test new innovative products/services in a controlled regulatory environment 
with or without regulatory relaxation, fostering orderly and responsible 
innovation in financial services, promoting efficiency, and bringing benefit to 
consumers. The Reserve Bank had opened the third cohort under RS for 
MSME Lending and eight entities were shortlisted for the Test Phase. Products 

20 
 
of the entities which completed the ‘Test Phase’ were evaluated and five 
products have been found viable. This cohort is expected to spur innovations 
that can fill the lending gap for MSMEs through the use of technology and data 
analytics. 
v. Account Aggregator (AA) Framework: As a regulator, the Reserve Bank has 
created an enabling environment for growth of digital technology for new 
financial products and services. RBI has facilitated the AA framework under 
which information related to financial assets of a customer is collected from the 
holders of such information (Financial Information Providers) and is presented 
to the customers or specified users (Financial Information Users). With the 
inclusion of Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN) as Financial Information 
Provider (FIP) and Goods and Services Tax (GST) Returns, viz. Form GSTR-1 
and Form GSTR-3B, as Financial Information, Financial Information Users 
(FIUs) can leverage GST return data for financing of MSMEs. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
INSURANCE 
The Committee note the recent Budget announcement regarding increase in 
the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) limit from 74% to 100% and the proposed removal 
of the FDI cap under the Insurance Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025 which is aimed at 
attracting stable foreign investments, enhancing competition and facilitating 
technology transfer, ultimately leading to better insurance products, improved 
customer service and more affordable premiums. The Committee is of the opinion that 
this step may aid in adoption of best global practices and help to improve insurance 
penetration and density in the country. But at the same time, the Committee would like 
to emaphasise on the need for some safeguard measures to be in place to counter 
concerns such as profit repatriation i.e. foreign investors sending earnings back to 
home countries rather than reinvesting in India;  reduced decision-making power of 
domestic firms; job security concerns arising due to potential automation and cost-

21 
 
cutting measures; focus on high-margin policies, neglecting rural and financially 
weaker sections etc. The Committee desire that the downside of the FDI in India’s 
insurance sector be dealt with adequately and scrupulously. With regard to the 
integration of InsurTech (Insurance Technology) in the insurance sector, the 
Committee observe that it has the potential to enhance efficiency, customer 
experience and risk assessment through digital innovation as advanced digital 
technologies such as Artificial Intelligence(AI), big data analytics and blockchain can 
streamline underwriting, claims processing and risk assessment, making insurance 
more accessible and efficient. The Committee feel that wider adoption of digital 
platforms will enable insurers to reach underserved rural and semi-urban markets 
thus, driving inclusive growth and strengthening India’s insurance ecosystem. 
Reply of the Government 
The observations made by the Committee have been taken note of. In this regard, it 
is submitted that the provisions of Indian Insurance Companies (Foreign Investment) 
Rules, 2015 cover various aspects such as corporate governance, repatriation of 
profit, composition of board, etc. Further, section 27E of the Insurance Act, 1938 
prohibits insurers from investing outside of India, directly or indirectly, from the 
policyholders' funds. 
With reference to concerns regarding reduced decision-making autonomy, it is 
submitted that all insurance companies registered with the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India (IRDAI), including those with 100% Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI), are required to comply with the IRDAI (Corporate Governance for 
Insurers) Regulations, 2024 and the IRDAI Master Circular on Corporate Governance, 
2024. This regulatory framework is designed to strengthen governance standards in 
the insurance sector by promoting transparency, accountability, and enhanced 
policyholder protection.  
In relation to concerns about a focus on high-margin products, it may be noted that all 
insurance products must comply with the IRDAI (Product Governance in Insurance) 
Regulations, 2024. These regulations envisage that insurance products are fair, 
suitable, and aligned with the needs of the target market. They promote transparency, 

22 
 
fair pricing, and regular product review. Insurers are also required to design need-
based products for underserved and vulnerable sections of society, thereby 
supporting financial inclusion and ensuring that offerings are not solely driven by 
profitability. 
All insurers, including those with 100% FDI, are mandated to comply with the IRDAI 
(Rural, Social Sector and Motor Third Party Obligations) Regulations, 2024. These 
regulations stipulate minimum obligations for insurers to serve rural areas and socially 
disadvantaged segments, thereby promoting inclusive insurance. 
With respect to job security concerns, it is submitted that all insurance companies, 
irrespective of their ownership structure, are governed by the labour laws and other 
applicable laws of the Government of India.  
IRDAI has introduced several measures to foster innovation and collaboration in the 
insurance sector. The Open House for InsurTech/FinTech Entities provides a platform 
for start-ups to engage directly with regulators, showcase innovations, discuss 
compliance requirements, and explore partnerships with insurers. The Regulatory 
Sandbox initiative allows insurance companies to test new products, services, and 
business models in a controlled environment, promoting experimentation without 
immediate regulatory constraints.  
Bima Sugam is an initiative of insurance industry and the proposed electronic 
marketplace connecting insurers, intermediaries, and customers for policy purchase, 
service, claims, and grievance redressal. Governed by the IRDAI (Bima Sugam - 
Insurance Electronic Marketplace) Regulations 2024, it seeks to enhance 
transparency, efficiency, and collaboration while driving insurance inclusion, 
particularly in rural and semi-urban markets, to achieve the vision of "Insurance for All 
by 2047." 
It is envisaged that Al and Machine Learning can also strengthen fraud detection by 
analyzing vast transaction data, identifying suspicious patterns, and enhancing 
security frameworks through identity verification and behavioural analytics.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
  

23 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
PRADHAN MANTRI JAN DHAN YOJANA  
The Committee note that 54.97 crore bank accounts with a deposit balance of Rs. 2.53 
lakh crore have been opened under the PM Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY). The 
Committee understand that Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana is a National Mission on 
Financial Inclusion with an integrated approach to bring about comprehensive financial 
inclusion and provide banking services to all households in the country. The 
Committee feel that it is essential to ensure that accounts opened under the Scheme 
are active and not dormant or fraudulent as the Scheme ensures access to a range of 
financial services like availability of basic savings bank account, access to need based 
credit, remittances facility, insurance and pension and thus holds vital importance. The 
Committee desire that rigorous verification of account details and regular audits of 
account activity should be conducted. Furthermore, discrepancies should be 
thoroughly investigated and accounts that are inactive for prolonged periods or found 
to be fraudulent should be deactivated to ensure that PMJDY serves its intended 
purpose of financial inclusion effectively. The Committee also recommend the Ministry 
to evaluate the scheme at regular intervals to sustain the performance over a period 
of time. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) guidelines, a Savings as well as a Current 
account should be treated as inoperative / dormant, if there are no customer induced 
transactions in the account for over a period of two years.   
      Banks are making concerted efforts to reduce the percentage of inoperative 
accounts and the progress is being regularly monitored by the Government. Banks 
also organize camps at local level to create awareness about good banking habits 
including the benefits of keeping the account active/ operative.  
      As a result of various initiatives, the percentage of inoperative accounts has come 
down from 40% in March’17 to 21.42% in April 2025. As on 30.04.2025, there are a 
total of 55.26 crore PMJDY accounts, with 43.42 crore (78.58%) being operative. 
  
 

24 
 
RBI has, inter-alia, advised Banks: 
 to undertake an annual review of accounts/ deposits where there has been no 
customer induced transactions for more than a year; and 
 to take steps to trace the customers of these accounts/ deposits.  
  
        Moreover, Banks have been advised to take necessary urgent steps to bring 
down the number of inoperative accounts and make the process of activation of such 
accounts smoother and hassle free, including by enabling seamless updation of KYC 
through mobile/internet banking, non-home branches, Video Customer Identification 
Process, etc.  
  
            As per RBI directions, periodic updation of KYC has to be carried out once in 
every 10 years for low risk customers such as PMJDY accounts. Additionally, several 
measures have been taken by the Govt. to simplify the Re-KYC process such as: 
 KYC to be done at any branch of the Bank where the customer is maintaining 
their account;  
 Banks are allowed to obtain self-declaration where there is no change in KYC 
information;  
 Video based Customer identification Process (V-CIP); and  
 Aadhaar OTP based e-KYC authentication in non-face-to face mode has also 
been permitted for re-KYC purpose. 
  
            Further, to give impetus to the financial inclusion initiatives of the Government, 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) was extended beyond 14.08.2018 by 
making the Scheme more attractive with following modifications: 
i. Overdraft (OD) limit has been revised from Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 10,000; 
ii. Age limit for availing OD facility revised from 18-60 years to 18-65 years; 
iii. Accident insurance cover for new RuPay card holders raised from existing Rs.1 
lakh to Rs.2 lakh for new PMJDY accounts opened after 28.8.2018; 
iv. Focus shifted from ‘every household’ to ‘every unbanked adult’. 
  
            With the purpose of improving implementation of PMJDY, Scheduled 
Commercial Banks including Private Sector Banks have been conducting regular 
awareness camps at the grassroots level to promote PMJDY. Additionally, a review 

25 
 
mechanism is in place to regularly monitor the implementation and effectiveness of 
the Scheme with Banks and other relevant stakeholders. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
DIGITAL FINANCIAL LITERACY 
The Committee note the various initiatives undertaken by the Government and the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to promote digital payment transactions and to create a 
digital payment ecosystem in the country such as waiving off of Merchant Discount 
Rate (MDR) charges for transactions upto Rs. 2,000 across all Debit Card Networks, 
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) transactions [Person to Merchants (P2M)] and 
Aadhar Enabled Payment System (AePS); Incentive scheme for promotion of RuPay 
Debit Cards and low-value BHIM-UPI transactions (P2M) to encourage banks to 
enable RuPay Debit Card and UPI transactions; launch of Payments Infrastructure 
Development Fund (PIDF) scheme in January, 2021 to encourage the use of digital 
payment infrastructure in India; various multi-media and awareness campaigns etc. 
While initiatives such as MDR exemptions, the PIDF scheme and digital payment 
awareness campaigns have contributed significantly to promoting a cashless 
economy, the Committee feel that to further enhance digital payment adoption, 
especially in rural areas, targeted measures should be implemented to address 
infrastructure gaps, financial literacy and cybersecurity concerns. The Committee 
recommend that additional steps such as intensifying financial literacy programs by 
leveraging local influencers and Self-Help-Groups to build trust and familiarity with 
digital transactions are needed to deepen penetration in underserved regions along 
with enhancing cybersecurity measures to boost user confidence. The Committee 
desire that in addition to the ongoing awareness campaigns on cyber fraud, use of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) for fraud detection and automatic real time settlement and 
pattern recognition may be explored. The Committee further opine that dedicated 
helpline for users, especially in the rural areas with vernacular language support can 
further aid fraud prevention and redressal and help the users gain confidence in using 

26 
 
the digital payment systems which will ensure a robust, inclusive and secure digital 
payment landscape across India. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the committee regarding financial literacy programs have been 
noted. 
Reserve Bank of India had set up an internal group to review the digital payments 
awareness activities of the Bank. Based on the recommendation of the group, the 
Bank shall be taking steps to strengthen its awareness activities in the upcoming 
financial year. 
Further, to strengthen infrastructure banks have been given specific targets to 
enhance their digital and payment infrastructure in rural areas, with a particular focus 
on the north-eastern states. Payments Infrastructure Development Fund (PIDF) 
scheme have been extended till December 31, 2025 aiming to promote digital payment 
infrastructure in tier-3 to tier-6 centers and special focus areas like the Northeastern 
states and Jammu & Kashmir/Ladakh. In addition, banks have also been given specific 
targets of merchant acquirement for FY 2024–25. 
Digital Payment Financial Literacy campaigns:  
Making Digital Payments Safe and Accessible for Everyone, NPCI has created and 
will further create contents with Pankaj Tripathi (actor) which will be deployed in 
relevant multimedia channels suited to the target audience. NPCI will be extending the 
campaign across properties like KBC to ensure larger viewership. NPCI is also 
planning activations and participation in melas (events like campaigns in Maha Kumbh 
is already done) to reach out to large audiences. These are further supported by 
regional and micro-influencer campaigns to cascade digital payments safety 
awareness messaging. 
The information regarding the committee’s recommendation on use of AI for 
fraud detection is as follows: 
Reserve Bank, over the years, has undertaken a number of measures for ensuring the 
safety and security of digital payments which has resulted in its increased adoption. 

27 
 
While these measures have resulted in the creation of safe and secure systems, 
incidences of fraudsters luring the victims through social engineering and other means 
to influence the victims to make the payment or share the credentials, willingly, are 
being reported. The modus operandi of fraudsters includes deploying sophisticated 
techniques. The defrauded money is taken out of the banking system in no time and 
the recovery is difficult in most cases. The payments ecosystem (Banks, NPCI, Card 
Networks, Payment Aggregators, Payment Apps, etc.,) have independently put in 
place fraud risk management systems. As these systems are working in silos, they 
lack network- level intelligence across the payment systems and also real-time sharing 
of data, which can prevent fraudulent transactions. In order to pre-empt these frauds, 
a need for network-level intelligence and real-time data sharing across payment 
systems is felt. It was, therefore, announced in the Bi-monthly Monetary Policy 
Announcement that a Digital Payments Intelligence Platform will be set up by 
harnessing advanced technologies to mitigate payment fraud risks. 
To take this initiative forward, a Committee [Chair: Shri A.P. Hota, CGM (Retd.,), RBI 
and former MD & CEO of NPCI] was constituted to examine the various aspects of 
setting up this Platform. The recommendations of the committee were examined by 
Reserve Bank of India and Reserve Bank Innovation Hub (RBIH) has been advised to 
develop a prototype for Digital Payment Intelligence Platform (DPIP). RBIH is in the 
process of preparing the architecture for the platform. 
  
With respect to dedicated helpline, it is submitted that under Payments Vision 2019-
2021 of the Reserve Bank, with Bank’s encouragement, various payment industry 
participants (banks & non-banks) have set up ‘DigiSaathi’ – a 24*7 multilingual helpline 
platform to address queries regarding digital payments through toll-free number, 
chatbot, website etc. National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) is managing and 
operating the Platform for the industry. 
Further, the government operates the Indian Cybercrime coordination centre (I4C) 
under MHA (Ministry of Home Affairs) who has provided a cybercrime helpline number 
1930. The aggrieved party or victim can call on 1930 and raise complaint pertaining to 
financial transactions and the portal has a functionality to immediately intimate the 
beneficiary bank with account number where the funds have got transferred. This 

28 
 
happens almost real time which gives the concerned bank an opportunity to 
block/freeze the funds and safeguard the victim’s interest.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8) 
DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC GRIEVANCES  
The Committee note that a large number of grievances/complaints concerning banking 
and insurance sectors are received. The Committee observe that as per Annual 
Report (2023-24) of Council for Insurance Ombudsman, all 17 Insurance Ombudsman 
Centres received a total 52575 complaints and disposed of 49705 complaints out of 
which 12855 were treated as non entertainable.  Further, the Committee note that 
number of complaints received under RBI’s Integrated  Ombudsman Scheme have 
increased at a compounded average growth rate of almost 50% over last two years to 
9.34 lakhs in 2023-24 and number of complaints processed increased from 2,35,000 
in 2022-23 to almost 2,94,000 in 2023-24. The Committee understand that the  postal 
grievances are also digitized and processed through Centralised Public Grievance 
Redressal and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) for its onward transmission to the 
designated Nodal officials for its redressal within a maximum time limit of 21 days by 
all organisations under the Department of Financial Services. The Committee further 
note that the petitioner, if not satisfied with the kind of disposal by the concerned 
banks/insurance company, can file complaint with the concerned Ombudsman for 
settlement of grievance through mediation and passing of awards. The Committee feel 
that the issue of adherence to the prescribed time limit for resolution and decisions 
being binding and enforceable are vital and essential for effective redressal of 
grievances. The Committee also desire that mechanisms be put in place for resolution 
of grievances spanning multiple sectors as in today’s economy the sectors are not in 
silos but have mingled; for instance banking sector also offers insurance products. The 
Committee also believe that a study of the best practices from across the globe can 
help provide constructive insights for improvement and betterment of the grievance 
redressal mechanism. Further, the existing regulations should be reviewed to 
strengthen the grievance redressal mechanism and to eliminate/reduce the causes of 

29 
 
grievances in the banking and insurance sector. To enhance the customer satisfaction 
and protection, regular awareness programmes and publicity drives about the 
available redressal mechanisms and the procedure to file complaints should  also be 
carried out frequently. The Committee would also like to highlight upon the importance 
of adequate training to personnel handling the grievance redressal in various 
organisations of the Department to ensure swift and efficient resolutions. The 
Committee feel that proper training can also reduce categorization of complaints as 
‘non-entertainable’ and maximize consumer satisfaction and redressal.  
Reply of the Government 
As per the comprehensive guidelines for handling public grievances issued by 
DARPG on 23rd August 2024, the timelines for effective grievance redressal have 
been reduced to 21 days. Necessary steps are taken to provide comprehensive 
resolution to customers' grievances lodged in CPGRAMS well within prescribed Turn 
Around Time (TAT) ie; 21 days. Weekly follow up is undertaken with Banks & 
Insurance Companies in respect of grievances pending beyond TAT, for quick 
resolution. For the year 2024, the TAT of Banking Division is 19 days and for 
Insurance Division is 11 days. 
Where multiple sectors like banking/SPARSH/pension/insurance are involved, the 
Banks and Insurance Companies have been advised to refer the grievance to 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) to take up the matter with other sector 
(Banking/insurance/SPARSH) to provide effective redressal to the complainants 
through CPGRAMS Portal. In addition to Government grievance redressal portals, 
all Banks/Insurance Companies have developed their own grievance redressal 
mechanism which allow customers to select the category of grievances while lodging 
complaints. 
CPGRAMS is recognized as a state-of-the-art grievance redressal system and a 
best practice of smart government by the Commonwealth Secretariat. Artificial 
Intelligence (Al) and Machine Learning (ML) are incorporated to revolutionize 
grievance management on the CPGRAMS platform. The 
Regulators/Banks/Insurance companies also deliberate on the best practices from 
across the globe to improve their grievance redressal mechanism. Further, Reserve 
Bank Integrated Ombudsman Scheme (RB-1OS) and insurance Ombudsman is a 

30 
 
testament to our commitment to good governance and the protection of citizens' 
rights. 
Root cause Analysis is conducted at Department level as well as by 
Regulators/Banks/Insurance companies to identify and address underlying 
weaknesses. In order to review the quality of resolution of grievances on CPGRAMS, 
twenty (20) grievances selected on random basis are being reviewed on regular 
basis by Secretary (FS) through video conferencing. Such an exercise has helped 
in building greater customer trust in the financial sector. In addition to periodic review 
meetings, some randomly selected public grievances are reviewed at the level of 
Additional Secretary and Joint Secretary in DFS. All organizations in BFSI sector 
have been advised to review grievances regularly at the top Management level to 
assess the quality of resolution and bring in systemic improvements for effective 
redressal of grievance. 
RBI undertakes various awareness programmes under Public Awareness 
Campaigns. These campaigns include newspaper advertisements in print media, 
hoardings & billboards, thematic multimedia campaigns including TV Commercials, 
SMS etc. Information on avenues of lodging complaints is one of the themes in these 
campaigns. Recently RBI has launched a WhatsApp channel also to promote public 
awareness. 
 IRDAI from time to time has been conducting insurance awareness campaigns in 
audio and video formats on All India Radio (AIR), private FM channels and Television 
channels. 
IRDAI has created print material in the form of booklets on various topics of insurance, 
in a simple, policyholder friendly language in 14 languages of India, which are 
available on the portal www.policyholder.gov.in. The portal is intended to serve as a 
single point reference for the dissemination of information on consumer guidance 
and protection to the policyholders as well as the general public. 
Banks/Insurance companies also create awareness through social 
Media/Newspapers and also through their web site. 
DFS has conducted workshops in some banks on "Effective Grievance Redressal 
Mechanisms" to sensitize the Grievance Redressal Officers about the importance of 
timely and qualitative redressal of grievances so as to improve customer satisfaction 

31 
 
and operational efficiency. Knowledge sharing programs and need-based trainings 
are organized by the regulated entities from time-to-time. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services), 
O.M. No. No.07/19/2025-Parl. dated 09.07.2025] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
  

35 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-
25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 
hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 

36 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Planning. 

37 
 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to 
the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
 
  

38 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES). 
 
 
 
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
08  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(vide Recommendations at SI. 
Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7 & 8) 
 
08 100.00% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies 
 
NIL -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
NIL -- 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
**** 
 