 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Twenty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the 
subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging 
Issues’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs] 
 
  
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
43 

ii 
 
FORTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Twenty-Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the 
subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging 
Issues’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs] 
 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 202603.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 2026 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 

iii 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
12 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
28 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
29 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
31 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06.08.2026  35 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Twenty-
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
the subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 37 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde*  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai#  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Vandana Under Secretary  
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee vice Smt. Darshana Singh w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 02 April 2026 and re-nominated as Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-Third Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Twenty-Eighth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Review of working of Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on 02 December, 2025. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from Ministry of Corporate Affairs on   
02 March, 2026 and 22 May, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
11 August, 2026.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Eighth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
11 August, 2026 
20 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Twenty-Eighth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of Working of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’ pertaining to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
which was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd December, 2025.  
 
1.2  The Twenty-Eighth Report contained 16 recommendations in total and a concluding 
para number 17 containing general observations. Action Taken Notes have been received 
from the Government in respect of all the 16 recommendations contained in the Report. 
These have been analysed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation No. 1,3,4,5,7,9,10,11,12,14,15 and 16           
(Total 12)  
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
 NIL               (Total NIL)                          
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 2 
 (Total 01)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No.6, 8 and 13 
(Total - 3)  
(Chapter- V) 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee observe that the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs are not in the format as communicated by the Secretariat. The 
Committee emphasize that replies ought to be self-contained and duly supported by 
relevant statistical data, concrete timelines of action taken or proposed, and specific 
references to notifications or circulars, to enable effective examination by the Committee. 
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to strictly adhere to the prescribed 
format by indicating, against each recommendation, the specific action taken, clear 
timelines for pending implementation, and explicit reasons for non-acceptance, if any. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that future submissions will address the substantive 
intent underlying each recommendation, refraining from furnishing piecemeal, general, or 
evasive replies. 
1.4 The Committee also note that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) 
Act, 2026 was notified on 22 May 2026 and came into force on 26 May 2026. In view of 
this legislative development, the Committee expect the Ministry to furnish updated, 
comprehensive replies stating the status of implementation of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I after the coming into force of the amended Act, incorporating 
complete and self-contained details on all the aforesaid aspects in the Final Action Taken 
Statement in conformity with the requirements outlined above. 
1.5   The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Efficacy and Post-Resolution Challenges 
1.6 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the IBC has demonstrated significant success in reviving 
firms, 1,322 corporate debtors (CDs) rescued through resolution plans and a total of 
8,715 CIRPs admitted until October 31, 2025. This efficacy is substantiated by 
resolved companies achieving a 76% increase in sales and the Code's deterrent 
effect leading to the resolution of approximately ₹13.94 lakh crore of debt outside the 
formal process, with 1,154 CDs having been withdrawn under Section 12A. The 
Committee observe that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs emphasized the objective 
of the IBC is Resolution, and that the CoC is expected to strike a "fine balance" 
between viability and commercial wisdom by not deciding on liquidation in cases 
where revival is possible. The Committee also observe from the report of IIM 
Ahmedabad that despite these achievements, post-resolution difficulties persist, 
including delays in obtaining necessary clearances from other government agencies 

3 
 
and significant difficulty in obtaining fresh bank financing due to the corporate debtor 
being labelled a defaulter.  
 The Committee recommend the establishment of a transparent, online mechanism 
for issuing “no dues” certificates and statutory clearances immediately upon 
completion of a resolution plan, ensuring that revitalised corporate debtors truly start 
with a clean slate. The Committee also note that the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 seeks 
to strengthen post-resolution implementation by mandating strict timelines and 
regulatory oversight, further enhancing accountability for successful resolution 
applicants. The Committee therefore emphasise that early intervention in stressed 
cases should continue to be promoted to preserve enterprise value, and that once a 
resolution plan is approved by the NCLT, its implementation should be prompt and 
monitored, with clear provisions to penalise non-compliance and ensure maximum 
recovery for all stakeholders.” 
 
1.7 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted as 
follows:- 
“ The certificates and statutory clearances are given by a host of authorities which may 
be under the control of central, state or local self-governments which have their own 
systems for issuing the same.   
 
The current IBBI regulations already have a provision for setting up a monitoring 
committee for monitoring and supervising the implementation of the resolution plan. It 
is proposed to be further strengthened by including this in the Code. The proposed 
IBC Amendment Bill 2025 has a provision to this effect.”  
 
1.8.1   The Committee had recommended the establishment of a transparent, online 
mechanism for issuing “no dues” certificates and statutory clearances immediately 
upon completion of a resolution plan to ensure that revitalised Corporate Debtors 
truly start with a clean slate. While noting the Ministry’s reply that clearances fall 
under a host of authorities across Central, State, and Local Self-Governments, the 
Committee observe that fragmented regulatory approvals across these three tiers 
remain a major bottleneck, as independent legacy systems continue to cause 
compliance delays, redundant documentation, and cost overruns, thereby impeding 
the timely operationalization of revitalised enterprises. 
1.8.2   While reiterating their earlier recommendation for establishing a transparent, 
online mechanism for issuing “no dues” certificates and statutory clearances, the 
Committee suggest that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of developing a 
unified digital gateway modelled on established single-window platforms—such as 
the 'PARIVESH' portal of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEFCC) and the 'National Single Window System' (NSWS) developed by DPIIT—

4 
 
while extending such digital integration to encompass local body approvals as well. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry examine this proposition in 
consultation with concerned stakeholders and apprise them of the outcome in the 
Final Action Taken Statement. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Delays, Backlogs, and Judicial Capacity 
1.9 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the average time taken for closure of the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) is 713 days, far exceeding the mandated 
330-day timeline. The Committee observe that these excessive delays are primarily 
caused by a severe shortage of NCLT benches, vacant judicial and administrative 
staff positions, and widespread frivolous litigation and appeals by promoters or 
unsuccessful resolution applicants, which erodes asset value. The Committee 
further observe that to streamline the adjudicatory process and reduce delays, a 
modus operandi should be adopted, involving a three-part checklist. This checklist 
would track compliance by the Resolution Professional [under Section 30(2)], 
compliance by the Committee of Creditors (CoC), and finally, examination by the 
NCLT to ensure only those issues contained in Section 30(2) are argued, thereby 
preventing arguments that go beyond the mandate of the Act.  
The Committee note that an amendment has been brought in the IBC Bill,2025 to 
ensure that the adjudicating authority admits an insolvency application filed by a 
financial creditor without getting into the reasons for default, thereby reducing the 
grounds for appeal and cutting down consequently the scope for excessive litigation 
at the admission stage to reduce overall delays. The Committee, strongly, 
recommend that the establishment of additional NCLT benches be expedited and 
that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs accelerate the operationalisation of the 
proposed Integrated Technology Platform (iPIE) for centralised case management, 
which is vital for strengthening the capacity and efficiency of the NCLT and NCLAT. 
To deter 76 vexatious challenges, the Committee further recommend that the IBBI 
prescribe a mandatory upfront threshold deposit for unsuccessful resolution 
applicants filing appeals, and the minimum penalty for frivolous applications should 
be substantially raised.” 
 
1.10 In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted as 
follows:- 
“IBBI, through regulations, has mandated Resolution Professionals to submit a 
compliance certificate to the Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) in a prescribed format 
(Form-H). The purpose of the certificate, which is in the form of a checklist, is to 
ensure that the Resolution Plan, as approved by the Committee of Creditors (CoC), 
fully complies with all provisions of the Code and relevant regulations, thereby 
ensuring legal and procedural adherence before final approval. 

5 
 
 The Ministry of Corporate Affairs is currently in an advanced stage of engaging the 
system integrator for Integrated Portal for Insolvency Ecosystem (iPIE) project. The 
iPIE which provide automated workflow tracking, digital records and analytics-based 
scheduling for faster disposal of cases. Further, a proposal for increasing the 
benches of NCLT is under consideration of the Government.  
 The IBC Amendment Bill 2025 proposes to introduce a provision for discouraging 
frivolous applications. Under this provision, NCLT or NCLAT may impose a penalty 
for frivolous or vexatious proceeding. This provision will also apply to frivolous or 
vexatious appeals of unsuccessful resolution applicants.” 
                                                                                 
1.11.1   The Committee had expressed grave concern over the excessive delay in 
the closure of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP)—averaging 713 
days against the statutory timeline of 330 days—and had recommended expediting 
the creation of additional NCLT benches, early operationalization of the Integrated 
Portal for Insolvency Ecosystem (iPIE), adoption of a strict compliance checklist, 
and imposing mandatory upfront threshold deposits alongside enhanced penalties 
to curb vexatious appeals.  
 
1.11.2   While noting the Ministry's reply that Form-H compliance certificates are 
being mandated, the engagement of a system integrator for iPIE is in an advanced 
stage, and the proposal for additional NCLT benches is under consideration, the 
Committee observe that key implementation steps remain under process. 
 
1.11.3  In view of the enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
(Amendment) Act, 2026, as mentioned in para 1.4 above, the Committee emphasize 
that critical operational and infrastructural measures—such as onboarding the 
system integrator for the iPIE portal, expediting the creation and staffing of 
additional NCLT benches, and establishing deterrence mechanisms like mandatory 
upfront threshold deposits against vexatious appeals—require swift execution to 
eliminate systemic delays and ensure timely adjudication. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry fast-track these pending measures and apprise 
them of the concrete progress achieved in the Final Action Taken Statement. 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 Recommendation Serial No. 4     
  
Creditor Realisation and Asset Valuation  
1.12 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that while creditors realise 170.1% of the liquidation value, 
the overall recovery is only 32.8% of the total admitted claims, indicating a 
significant shortfall largely due to firms entering the IBC when assets are already 
heavily stressed. The Committee observe that recovery is constrained by valuing 
assets based merely on liquidation potential rather than enterprise value, and by a 
limited pool of quality resolution applicants. The Committee further observe that 
valuation is a concern due to the lack of transparency and accountability in the 
process, sometimes leading to distress-sale prices.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the system be evolved to value assets 
based on enterprise value to better reflect the corporate debtor’s potential. The 
Committee further recommend that to reduce ‘haircuts’ the process for competitive 
bidding be expanded through global outreach to enhance competition. The 
Committee also recommend that the role of liquidators and registered valuers must 
be strengthened with clear Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), audit trails, and 
post-resolution valuation reviews, and that the option for fresh valuation to be 
carried out again after specific intervals should be explored. The Committee note 
that the IBC Amendment Bill, 2025 introduces provisions aimed at enhancing 
transparency and accountability in liquidation and valuation processes. The 
Committee believe that implementing these reforms, together with improved 
institutional 77 checks, will help maximise value for all stakeholders and make the 
recovery process more robust.” 
 
 1.13  In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted as 
follows:- 
 
“The IBBI is in the process of revising the definition of ‘Fair Value’ by amendment in 
the existing definition in the CIRP Regulations and Pre-packaged Insolvency 
Resolution Process Regulations. The proposed revised definition will capture a 
more holistic valuation of the CD that reflects the true commercial worth and 
economic value of the CD. 
  All the auctions currently being conducted for resolution/insolvency are on a digital 
platform accessible globally which enhances competition and outreach.  
IBBI and the Indian Banks’ Association launched BAANKNET (formerly eBKray), a 
centralised auction platform for liquidation assets. Featuring asset photos, videos, 
and geo-tags, it increases transparency and bidder participation. From April 1, 2025, 
its use is mandatory for all liquidation auctions. 
 Further, the Integrated Platform for IBC Ecosystem (iPIE) is presently under 
development as a centralised digital infrastructure designed to consolidate data, 
filings, monitoring, compliance, marketplace access, and analytics across all 
stakeholders. The platform will integrate with MCA21, Information Utilities, e-

7 
 
Courts, NCLT/ NCLAT databases, and IPA/RVO records, ensuring real-time data 
availability and eliminating duplication. Importantly, iPIE is being designed to enable 
greater transparency and discoverability of distressed assets, including facilitation 
of wider bidder participation and automated outreach capabilities, which are 
expected to significantly improve competition and resolution value. The platform is 
currently under operationalisation with the Ministry, and will address the objective 
underlying the Committee’s recommendation. 
 When a corporate debtor is admitted into CIRP, the Resolution Professional 
appoints registered valuers to determine the fair value and liquidation value of the 
company.  These valuation figures guide the Committee of Creditors in 
evaluating resolution plans. If the company subsequently proceeds to liquidation, 
the valuation determined during CIRP is ordinarily relied upon. However, where the 
Liquidator forms the view that circumstances require an updated valuation—such 
as material changes in asset condition, market fluctuations, or disputes—he may, 
after consultation with the Stakeholders’ Consultation Committee (SCC), appoint 
registered valuers to undertake a fresh determination of the realisable value of the 
assets or business of the corporate debtor. 
 Furthermore, the IBBI is in the process of introducing standardised valuation report 
formats, documentation requirements, harmonised valuation standards across 
resolution and liquidation, and the appointment of a Coordinator Valuer to integrate 
asset-class valuations into a unified Aggregate Fair Value, thereby improving 
robustness and credibility of valuation.”                                                                       
 
1.14.1 The Committee note the regulatory steps initiated by the Ministry and IBBI to 
improve creditor realization and address valuation discrepancies, particularly the 
proposed amendments to the CIRP Regulations and Pre-packaged Insolvency 
Resolution Process Regulations to revise the definition of 'Fair Value'. The 
Committee also note the mandatory deployment of the BAANKNET auction platform 
from 1 April 2025, the development of the iPIE portal, and the proposed introduction 
of a 'Coordinator Valuer' to arrive at a unified Aggregate Fair Value.  
1.14.2    To minimize steep haircuts and ensure consistent asset pricing, the 
Committee emphasize that a transparent and standardized valuation mechanism is 
essential. The Committee, therefore, urge IBBI to establish clear, objective triggers 
for ordering fresh valuations, formally codify the legal status, qualifications, 
responsibilities, and liabilities of the 'Coordinator Valuer', and finalize a harmonized 
set of national valuation standards tailored for distressed assets. 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6      
Homebuyers Rights  
1.15 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the IBC's intent to empower homebuyers, a concession 
formalized by authorizing the Committee of Creditors (CoC) to relax eligibility criteria 
for homebuyer associations to submit a resolution plan. However, the Committee 
observe that this relief is significantly undermined by 79 the high requirement of a 
66% voting share for the CoC to approve this relaxation, effectively negating the 
intended concession. While the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has viewed the 
procedural challenge of meeting the minimum threshold (100 or 10% of total 
homebuyers) to initiate CIRP as being outside its purview, the Committee 
nonetheless believes that Government functionaries must coordinate across 
jurisdictions to operationalize laws effectively. The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that despite the empowering move, homebuyers remain reliant on the 
CoC’s discretion and lack an absolute right to relief independently.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that to give effective implementation to the 
granted concession, the eligibility criteria for homebuyers must be reconsidered to 
make the concession meaningful and enable resolution plans from these groups. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs explore ways to 
coordinate with other nodal Ministry/Department (like Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs/RERA) to facilitate the inclusion of the necessary provisions to help 
homebuyers and also to address regulatory overlaps with other statutes.” 
 
1.16  In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted as 
follows:- 
“The requirement of a 66% voting threshold ensures that any relaxation is exercised 
with broad creditor consensus in line with other major approvals under the CIRP. 
Any further concessions in this regard may risk litigation.  
However, the concessions given to homebuyers for submitting the plans will be re-
examined by IBBI to ascertain the feasibility of further relaxation.     
As per the Supreme Court’s direction in the Mansi Brar Case a Committee has been 
formed comprising of representation from MCA, MoHUA, IBBI to suggest 
commercially viable systematic reforms. The report of the said Committee is 
awaited.” 
 
1.17 The Committee had recommended reconsidering the eligibility criteria for 
homebuyer associations to make resolution plan concessions meaningful, 
alongside strengthening coordination with MoHUA to address regulatory overlaps 
between the IBC and RERA.  While acknowledging the Ministry's submission that 
the 66% voting threshold ensures broad creditor consensus, the Committee note 
that IBBI is re-examining the feasibility of further relaxing concessions for 
homebuyers and that a Committee comprising representations from MCA, MoHUA, 

9 
 
and IBBI has been constituted pursuant to the Supreme Court’s direction in the 
Mansi Brar case. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure early 
completion of IBBI's review as well as the finalization of the report of the said 
Committee, and desire to be apprised of the progress achieved in the Final Action 
Taken Statement. 
      Recommendation Serial No. 8     
  
Advance Ruling Mechanism and Mediation  
1.18  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that a mechanism for advance ruling, such as the one used 
in the GST regime to provide certainty and pre-empt post-litigation disputes, is 
currently absent in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC). The Committee 
observe that the IBC legal community has been demanding the introduction of such 
an advanced ruling mechanism for some time. Given that the IBC prioritizes time-
bound resolution, the lack of a system that can provide 81 stakeholders with binding 
clarity on key issues before the initiation or admission of an insolvency petition 
contributes to procedural ambiguity and subsequent litigation. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the IBBI should 
urgently explore the feasibility and applicability of introducing a suitable advance 
ruling mechanism within the IBC framework. This mechanism should aim to provide 
stakeholders with pre admission clarity on key legal or factual issues, thereby 
significantly reducing unnecessary litigation and safeguarding the time-bound 
nature of the resolution process.  
The Committee also note that mediation under IBC, 2016 is in an early 
evolution stage, and an expert Committee constituted by IBBI recommended for 
pre-institutional mediation to help resolve disputes outside the formal court process. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the integration of mediation as an 
alternative dispute resolution mechanism, drawing from international best practices, 
must be sufficiently promoted and its importance not to be undermined, as this 
would considerably reduce the burden on Adjudicating Authorities and expedite 
resolution.”  
 
1.19  In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted as 
follows:- 
 “To provide stakeholders with preadmission clarity on key legal or factual issues, 
thereby significantly reducing unnecessary litigation and safeguarding the time-
bound nature of the resolution process, the feasibility and applicability of introducing 
a suitable advance ruling mechanism within the IBC framework is being examined.  
  IBC is a strictly time-bound framework designed to achieve swift resolution and 
value maximization. Introducing Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms 
such as mediation or arbitration within the ongoing insolvency process may lead to 

10 
 
delays and procedural uncertainty, undermining the core objective of timeliness 
under the Code. While the IBBI had earlier released a discussion paper on 
mediation for operational creditors prior to filing under section 9, it was observed 
that such mechanisms may be suitable in the pre-IBC stage but not during the CIRP 
or liquidation process. Hence, incorporating ADR or court-linked valuation panels 
within the insolvency process is not recommended.”                                                                          
 
1.20 While welcoming the Ministry's submission that an advance ruling 
mechanism is under active examination, the Committee observe that alternative 
dispute resolution should not be entirely excluded.  To address the dual challenge 
of maintaining timeline discipline alongside growing NCLT litigation, the Committee 
suggest introducing an optional mediation track to be exercised with in a fixed 
timeline, dedicated exclusively to non-core collateral issues like operational 
disagreements, and inter-creditor disputes etc.. The availability of the optional 
Mediation route for a limited duration would also ensure that it does not affect the 
asset realisation value. Such a complementary framework would prevent minor 
conflicts from escalating into drawn-out litigation while allowing the primary CIRP 
timeline to run uninterrupted. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
expedite the feasibility evaluation of advance rulings and re-evaluate incorporating 
mediation into the IBC framework as has been done in several foreign Jurisdictions 
like USA , Singapore, Hong Kong among others and desire to be apprised of the 
progress made in the Final Action Taken Statement. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Waterfall Mechanism and Stakeholder Claims 
1.21 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that a major issue that plagues the resolution process is the 
ambiguity surrounding the waterfall mechanism (Section 53 of the IBC), which 
defines the priority of claims during liquidation. This mechanism dictates that 
secured creditors take priority over unsecured creditors, and operational creditors 
are ranked below financial creditors, often resulting in minimal recovery for the 
former. The Committee observe that the MCA has already issued directions to the 
IBBI to conduct a study on the consequential effects of the waterfall mechanism on 
MSMEs and suggest remedial measures to facilitate better recoveries by MSMEs 
vis-à-vis other creditors. This action acknowledges the potential unintended 
consequences of the current priority structure on certain stakeholder groups. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs must 
expedite the review of the waterfall mechanism’s impact on vulnerable stakeholder 

11 
 
groups, particularly MSMEs and operational creditors, whose lower recovery often 
undermines their ability to sustain business. The Committee further recommend that 
based on the findings of the IBBI study, the Ministry should propose targeted 
amendments to the waterfall mechanism to strike a better balance, maximizing 
value while ensuring that the distribution framework does not unduly disadvantage 
MSMEs, which are critical to the economy.” 
 
1.22  In their Action Taken Replies the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has submitted as 
follows:- 
“It has been observed that the realisation of operational creditors is more than that 
of unsecured financial creditors. Any change in the waterfall mechanism as such 
may not be advisable at this stage. 
 IBBI has been directed to undertake a study on MSME. The study report is 
awaited.” 
1.23   Having earlier recommended a re-examination of the Section 53 distribution 
hierarchy to safeguard MSMEs and operational creditors, the Committee take note 
of the Ministry's submission that the IBBI study is awaited and that modifying the 
waterfall mechanism is presently considered premature. The Committee has also 
been informed that the realisation of Operational Creditors is more than that of 
unsecured financial creditors and any change in the waterfall mechanism as such 
may not be conducive for the purpose at this stage. The Committee would therefore 
like to be apprised of the percentage of the total value realised in the CIRP along 
with data of realisation for Operational Creditors vis-a-vis Unsecured Creditors 
during the last ten years. The Committee, in this regard, reiterate their 
recommendation for expediting the IBBI study and desire that its findings, together 
with the remedial measures formulated for MSMEs, be furnished in the Final Action 
Taken Statement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Impact of IBC, Successes, and Systemic Challenges 
 The Committee acknowledge the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC), enacted 
in 2016, as having played a pivotal role in improving the ease of doing business in India 
by introducing a faster and more structured insolvency resolution process maximising the 
value of assets, promote entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the interests 
of all the stakeholders. This efficacy is substantiated by the fact that as of March 31, 2025, 
a total of 1,194 companies have been successfully resolved under the IBC framework. 
Through these cases, creditors have realised an amount of ₹3.89 lakh crore which is over 
170% of the liquidation value and more than 93% of the fair value of these companies, as 
assessed at the time of admission into the IBC process. The Committee, further, note that 
the enactment of the IBC led to a significant improvement in the "Resolving Insolvency" 
parameter in the World Bank's Ease of Doing Business Report 2020, moving India's rank 
up to 52 from 136 in just a few years.  
 Despite these undeniable successes, the Committee express profound concern 
over persistent and systemic challenges that significantly undermine the Code's optimal 
performance. These challenges include protracted delays in proceedings, an excessive 
burden of litigation straining adjudicating authorities, contentious issues surrounding 
excessive haircuts for creditors, and the incomplete implementation of key frameworks, 
specifically the individual insolvency framework and the pre-packaged mechanism for 
MSMEs. The Committee particularly note that slow admission of insolvency applications 
continues to impede rapid value realisation and leads to asset deterioration, and 
significantly dilutes the Code’s objective of time-bound resolution. 
 In this context, the Committee commend the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for 
constructively responding to their earlier reports and for incorporating their 
recommendations into the formulation of key reforms proposed in the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill 2025. The Committee note that the Bill provides for 
time-bound admission of insolvency cases, introduces a framework for creditor-initiated 
insolvency framework, establishes a statutory structure for group insolvency resolution, 

13 
 
and empowers the Central Government to prescribe rules relating to cross- border 
insolvency proceedings. The Bill further clarifies critical definitions, including those of 
resolution plan and resolution applicant, strengthens procedures relating to liquidation and 
distribution of proceeds, enhances scrutiny of avoidance transactions, and provides for 
more robust regulatory enforcement. The Committee note that while new dynamics have 
emerged in the corporate and financial environment consequent upon changes in borrower 
behaviour influenced by the IBC, the impact of digitization and the IBC’s performance 
relative to other recovery statutes, the unwavering strategic focus must be the consistent 
optimisation of the IBC’s efficiency. This sustained commitment is essential to ensure a 
prompt, time-bound resolution of default cases, maximize recovery, and ultimately fulfill 
the Code's potential in significantly enhancing the ease of doing business in India.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No specific recommendations have been made. As such, this does not require any 
comments or action.   
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Delays, Backlogs, and Judicial Capacity 
 The Committee note that the average time taken for closure of the Corporate 
Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) is 713 days, far exceeding the mandated 330-day 
timeline. The Committee observe that these excessive delays are primarily caused by a 
severe shortage of NCLT benches, vacant judicial and administrative staff positions, and 
widespread frivolous litigation and appeals by promoters or unsuccessful resolution 
applicants, which erodes asset value. The Committee further observe that to streamline 
the adjudicatory process and reduce delays, a modus operandi should be adopted, 
involving a three-part checklist. This checklist would track compliance by the Resolution 
Professional [under Section 30(2)], compliance by the Committee of Creditors (CoC), and 
finally, examination by the NCLT to ensure only those issues contained in Section 30(2) 
are argued, thereby preventing arguments that go beyond the mandate of the Act.  

14 
 
 The Committee note that an amendment has been brought in the IBC Bill,2025  to 
ensure that the adjudicating authority admits an insolvency application filed by a financial 
creditor without getting into the reasons for default, thereby reducing the grounds for 
appeal and cutting down consequently the scope for excessive litigation at the admission 
stage to reduce overall delays .The Committee, strongly, recommend that the 
establishment of additional NCLT benches be expedited and that the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs accelerate the operationalisation of the proposed Integrated Technology Platform 
(iPIE) for centralised case management, which is vital for strengthening the capacity and 
efficiency of the NCLT and NCLAT. To deter vexatious challenges, the Committee further 
recommend that the IBBI prescribe a mandatory upfront threshold deposit for unsuccessful 
resolution applicants filing appeals, and the minimum penalty for frivolous applications 
should be substantially raised. 
Reply of the Government 
IBBI, through regulations, has mandated Resolution Professionals to submit a 
compliance certificate to the Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) in a prescribed format (Form-
H). The purpose of the certificate, which is in the form of a checklist, is to ensure that the 
Resolution Plan, as approved by the Committee of Creditors (CoC), fully complies with all 
provisions of the Code and relevant regulations, thereby ensuring legal and procedural 
adherence before final approval. 
 The Ministry of Corporate Affairs is currently in an advanced stage of engaging the 
system integrator for Integrated Portal for Insolvency Ecosystem (iPIE) project. The iPIE 
which provide automated workflow tracking, digital records and analytics-based scheduling 
for faster disposal of cases. Further, a proposal for increasing the benches of NCLT is 
under consideration of the Government.  
 The IBC Amendment Bill 2025 proposes to introduce a provision for discouraging 
frivolous applications. Under this provision, NCLT or NCLAT may impose a penalty for 
frivolous or vexatious proceeding. This provision will also apply to frivolous or vexatious 
appeals of unsuccessful resolution applicants. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026]  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.11.1, 1.11.2 & 1.11.3 of 
Chapter I) 

15 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Creditor Realisation and Asset Valuation 
 The Committee note that while creditors realise 170.1% of the liquidation value, the 
overall recovery is only 32.8% of the total admitted claims, indicating a significant shortfall 
largely due to firms entering the IBC when assets are already heavily stressed. The 
Committee observe that recovery is constrained by valuing assets based merely on 
liquidation potential rather than enterprise value, and by a limited pool of quality resolution 
applicants. The Committee further observe that valuation is a concern due to the lack of 
transparency and accountability in the process, sometimes leading to distress-sale prices. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the system be evolved to value assets 
based on enterprise value to better reflect the corporate debtor’s potential. The Committee 
further recommend that to reduce ‘haircuts’ the process for competitive bidding be 
expanded through global outreach to enhance competition. The Committee also 
recommend that the role of liquidators and registered valuers must be strengthened with 
clear Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), audit trails, and post-resolution valuation 
reviews, and that the option for fresh valuation to be carried out again after specific 
intervals should be explored. The Committee note that the IBC Amendment Bill, 2025 
introduces provisions aimed at enhancing transparency and accountability in liquidation 
and valuation processes. The Committee believe that implementing these reforms, 
together with improved institutional checks, will help maximise value for all stakeholders 
and make the recovery process more robust.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The IBBI is in the process of revising the definition of ‘Fair Value’ by amendment in 
the existing definition in the CIRP Regulations and Pre-packaged Insolvency Resolution 
Process Regulations. The proposed revised definition will capture a more holistic valuation 
of the CD that reflects the true commercial worth and economic value of the CD. 
  All the auctions currently being conducted for resolution/insolvency are on a digital 
platform accessible globally which enhances competition and outreach.  
IBBI and the Indian Banks’ Association launched BAANKNET (formerly eBKray), a 
centralised auction platform for liquidation assets. Featuring asset photos, videos, and 

16 
 
geo-tags, it increases transparency and bidder participation. From April 1, 2025, its use is 
mandatory for all liquidation auctions. 
 Further, the Integrated Platform for IBC Ecosystem (iPIE) is presently under 
development as a centralised digital infrastructure designed to consolidate data, filings, 
monitoring, compliance, marketplace access, and analytics across all stakeholders. The 
platform will integrate with MCA21, Information Utilities, e-Courts, NCLT/ NCLAT 
databases, and IPA/RVO records, ensuring real-time data availability and eliminating 
duplication. Importantly, iPIE is being designed to enable greater transparency and 
discoverability of distressed assets, including facilitation of wider bidder participation and 
automated outreach capabilities, which are expected to significantly improve competition 
and resolution value. The platform is currently under operationalisation with the Ministry, 
and will address the objective underlying the Committee’s recommendation. 
 When a corporate debtor is admitted into CIRP, the Resolution Professional 
appoints registered valuers to determine the fair value and liquidation value of the 
company.  These valuation figures guide the Committee of Creditors in evaluating 
resolution plans. If the company subsequently proceeds to liquidation, the valuation 
determined during CIRP is ordinarily relied upon. However, where the Liquidator forms the 
view that circumstances require an updated valuation—such as material changes in asset 
condition, market fluctuations, or disputes—he may, after consultation with the 
Stakeholders’ Consultation Committee (SCC), appoint registered valuers to undertake a 
fresh determination of the realisable value of the assets or business of the corporate 
debtor. 
 Furthermore, the IBBI is in the process of introducing standardised valuation report 
formats, documentation requirements, harmonised valuation standards across resolution 
and liquidation, and the appointment of a Coordinator Valuer to integrate asset-class 
valuations into a unified Aggregate Fair Value, thereby improving robustness and 
credibility of valuation.                                                                      
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026]  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.14.1 & 1.14.2 of             
Chapter I) 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Integrity of the IBC Process and Accountability 
 The Committee note that the statutory overlap between the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) is posing a 
great challenge. The simultaneous application of the IBC and the PMLA often creates a 
conflict, as the attachment of assets by the Enforcement Directorate can undermine the 
immunity granted to the new management under Section 32A of the IBC. The Committee 
further note that for giving them protection from any past misconducts of the outgoing 
management, the confiscation of property under PMLA is unknowingly pushing away the 
Resolution Applicants and affecting the revival prospects of distressed corporate debtors, 
thereby defeating the very purpose of IBC to resolve insolvency in a time-bound manner.  
 In this regard, the Committee while noting that IBBI has recently issued a circular 
providing that in cases where assets of the corporate debtor are attached by the ED under 
the provisions under PMLA, the Insolvency Professional may file an 
application/undertaking before the Special Court under sections 8(7) or 8(8) of the PMLA 
for restitution of such assets hope that expeditions disposal of such applications by the 
Special Courts will  significantly enhance the value of the Corporate Debtor thereby leading 
to higher realization. 
 The Committee observe that concerns exist regarding the competence and possible 
misuse of power by some Resolution Professionals (RPs), despite IBBI following a “carrot 
and stick policy” involving mandatory professional education and a strong disciplinary 
mechanism, with 73 disciplinary orders issued against RPs in the last year. It is important 
to remember that though the law is credit-driven, the success of this law practically 
depends on the RP, as it is basically the RP which drives it. However, the Committee are 
of the view that this long process of accountability, requiring Committee of Creditors (CoC) 
action under Section 25 before approaching the NCLT, needs revisiting. The Committee 
also express concern regarding the instances where the conduct of the RP is collusive with 
the erstwhile promoter or interested parties, and the suspected allegations of round-
tripping of ownership. The Committee further note that the IBC Amendment Bill, 2025 
strengthens the accountability of Resolution Professionals (RPs) by prescribing higher 
penalties and enabling enhanced regulatory oversight for instances of misconduct. In view 
of these developments, the Committee recommend that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Board of India (IBBI) mandate and expand specialized training programs for RPs, and 

18 
 
consider the introduction of an additional internal auditor or similar monitoring mechanism 
to ensure compliance and improve oversight. The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs revisit the provisions governing the appointment and removal 
of RPs to empower the Committee of Creditors (CoC) more effectively, and streamline the 
process for establishing accountability of RPs and CoC members in cases of any 
infringement of statutory provisions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
IBBI has been consistently organising Workshops, Webinars, Roundtables, and 
Training Programmes for Insolvency Professionals (IPs). In FY 2025–26, IBBI has 
commenced a structured series of advanced physical training programmes for IPs and 
CoC members. Two such 3-day physical training programs for IPs have been organised 
in Delhi and 7 workshops for members of CoC have been organised in different parts of 
the country with others being planned in due course.  
 
As per the Code, the Adjudicating Authority appoints the RP based on the 
recommendation of the CoC. Further, at any time during the process, CoC has the 
statutory power to replace the RP with the approval of Adjudicating Authority.  
  
The IBC Amendment Bill 2025 proposes to streamline the appointment of the RP 
by providing for the deemed continuation of the Interim Resolution Professional (IRP) as 
RP once the CoC passes a resolution to that effect, thereby removing the need for 
separate judicial intervention by the Adjudicating Authority. To further empower the CoC 
during the liquidation phase, the Bill, as recommended by the Select Committee provides 
that the Resolution Professional handling the CIRP process of the Corporate Debtor shall 
not be appointed as the Liquidator  and further grants the CoC the power to replace the 
liquidator at any time during the process. These amendments ensure that the CoC 
maintains effective oversight throughout both the resolution and liquidation processes. 
  
As regards accountability of the CoC, the IBBI has already issued guidelines for 
conduct of CoC. The IBC Amendment Bill 2025 also empowers the Board to specify 
standards of conduct for the CoC and its members.  
  

19 
 
As regards accountability of RPs, the IBBI carries out inspections and investigations 
of IPs and passes disciplinary orders against errant IPs, imposing monetary penalties or 
suspending or cancelling the IPs’ registration. The Ministry has also issued directions to 
the IBBI that the IP shall not be given any assignment for a period of two years after 
disciplinary action has been taken against him. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Cross-border insolvency Framework 
 The Committee note that the establishment of Cross-border insolvency is the need 
of the hour in a developing nation like India, as an increasing number of corporate entities 
are operating internationally with assets spread across multiple jurisdictions. The 
Committee further note that the current vacuum in a well-established framework to handle 
cross-border insolvency disputes under IBC, 2016, is causing significant losses in high-
value cases and making asset recovery and settlement tedious. 
 The Committee also note that their 32nd Report (17th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended the incorporation of the United Nations Commission on International Trade 
Law (UNCITRAL) Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency and the expeditious adoption of 
a framework. While concerns have been raised that adopting the UNCITRAL Model may 
inadvertently grant foreign creditors priority over domestic creditors, the Committee duly 
understand these looming concerns. The Committee further note that the IBC Amendment 
Bill 2025 proposes to insert a new enabling provision for empowering the Central 
Government to prescribe Rules relating to Cross-border Insolvency proceedings, which is 
currently under active consideration of the Select Committee. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that for making IBC 2016 instrumental in 
addressing the resolution of cross-border insolvency cases, the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs may consider selective adoption of the UNCITRAL Model with some modifications, 
well suited for India's financial and legal framework to avoid the attached shortcomings. 
The Committee would also like to be informed about those specific instances which are 
posing a challenge in the implementation of the UNCITRAL Model to have a better 
understanding of the specific issues. 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards selective adoption of the UNCITRAL Model with some modifications, 
well suited for India's financial and legal framework to avoid the attached shortcomings for 
making IBC 2016 instrumental in addressing the resolution of cross-border insolvency 
cases, it is submitted that the IBC (Amendment) Bill, 2025 proposes to insert an enabling 
provision empowering the Central Government to prescribe Rules for cross-border 
insolvency.  
The said Bill has been referred to the Select Committee which has given 
recommendation affirming the Governments’ proposal. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Diversion or Siphoning of Funds 
 The Committee note that the issue of diversion or siphoning of funds, along with 
avoidance transactions, is a critical concern, evidenced by the fact that out of 1,326 
applications filed for avoidance transactions valued at ₹3.76 lakh crore, the recovery was 
only about ₹7,500 crores. This vast gap highlights the apparent diversion of funds and its 
severe undermining effect on asset quality and subsequent recovery for lenders. 
 The Committee observe that RBI views the diversion or siphoning of funds as a 
"critical concern for REs" (Regulated Entities). To address this, regulations require REs to 
adopt a comprehensive approach combining strong credit appraisal with end-use 
monitoring mechanisms. Further, the RBI observed that diversion of funds is subjected to 
checks such as credit audits and that the RBI's supervisory examinations also focus on 
diversion and end-use of funds. The RBI further note that the primary responsibility of 
monitoring large borrower accounts lies with the banks. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that given the significant value erosion 
caused by these activities, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and IBBI must enhance their 
coordination with the RBI and the Enforcement Directorate ED to strengthen forensic audit 
capabilities during the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP). Specifically, the 
Committee recommend that the IBC framework should be amended to explicitly empower 
Resolution Professionals (RPs) to conduct deeper, time-bound investigations into 

21 
 
avoidance transactions and diversion of funds, ensuring that the claw-back process is 
expedited and effectively contributes to maximizing the value of the corporate debtor's 
assets. The existing legal provisions related to avoidance transactions (PUFE petitions) 
must be adjudicated without "undue delay" by the NCLT to ensure that the recovery is not 
compromised. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The IBBI issued a Circular on 4th November 2025 providing a mechanism for 
restitution of assets attached under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
(PMLA). Through this Circular the Insolvency Professionals have been advised to 
approach the Special Court under Sections 8(7) or 8(8) of PMLA for restitution of attached 
assets, using the standardised undertaking developed jointly by IBBI and the Enforcement 
Directorate. This is expected to improve value realisation in CIRP cases where substantial 
assets remain under attachment. 
 
As regards strengthening forensic audit capabilities, directions will be given to IBBI 
to enhance coordination mechanism with the stated agencies.  
 
As regards amendment of IBC framework to explicitly empower Resolution 
Professionals (RPs) to conduct deeper, time-bound investigations into avoidance 
transactions and diversion of funds, ensuring that the claw-back process is expedited and 
effectively contributes to maximizing the value of the corporate debtor's assets and 
adjudicating the existing legal provisions related to avoidance transactions (PUFE 
petitions), the Ministry has issued directions to IBBI to make suitable regulations in this 
regard. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Impact of IBC on MSMEs and the Pre-packaged Insolvency Resolution Process 
(PPIRP) 
 The Committee note that the Pre-Packaged Insolvency Resolution Process 
(PPIRP) was introduced through the Sixth amendment in 2021 to the IBC Code specifically 

22 
 
to bail out and ameliorate distressed MSME corporates, envisioning a quicker, cost-
effective, and value-maximizing outcome for all stakeholders. The Committee observe that 
the outcomes of the PPIRP have been "not so encouraging". As of March 31, 2025, only 
14 applications had been admitted, with only 8 cases seeing an approved resolution plan. 
The Committee albeit note that the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 has proposed for certain 
measures for streamlining the PPIRP which is under consideration of a the Select 
Committee.  
 The Committee further observe that the low uptake is attributed to various 
infrastructural and procedural gaps, such as the complicated procedure for filing 
applications, the lack of liquidity, trust deficit amongst financial creditors, sophistication 
required by MSMEs to navigate the entire complexities of the process etc.. Consequently, 
these drawbacks are cumulatively pushing banks toward alternate routes like the 
SARFAESI and DRT Acts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a "less complicated 
procedural set up" be evolved to truly help distressed MSME corporates. The Committee 
further recommend that the effective implementation of the PPIRP framework be 
supported through greater awareness, the provision of appropriate incentives, and the 
issuance of clear guidelines for Banks and Financial Institutions to facilitate timely 
resolution, and maximize the intended benefits of the PPIRP under the amended Code.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The IBC Amendment Bill, 2025 proposes a number of measures aimed at 
strengthening the PPIRP framework, including simplification of entry conditions like 
reduction of the percentage threshold for initiation of PPIRP and simplification of other 
procedures in the process. 
 
Regulatory initiatives are underway to expand outreach and capacity building 
among MSMEs and lending institutions, including awareness programmes for the PPIRP 
framework. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
           
 

23 
 
     Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
Adjudicating Authority Rules 
 The Committee note that the current adjudication process under the IBC suffers 
from protracted delays at the pre-admission stage, driven by factors like repeated 
adjournments and the filing of multiple replies and rejoinders. The Committee observe that 
the fundamental issue is the procedural ambiguity arising because the existing Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating Authority) Rules, 2016 only refer to the general 
NCLT Rules, which are not specifically designed for insolvency matters. This reliance has 
led to confusion, a lack of clarity, and judicial inefficiency, which significantly block the 
adjudicatory bandwidth of the NCLT and NCLAT. The Committee note that the IBBI 
suggested the notification of dedicated Rules of Procedure specifically for IBC matters to 
ensure clarity, provide fixed timelines, and enhance the role of the Registry. The 
Committee also observe that the IBC Amendment Bill, 2025, underscores the need for 
procedural streamlining to expedite the resolution process. In view of these considerations, 
the Committee recommend that immediate action be taken to notify dedicated Rules of 
Procedure specifically tailored for IBC matters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Notifying the dedicated Rules of Procedure specifically tailored for IBC matters 
would be taken up once the proposed amendment bill is passed in the Parliament. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Part settlement of Resolution Plan 
 The Committee note that in compliance with its previous recommendation, CIRP 
Regulation 37 had been accordingly amended in 2022, which clarified that a resolution 
plan may provide for the sale of one or more assets of the Corporate Debtor (CD) to one 
or more successful resolution applicants. The Committee are pleased to note that the MCA 
adopted a proactive approach in amending Regulation 37 to clarify the scope of a 
'Resolution Plan' defined under Section 5(26), and the NCLT has also approved the 

24 
 
implementation of a resolution plan in parts. The Committee also take note of the IBC 
Amendment Bill 2025 which proposes to further amend Section 5(26) to explicitly clarify 
that the restructuring of the CD may include the sale of one or more of its assets. 
 The Committee, however, desire that in addition to the amendment in the CIRP 
regulation, a consolidated administrative order clearly citing the scope and extent of the 
enabling provision/regulation authorizing the part settlement of the Resolution Plan in 
clear, unambiguous regional language should be issued. This is necessary to avoid any 
misinterpretation and ensure that any corporate entity or individual, irrespective of their 
resources or level of erudition, can easily reach out and comprehend this important aspect 
of CIRP, thereby making the legal position clear. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 IBBI has been directed to issue an appropriate guidance note in the matter. 
 [Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
Strengthening the Capacity and Efficiency of NCLT 
 The Committee note that one of the major issues in the efficient implementation of 
IBC is the delay in the resolution of processes. The average time taken for resolution as of 
March 2024 stood at 674 days, which jumped to 853 days during 2024-2025, significantly 
traversing the mandated 330-day timeline. The Committee observe that this concerning 
delay, which is diminishing asset value, is primarily attributable to the inadequacy of legal 
institution infrastructure, as the NCLT capacity needs to be scaled up to get an optimal 
outcome. The Committee also note that currently, 30,600 IBC cases are pending before 
30 NCLT Benches that would take at least a decade to dispose of this huge backlog with 
the current strength. The Committee further observe that these excessive delays are 
compounded by widespread frivolous litigation and appeals by promoters or unsuccessful 
resolution applicants. The Committee note that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs is 
proactively working to reduce the delay by increasing the number of benches of NCLT and 
NCLAT, and a proposal in this regard is already under consideration. 

25 
 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Government must review 
the strength of NCLT & NCLATs for the creation of additional Benches and consider 
enhancing the efficiency of existing NCLT benches, beside filling up the existing vacancies. 
Special designated fast track courts for a fixed time period may also be established to 
shoulder the burden and ensure expeditious disposal. To deter vexatious challenges, the 
Committee further recommend that the IBBI prescribe a mandatory upfront threshold 
deposit for unsuccessful resolution applicants filing appeals, and the minimum penalty for 
frivolous applications should be substantially raised. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This is a continuous and collaborative process between the executive and the 
judiciary. The NCLT has been equipped with adequate manpower as and when sought, 
coupled with use of technology like e-Court and Hybrid courts to enhance efficiency. 
Regular colloquiums are being held for capacity building. 
 As regards, prescribing a mandatory upfront threshold deposit for unsuccessful 
resolution applicants filing appeals, etc in order to deter vexatious challenges, it is stated 
that it would be incorporated in the Rules applicable to NCLT & NCLAT which would be 
notified by the Ministry. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
E-Court System  
 The Committee note that the presently operating e-court system under IBC has a 
vital role to play in case management and streamlining the process. However, the 
Committee further note that one of the functional challenges in making e-courts a success 
is the lack of technological fluency among some Judges. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that to make the e-court system effective, the Adjudicating Officers must be 
adequately trained and made comfortable in navigating the e-court platform. The Ministry, 
in this regard, may explore options for tying up with capacity building institutions for 
imparting the requisite training. 

26 
 
The Committee further recommend the creation of a dedicated cadre of IT professionals 
to support NCLT operations, the engagement of specialized personnel for the digital 
infrastructure and groundwork, and the adoption of international best practices to build a 
robust technological backbone, ensuring the e-court system functions efficiently. 
Reply of the Government 
 NCLT conducts Colloquium of members for capacity building. 
 
 The Ministry fully admits the recommendations of the Committee for a dedicated IT 
professional and has already put in place a dedicated cadre to support National Company 
Law Tribunal (NCLT) operation. At present, the NCLT has been sanctioned one post of 
Programmer and three posts of Assistant Programmer to oversee core technical 
operations. 
 
 To meet the increased demand for such technical operations, the Ministry, in its 
comprehensive proposal for creation of additional posts in NCLT, has specifically 
recommended for the creation of 30 additional posts of Assistant Programmer with an aim 
to provide a dedicated Assistant Programmer for each of the 31 courts and this localized 
technical support will ensure that every bench is able to manage its e-filing, virtual 
hearings, and digital record-keeping with minimal downtime. 
 
 Further, the proposal involves the deployment of two additional Assistant 
Programmers specifically at the Principal Bench to assist the lead Programmer in 
managing day-to-day national operations. 
 
 On the infrastructure front, it is pertinent to mention that the eCourt 1.0 system, 
managed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC), has already been successfully 
implemented across all benches of the NCLT, in line with the similar eCourts systems 
followed by similar Tribunals. Furthermore, the Ministry is actively pursuing the transition 
from eCourt 1.0 to eCourt 2.0 which involves a significant technological upgradation, 
incorporating Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) algorithms to 
streamline case management, automate document processing, and enhance the overall 
speed of judicial delivery.  
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 

27 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund 
 The Committee note that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund provided for under 
Section 224 of the Code remains pending operationalisation, despite the IBBI having 
requested the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) to operationalize it as early as 2019. 
Given the critical and documented need to strengthen the capacity and efficiency of the 
Adjudicating Authorities (NCLT/NCLAT) by filling vacant judicial and administrative posts, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the IBC Fund be immediately operationalized. 
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry must ensure that the Fund is suitably 
utilized for enhancing the human resources and efficiency of the NCLT and NCLAT to help 
reduce the excessive delays plaguing the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process 
(CIRP). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The benches of National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) are established depending 
on quantum of workload and other factors. As on date, one Principal Bench and 15 other 
Benches of NCLT are operational in the country. To facilitate expeditious disposal, 
Government is taking necessary steps on an ongoing basis, which includes 
implementation of e-court and hybrid court project, regular colloquiums for capacity 
building of members, provisions of infrastructure, filling up of vacancies, etc. Cases are 
disposed in the Tribunal as per procedure provided in law and increased pendency cannot 
be directly attributed to only vacancies. NCLT is a quasi-judicial body. There are several 
reasons for the pendency of cases in NCLT which, inter-alia, includes circumstances and 
complexity of each case, nature of evidence, number of Interlocutory Applications (IAs), 
stay by the higher courts, cooperation of stake holders etc. 
 
 It is pertinent to mention that whilst the operationalisation of the IBC Fund has been 
proposed in the Amendment Bill, the upgradation of the resources of the Tribunals is 
carried out through the budgetary allocation made to these tribunals based on the 
demands raised by them. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026] 

28 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

29 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Efficacy and Post-Resolution Challenges 
 The Committee note that the IBC has demonstrated significant success in reviving 
firms, 1,322 corporate debtors (CDs) rescued through resolution plans and a total of 8,715 
CIRPs admitted until October 31, 2025. This efficacy is substantiated by resolved 
companies achieving a 76% increase in sales and the Code's deterrent effect leading to 
the resolution of approximately ₹13.94 lakh crore of debt outside the formal process, with 
1,154 CDs having been withdrawn under Section 12A. The Committee observe that the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs emphasized the objective of the IBC is Resolution, and that 
the CoC is expected to strike a "fine balance" between viability and commercial wisdom 
by not deciding on liquidation in cases where revival is possible. The Committee also 
observe from the report of IIM Ahmedabad that despite these achievements, post-
resolution difficulties persist, including delays in obtaining necessary clearances from other 
government agencies and significant difficulty in obtaining fresh bank financing due to the 
corporate debtor being labelled a defaulter.  
 The Committee recommend the establishment of a transparent, online mechanism 
for issuing “no dues” certificates and statutory clearances immediately upon completion of 
a resolution plan, ensuring that revitalised corporate debtors truly start with a clean slate. 
The Committee also note that the IBC Amendment Bill 2025 seeks to strengthen post-
resolution implementation by mandating strict timelines and regulatory oversight, further 
enhancing accountability for successful resolution applicants. The Committee therefore 
emphasise that early intervention in stressed cases should continue to be promoted to 
preserve enterprise value, and that once a resolution plan is approved by the NCLT, its 
implementation should be prompt and monitored, with clear provisions to penalise non-
compliance and ensure maximum recovery for all stakeholders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The current IBBI regulations already have a provision for setting up a monitoring 
committee for monitoring and supervising the implementation of the resolution plan. It is 

30 
 
proposed to be further strengthened by including this in the Code. The proposed IBC 
Amendment Bill 2025 has a provision to this effect.  
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026]  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.8.1 & 1.8.2 of Chapter I) 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Homebuyers Rights 
 The Committee note that the IBC's intent to empower homebuyers, a concession 
formalized by authorizing the Committee of Creditors (CoC) to relax eligibility criteria for 
homebuyer associations to submit a resolution plan. However, the Committee observe that 
this relief is significantly undermined by the high requirement of a 66% voting share for the 
CoC to approve this relaxation, effectively negating the intended concession. While the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs has viewed the procedural challenge of meeting the minimum 
threshold (100 or 10% of total homebuyers) to initiate CIRP as being outside its purview, 
the Committee nonetheless believes that Government functionaries must coordinate 
across jurisdictions to operationalize laws effectively. The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that despite the empowering move, homebuyers remain reliant on the CoC’s 
discretion and lack an absolute right to relief independently. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that to give effective implementation to the 
granted concession, the eligibility criteria for homebuyers must be reconsidered to make 
the concession meaningful and enable resolution plans from these groups. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs explore ways to coordinate with other nodal 
Ministry/Department (like Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs/RERA) to facilitate the 
inclusion of the necessary provisions to help homebuyers and also to address regulatory 
overlaps with other statutes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The requirement of a 66% voting threshold ensures that any relaxation is exercised 
with broad creditor consensus in line with other major approvals under the CIRP. Any 
further concessions in this regard may risk litigation.  
However, the concessions given to homebuyers for submitting the plans will be re-
examined by IBBI to ascertain the feasibility of further relaxation.     

32 
 
As per the Supreme Court’s direction in the Mansi Brar Case a Committee has been 
formed comprising of representation from MCA, MoHUA, IBBI to suggest commercially 
viable systematic reforms. The report of the said Committee is awaited. 
 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026]  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.17 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Advance Ruling Mechanism and Mediation 
 The Committee note that a mechanism for advance ruling, such as the one used in 
the GST regime to provide certainty and pre-empt post-litigation disputes, is currently 
absent in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC). The Committee observe that the IBC 
legal community has been demanding the introduction of such an advanced ruling 
mechanism for some time. Given that the IBC prioritizes time-bound resolution, the lack of 
a system that can provide stakeholders with binding clarity on key issues before the 
initiation or admission of an insolvency petition contributes to procedural ambiguity and 
subsequent litigation. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs and the IBBI should urgently explore the feasibility and applicability of introducing 
a suitable advance ruling mechanism within the IBC framework. This mechanism should 
aim to provide stakeholders with pre-admission clarity on key legal or factual issues, 
thereby significantly reducing unnecessary litigation and safeguarding the time-bound 
nature of the resolution process. 
 The Committee also note that mediation under IBC, 2016 is in an early evolution 
stage, and an expert Committee constituted by IBBI recommended for pre-institutional 
mediation to help resolve disputes outside the formal court process. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the integration of mediation as an alternative dispute resolution 
mechanism, drawing from international best practices, must be sufficiently promoted and 
its importance not to be undermined, as this would considerably reduce the burden on 
Adjudicating Authorities and expedite resolution. 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To provide stakeholders with preadmission clarity on key legal or factual issues, 
thereby significantly reducing unnecessary litigation and safeguarding the time-bound 
nature of the resolution process, the feasibility and applicability of introducing a suitable 
advance ruling mechanism within the IBC framework is being examined.  
IBC is a strictly time-bound framework designed to achieve swift resolution and 
value maximization. Introducing Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms such 
as mediation or arbitration within the ongoing insolvency process may lead to delays and 
procedural uncertainty, undermining the core objective of timeliness under the Code. While 
the IBBI had earlier released a discussion paper on mediation for operational creditors 
prior to filing under section 9, it was observed that such mechanisms may be suitable in 
the pre-IBC stage but not during the CIRP or liquidation process. Hence, incorporating 
ADR or court-linked valuation panels within the insolvency process is not recommended.                                                    
 [Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026]  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.20 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Waterfall Mechanism and Stakeholder Claims 
 The Committee note that a major issue that plagues the resolution process is the 
ambiguity surrounding the waterfall mechanism (Section 53 of the IBC), which defines the 
priority of claims during liquidation. This mechanism dictates that secured creditors take 
priority over unsecured creditors, and operational creditors are ranked below financial 
creditors, often resulting in minimal recovery for the former. The Committee observe that 
the MCA has already issued directions to the IBBI to conduct a study on the consequential 
effects of the waterfall mechanism on MSMEs and suggest remedial measures to facilitate 
better recoveries by MSMEs vis-à-vis other creditors. This action acknowledges the 
potential unintended consequences of the current priority structure on certain stakeholder 
groups. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs must 
expedite the review of the waterfall mechanism’s impact on vulnerable stakeholder groups, 
particularly MSMEs and operational creditors, whose lower recovery often undermines 

34 
 
their ability to sustain business. The Committee further recommend that based on the 
findings of the IBBI study, the Ministry should propose targeted amendments to the 
waterfall mechanism to strike a better balance, maximizing value while ensuring that the 
distribution framework does not unduly disadvantage MSMEs, which are critical to the 
economy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It has been observed that the realisation of operational creditors is more than that 
of unsecured financial creditors. Any change in the waterfall mechanism as such may not 
be advisable at this stage. 
 IBBI has been directed to undertake a study on MSME. The study report is awaited. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency-Part(1) dated 02.03.2026 and O.M. No. No.30/66/2020-Insolvency (e-278797) dated 22.05.2026]  
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.23 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
11 August, 2026 
20 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                              
 

35 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
 
Minutes of the Forty-Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5. Shri K. Gopinath 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Kishori Lal 
8. Thiru Arun Nehru 
9. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
10. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
11. Prof. Sougata Ray 
12. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
13. Shri Manish Tewari 
14. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri P. Chidambaram 
16. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
17. Shri Praful Patel 
18. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
19. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
20. Shri Sanjay Seth 
21. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption: 

36 
 
i) Forty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Twenty-Eighth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Review of working of 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
ii) Forty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty-Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
iii) Forty-Fifth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty-Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public 
Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management). 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
PART II 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
* * * 
 
 

37 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON THE SUBJECT ‘REVIEW OF WORKING OF 
INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE AND EMERGING ISSUE’ OF THE MINISTRY 
OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS. 
 
 
 
 
  Total % of total      
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
16  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(vide Recommendations at SI. 
Nos.1,3,4,5,7,9,10,11,12,14,15 and 16) 
 
12 75% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies 
 
NIL -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide Recommendation at SI. No.2) 
 
01 6.25% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited (vide 
Recommendation at SI. No.6, 8 and 13) 
 
03 18.75% 
 
 
**** 
 
 