i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF NATIONAL STATISTICAL 
COMMISSION (NSC) 
 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
27 

ii 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF NATIONAL STATISTICAL 
COMMISSION (NSC) 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 02 December, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02 December, 202503 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENT 
 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                    (v) 
Introduction                                                                                                                  (vii) 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
1. Introductory 1 
    Evolution of the Indian Statistical System  1 
    Background of MoSPI 2 
    Establishment of National Statistical Commission 3 
    Capacity, Availability of infrastructure and accountability  3 
    Composition of the Commission  4 
    Role and responsibilities of NSC  6 
    Technical support available to the Commission  8 
    Statistical reforms driven by NSC  9 
    Major Activities undertaken by the Commission 12 
    National Statistical Office (NSO) 17 
2. Allocation of Funds and Utilisation 20 
3. Statutory Status for NSC 23 
    Draft National Statistical Commission (NSC) Bill, 2019 24 
4. NSSO  26 
     Merger of CSO and NSSO 31 
5. Strengthening Statistical Systems 33 
    Coverage 33 
    Accuracy and Quality of Statistical Data 34 
    Sampling Design  37 
    Index of Industrial Production (IIP) 39 
    Consumer Price Index (CPI) 40 
    Research and Analysis Unit (RAU) 42 
    IT Modernization Plans and Data Innovation Labs 44 
    Collaboration with International Institutions and follow Global Best    
Practices  46 
    SDG Indicators  47 
    Mitigation of Data Overlap 49 
    Engagement with Institutions, Students and Researchers  49 
    Interactive Sessions and panel discussions 50 
 PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  53-59 
  

iv 
 
 ANNEXURES  
Annexure A A brief on the reform initiatives for ‘Strengthening the National 
Statistical System  
 
60 
Annexure  B  Comparative Table of Statistical Systems in various countries 
 
67 
 APPENDICES  
Appendix – I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 09.01.2025 68 
Appendix – II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06.08.2025 71 
Appendix – III Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 26.11.2025 75 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Smt. Mradula Dubey Assistant Committee Officer 
 

vi 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
  

vii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Performance review of National Statistical Commission (NSC)’. 
 
2. The Committee, on 09 January, 2025, held deliberations with the representatives 
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on the subject. Thereafter, 
on 06 August, 2025, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on the same subject. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on           
26 November, 2025.       
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing the requisite material and information desired by the Committee in connection 
with the examination of the subject. 
 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
26 November, 2025 
05 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
CHAPTER – I 
 
1. INTRODUCTORY 
Evolution of the Indian Statistical System 
 
1.1 In 1945, the Government of India set up an Inter-Departmental Committee with 
the Economic Adviser to the Government of India as Chairman to consider the statistical 
material available and to make recommendations for filling up of the gaps and for 
improvement in the existing organisations. Among the organisational recommendations 
was a scheme coupled with the formation of a Central Statistical Office for coordination, 
the institution of a statistical cadre, establishment of Statistical Bureaus at the 
Headquarters of State Governments and the preparation of overall statistics for the 
entire country. 
1.2 Professor P.C. Mahalanobis, who is regarded as a pioneer in the field of 
statistics, was appointed as the first Statistical Adviser to the Cabinet, Government of 
India in January 1949. He was the architect of the statistical system of independent 
India. Professor P. V. Sukhatme, as Statistical Adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture, 
was responsible for the development of Agricultural Statistics. 
1.3 The coming of the era of developmental planning in India, gave significant 
impetus to the development of statistics. The important phases of this development are 
enumerated below:  
(i) A nucleus statistical unit was set up at the Centre in the Cabinet Secretariat 
in 1949. This unit was developed later on in 1951 into the Central Statistical 
Organisation (CSO). The main responsibility assigned to the CSO was to 
bring about coordination of statistical activities among various statistical 
agencies in the Central Government and of Statistical Bureaus of State 
Governments, which was set up for similar coordination of activities of 
statistical agencies at the State level. 

2 
 
(ii) A National Income Committee was appointed in 1949 to work out a system 
for reliable estimation of national income. 
(iii) The National Sample Survey (NSS) came into being in 1950 to collect 
information through sample surveys on a variety of socio-economic aspects. 
(iv) In 1954, the National Income Unit was transferred from the Ministry of 
Finance to the CSO and a new Unit for Planning Statistics was set up. 
(v) In 1957, the subject of Industrial Statistics was transferred from the Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry to the CSO. 
(vi) In April 1961, the Department of Statistics was set up in the Cabinet 
Secretariat and the CSO became a part of it. 
(vii) In 1972, a Computer Centre in the then Department of Statistics was set up. 
(viii) In 1973, the Department of Statistics became a part of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
(ix) In February 1999, the Department of Statistics and the Department of 
Programme Implementation were merged and named as the Department of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation under Ministry of Planning and 
Programme Implementation. 
(x) In October 1999, the Department of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation was declared as the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI). 
 
 
Background of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) 
 
1.4 The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) came into 
existence as an independent Ministry on 15th October 1999 after the merger of the 
Department of Statistics and the Department of Programme Implementation. The 
ministry is the nodal agency for the planned and organized development of the 
statistical system in the country and coordination of statistical activities among different 

3 
 
stakeholders in Government of India, State Governments as well as for meeting 
requirements of the International Agencies.  
 
Establishment of National Statistical Commission 
 
1.5 A Commission set up by the Government of India in January 2000 under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan reviewed the statistical system and the entire gamut 
of Official Statistics in the country. The Rangarajan Commission submitted its report to 
the Government in 2001. One of the key recommendations of this Commission was to 
establish a Statutory National Commission on Statistics to serve as a nodal and 
empowered body for all core statistical activities of the country to evolve, monitor and 
enforce statistical priorities and standards and to ensure statistical co-ordination among 
the different agencies involved. The Rangarajan Commission also recommended that 
the Commission be set-up initially through a Government order. In line with the 
recommendations of the Rangarajan Commission, the Government of India set up a 
National Statistical Commission (NSC) through the Resolution dated 1 June 2005. In 
pursuance of the Resolution, the NSC was constituted and has been functioning with 
effect from 12 July 2006. As per provisions of the said Resolution, the Commission has 
the requisite autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. Revised 
notification was issued vide notification no.478 dated 19 December 2019, which 
contained the details of Composition of NSC, Selection Process of NSC Chairperson 
and Members, Tenure of NSC Chairperson and Members, Functions of National 
Statistical Commission, Powers of National Statistical Commission, Responsibility of 
Commission to the Parliament, Budgetary support to the Commission etc. 
 
Capacity, Availability of infrastructure and accountability 
1.6 National Statistical Commission (NSC) is chaired by an eminent statistician and 
its four members have specialization and experience in specified statistical and allied 
fields. The Chairman and Members of the NSC are selected on the basis of the 
recommendations of a Search Committee duly constituted by the Government of India 
for the purpose, from time to time. The service conditions of the Chairperson and 

4 
 
Members of the NSC have been laid down in the Government of India Notification 
No.465 dated 10 May 2006 published in the Gazette of India. 
 
Composition of the Commission  
1.7 The National Statistical Commission consists of : 
a) a part-time Chairperson who is, or has been, an eminent statistician or social 
scientist to be nominated by the Government of India; 
b) four part-time Members, one each from the following fields, to be nominated by 
the Government of India, from amongst the persons having specialization and 
experience in – 
i. Economic statistics in such areas as agriculture, industry, infrastructure, 
trade or finance, 
ii. Social and environment statistics in such areas as population, health, 
education, labour and employment or environment, 
iii. Statistical operations in such areas as censuses, surveys, statistical 
information system or information technology, and 
iv. National accounts, statistical modelling or State Statistical Systems 
c) The Chief Executive Officer, NITI Aayog (National Institution for Transforming 
India) as ex officio Member. 
d) The Chief Statistician of India, who is the Secretary of the Commission. He is 
also the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation. 
 
1.8 The Chairman and Members are selected on the basis of the recommendations 
of a Search Committee duly constituted by the Government of India from time to time for 
the purpose. The tenure of the Chairperson and the Members is three years. The status 
of the Chairperson is that of a Minister of State and the Members are equivalent to 

5 
 
Secretary to the Government of India. The present composition of the Commission is as 
follows: 
Sr. No. Designation Name 
1.  Chairperson Prof. Rajeeva Laxman Karandikar 
Professor Emeritus, CMI, Chennai 
2.  Member Prof. A. Ganesh Kumar 
Professor, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development 
Research, Mumbai 
3.  Member Prof. Debasis Kundu 
Professor, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
4.  Member Prof. Mukesh Mohania 
Professor, Indraprastha Institute of Information 
Technology, Delhi 
5.  Member Shri Asit Kumar Sadhu, 
DG (Retd.), M/ o Statistics & PI 
6.  Member, ex-
officio     
Shri B. V. R. Subrahmanyam, IAS (Retd.)  
CEO, NITI Aayog 
7.  Secretary to the 
NSC  
Dr. Saurabh Garg, IAS (Retd.) 
Secretary, M/ o Statistics & PI 
 The Service Conditions of the Chairperson and Members of the NSC are laid 
down by the notification dated 8 May 2006 and further revised vide Notification dated 7 
November 2024. 
 
1.9 The honorarium or remuneration of Chairman and Members of the NSC have 
been enhanced by the Government of India Notification No. 4446 dated 7 November 
2024 published in the Gazette of India. The annual expenditure on account of the 
establishment of the National Statistical Commission including salary and wages, 
domestic travel, office expenses, hiring of accommodation, professional services, 
administrative services and requirements for day to day administration of the 
Commission is met from a demand under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation through a separate budget head and is voted by the Parliament. NSC 
has a separate website (www.nsc.mospi.gov.in) where all the information including 
regulations, Annual Reports and Action Taken Reports are available. National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) has a dedicated office in RK Puram and is serviced by a Secretariat 

6 
 
headed by Secretary of the Commission who is supported by an officer of the Indian 
Statistical Service in the Senior Administrative Grade (DDG) and other officials.The 
Annual Report for each financial year which is prepared by the Commission along with 
approved action taken reports are laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
Role and responsibilities of NSC 
1.10 The mandate of the National Statistical Commission constitutes the following: 
a) to identify the core statistics, which are of national importance and are critical to 
the development of the economy; 
b) to constitute professional committees or working groups to assist the 
Commission on various technical issues; 
c) to evolve national policies and priorities relating to the statistical system; 
d) to evolve standard statistical concepts, definitions, classifications and 
methodologies in different areas in statistics and lay down national quality 
standards on core statistics; 
e) to evolve national strategies for the collection, tabulation and dissemination of 
core statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets; 
f) to evolve national strategies for human resource development on official statistics 
including information technology and communication needs of the statistical 
system; 
g) to evolve measures for improving public trust in official statistics; 
h) to evolve measures for effective co-ordination with State Governments and Union 
Territory Administrations on statistical activities including strengthening of 
existing institutional mechanisms; 
i) to exercise statistical co-ordination between Ministries, Departments and other 
agencies of the Central Government; 
j) to exercise statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and 
integrity of the statistical products; 
k) to recommend to the Central Government, or any State Government, as the case 
may be, measures to effectively implement the standards, strategies and other 
measures evolved under clauses (c) to (h); 

7 
 
l) to advise the Government on the requirement of legislative measures on 
statistical matters including the statute for the National Statistical Commission; 
and 
m) to monitor and review the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the 
laid down policies, standards and methodologies and recommend measures for 
enhanced performance. 
 
1.11 The Commission has the authority to formulate its short and long term 
programmes. NSC has evolved necessary measures and mechanism by constituting 
professional committees, expert committees and working groups to assist the 
Commission on various technical issues. NSC has also been assigned the functions of 
oversight of the implementation of the reforms for ‘Strengthening of the Indian National 
Statistical System’. For all the matters placed before the Commission, the action taken 
by respective stakeholders is monitored by NSC through the Action Taken Reports, 
which is presented to the Commission in every meeting.  Thus, NSC has a robust 
framework in place and it continues to serve as a nodal body for statistical activities and 
it ensures effective statistical co-ordination among the different agencies of the National 
Statistical System. 
 
 
1.12 The representatives of Ministry in their presentation during the sitting of the 
Committee held on 09.05.2025deposed as below: 
“…the National Statistical Commission regularly monitors the functioning in the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, predominantly the National 
Statistics Office. It works through various working groups and professional 
committees, which support them on various technical issues. So, they give 
guidance and directions in evolving standards, concept definitions, detail work on 
the national sample surveys, the sample design and all the sample survey-
related matters. They guide NSO in all this through these technical committees.” 
 
 

8 
 
Technical support available to the Commission  
Steering Committee 
1.13 NSC has also been exercising the functions of the erstwhile Governing Council 
(GC) of the National Sample Survey Office (NSSO) through a Steering Committee. The 
functions of GC included deciding the subjects for coverage in each NSS round, 
formulating methodology, and overseeing the processing of data and the release of 
survey reports/ unit level data by the NSS. The Steering Committee of NSC 
recommends on various aspects pertaining to National Sample Surveys and comprises 
of subject-matter experts as well as the representatives from Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI), Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI), NITI Aayog and State Governments.  
1.14 The Steering Committee of NSC reviews the extant framework and addresses 
the issue from time to time on the subject results, methodology, questionnaire, sampling 
frame, sampling design, concepts and definitions, surveys instruments etc. related to all 
National Sample Surveys. The finalization and approval of survey results/ reports for 
release is also done by the Steering Committee of NSC.  
Technical Advisory Committees (TAGs) 
1.15 There are two Technical Advisory Groups (TAGs) under the aegis of the Steering 
Committee, which provide technical guidance on matters related to household surveys 
and enterprise surveys. The members are experts from MoSPI, respective Ministries, 
academia and members from RBI and Institutes of repute such as NCAER, NIPFP, IEG, 
Universities etc. The recommendations of Steering Committee and reports of TAGs are 
placed before the NSC for deliberations and finalization.  
Expert Committees 
1.16 NSC formed five Expert Committees on the following subjects, which gave a 
number of recommendations: 
1. Expert Committee on Revisiting Survey Design  
2. Expert Committee on Shortening of Questionnaire and Definitional Issues  
3. Expert Committee on Various Surveys and Redundancies in Government of India 
4. Expert Committee on Modernisation of Information and Technology 
5. Expert Committee for Analytics on Government Data 
These Committees headed by experts in different subject matters gave 
recommendations regarding various technical matters including updation of sampling 
methodology of NSO, address definitional issues, using external data sources for the 

9 
 
sampling frame, use of "Geo-tagging" and mobile to ensure correctness of data and 
ensuring data quality, Use of Information and Technology for improving the speed of 
data collection, processing and dissemination, reduction in canvassing time of 
questionnaires, mechanism of coordination between MoSPI and other 
Ministries/Departments to bring synergy in conduct of surveys etc.   
The tiered mechanism in form of TAGs, Steering Committee, Expert Committees 
and overarching guidance of NSC provide a rigorous framework for all National Sample 
Surveys.  
 
 
1.17 Besides, the functions of the Governing Council of the NSSO were also entrusted 
to the NSC in 2006. The NSC has since been assigned the functions of oversight of the 
implementation of the reforms for ‘Strengthening of the Indian National Statistical 
System’. The Commission prepares its Annual Report for each financial year giving a 
full account of its activities during the financial year and forwards the same to the 
Central Government. The Annual Report and the Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations of the Commission are laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
1.18 The oversight of the reform initiatives of the MoSPI has been entrusted to the 
NSC. The objectives of these reforms are to ensure the timeliness, accuracy and 
reliability of the official statistics which are brought out by the Ministry of Statistics, 
better data governance, having uniform guidelines, adoption of new technologies like 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) / Machine Learning (ML) and promoting data-driven decision-
making, improving credibility, and enhancing credibility of system so that people trust 
data, and making data more accessible and user-friendly.  The reform initiatives have 
been divided in eight broad parts which deal with administrative statistics, sample 
surveys, derived statistics, non-official data, institutional structures and mechanism, 
capacity building, enhancement of the credibility of the statistical system, and overall 
technical up-gradation in data management and sharing.  
 
Statistical Reforms driven by the NSC 
1.19 National Statistical Commission has recommended various reforms for improving 

10 
 
statistical system including capacity building, modernization of information technology, 
review of framework of National Sample Surveys wherever necessary. The Commission 
has, over the years, made recommendations on various aspects such as survey 
methodology, classification standards, and data quality frameworks. With the overall 
guidance of NSC and the technological advancements adopted by MoSPI for 
conducting surveys, the time lag for releasing survey reports has been reduced 
considerably. Currently, NSO releases all its annual reports within 90 days and quarterly 
reports within 45 days. MoSPI apprises the NSC from time to time about various 
initiatives undertaken related to data harmonization, data standardisation, improved 
data quality, data dissemination and data innovation. The Commission gives their 
suggestions in this regard.  
 
1.20 A set of recommendations on ‘Strengthening the Indian National Statistical 
System’ is under implementation by MoSPI. National Statistical Commission (NSC) 
functions as the Oversight body and periodically review the progress of the action/ 
implementation plan under the roadmap. The representatives of Reserve Bank of India 
and Department of Economic Affairs participate in these reviews. 
 
1.21 MoSPI has prepared the action plan for implementation of these 
recommendations by dividing them into eight specific goals and for each goal, a 
dedicated team of senior officers (DDG level officers) under Divisional Heads has been 
formed and the progress on each goal is being monitored by Secretary, MoSPI through 
bi-monthly review meetings. The reforms are aimed at improving the data management 
and governance ecosystem across the Government, wherein MoSPI, various 
Ministries/Departments, States/UTs are the key stakeholders. The objectives of the 
reforms are as follows: 
• Enhanced accuracy, timeliness and reliability of Official Statistics 
• Better data governance by way of uniform guidelines 
• Adoption of new technologies and techniques 
• Enhancing credibility of the National Statistical System 
• Making data more accessible and user-friendly 
• Promote data-driven decision making 
• Appropriately impart skills and knowledge to the human resources in MoSPI and 
across Ministries/ Departments to take forward these reforms. 

11 
 
1.22 The representatives of Ministry in their representation during the sitting of the 
Committee held on 09.05.2025 also briefed about major reform initiatives as follows:  
(i) Administrative statistics - To strengthen the administrative statistics, interaction is 
being done extensively with various Ministries and Departments. Major datasets have 
been identified and their usability, comparability and consistency in terms of concepts 
and definitions is being examined. A National Metadata Standard has been laid down, 
which is being disseminated to all the Ministries so that they also follow it to ensure that 
the prescribed standard of the datasets is achieved.  
(ii) Sample Surveys - Methodological improvements have been done by defining 
concepts, definitions, standards, and making them uniform. A full-fledged stabilized 
CAPI-e-SIGMA (e Survey Instrument and Generalised Multimodal Application) platform 
is being developed for data collections to reduce time lag of surveys. Quality checks are 
ensured at various levels. The survey ecosystem is in the process of being revamped 
with provision of using IT in all aspects to fast track survey results and reduce time lag.  
(iii) Derived statistics - Derived statistics Area are the ones which help in decision 
making at different levels and are also very important indicators of how the economy is 
doing across different areas. The NSO brings out a number of macroeconomic 
indicators like GDP, IIP, and CPI. The exercise towards base year revision is underway 
to improve the methodology across derived statistics area.  
(iv) Credibility of the official statistical system -Interactive sessions, Data User 
Conferences and panel discussions with different stake holders and researchers 
provide a platform for open discussions, allowing attendees to pose questions, share 
insights, and provide feedback to enhance the credibility of the official statistical system.  
Work is also being done on quality framework and International Metadata Standards. A 
Research and Analysis Unit (RAU) has been opened and the Ministry is also 
collaborating with institutes of repute like IITs, NITs etc so that they undertake research 
and come up with feasible solutions to the identified problem statements.  
(v) Technical upgradation - An e-Sankhyiki portal was launched through which all 
macroeconomic indicators, survey data, unit level data and micro data for the past 30 
years are available for users to access. To revamp IT infrastructure, Data Innovation 

12 
 
Lab have been set up to undertake research work to help facilitate in providing solutions 
for better data extraction, data dissemination and data use in official statistics. 
(vi) Capacity Building Programmes-  Training courses for behavioural, functional and 
domain specific areas for capacity building of Officers both at the organisational level 
and individual level have been conducted in offline as well as online mode.  
(vii) Institutional structures  -There is National Statistical Systems Training Academy 
(NSSTA) where training is imparted in the field of official statistics to the statistical 
personnel, not only of the Central and State /UT Governments of the country but also of 
the developing countries of Asia-Pacific Region. Collaboration is also done with 
international institutes and organisations for adoption of global best practices and 
standards.  
(viii) Non-official data - Earlier, MoSPI was bringing out inflation data, unemployment 
data and different data sets at the national and the State levels only. Now, changes 
have been made in sample strategies to collect granular data at the district level 
also.NSC works through the various committees i.e steering committee for NSC 
surveys. The steering committee is a 17-member Committee chaired by the Chairman, 
NSC. The survey results which were released during last year are Household 
Consumption Survey, Periodic Labour Force Survey, ASUSE, ASI, NSS-79th and CAMS 
etc. 
 A detailed brief about the reform initiatives under the eight goals as mentioned 
above is attached at Annexure A. 
 
Major Activities undertaken by the Commission  
1.23 Four (04) meetings and an interaction with Government of Karnataka were held 
by the Commission during the current Financial Year 2024-25 (from 01.04.2024 to 
31.10.2024). Thirteen (13) meetings were held by the Commission during the previous 
three financial years (05 each in 2021-22 and 2022-23 and 03 in 2023-24). 
 
1.24 Major issues deliberated by the Commission and their findings / 
recommendations are as under: 

13 
 
FY 2024-25 
i. Based on the recommendation of NSC, a ‘Steering Committee on National Sample 
Surveys (NSS)’ was constituted on 03.04.2024 to review the extant framework and 
to address the issue on the subject results/ methodology, questionnaire, sampling 
frame, sampling design, concepts and definitions, surveys instruments etc. related 
to all National Sample Surveys. The Steering Committee will look into all the 
pertinent issues as per the terms prescribed to it and would place its 
recommendations before the Commission which have the final authority for 
making decision on those recommendations. The terms and composition of the 
Steering Committee were further expanded on 14.06.2024. Four (04) meetings of 
the Steering Committee have been held and recommendations taken thereon 
were apprised to the NSC in subsequent meetings of the Commission. 
ii. The Reports of the five Expert Committees constituted previously by the NSC were 
placed before the Commission and brief presentations on the recommendations 
were made by the respective Member Secretaries of those Committees. 
iii. Commission observed that the prospect of demand for surveys through MoSPI 
has to be identified in a holistic manner. The Commission felt the need to assess 
the demand-expectation of various Central Ministries/ Departments. 
iv. Pursuant to the Commission’s recommendation for setting up of a ‘Research Wing 
for implementation of data analytics’, MoSPI constituted the ‘Research and 
Analysis Unit’.  
v. The Commission was briefed about the IT implementation plan of MoSPI. The 
action plan, inter alia, contained short-term and medium-term strategies for data 
collection and curation, data processing and data dissemination. 
vi. A brief presentation was made before the NSC on the Report that looked into the 
aspect of Underestimation of Population and to evolve a good calibration 
technique for NSS estimates. In this context, the NSC decided that a study be 
undertaken on the divergence in population estimates arising from the Census and 
NSS surveys. 
vii. NITI Aayog conducted a meeting on the feasibility of the proposal pursuant to the 

14 
 
Commission’s recommendation for examining the DPIIT’s proposal on the 
Producers Price Index (PPI). 
viii. With regard to the proposed statistical reforms and transformation of sample 
surveys, the broad contours of the roadmap goals and implementation plan was 
shared with the Commission. The Commission suggested that the already 
available recommendations of various committees be utilized and augmented in 
the implementation plan.  
ix. State and Regional Interaction on the Official Statistical System with Karnataka 
State was held on 16 May 2024 at Bengaluru. The officials of Government of 
Karnataka (GoK) apprised the Commission about various statistical activities and 
initiatives of the State Government including Karnataka State’s IT-enabled data 
analytics and evidence-based policy making, extensive use of GIS data, use of 
predictive Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI-ML) in planning and 
traffic management and use of Data Lake integrating data from various sources. 
Several data portals and IT-based applications had been showcased to the 
Commission. The Commission appreciated the State’s proactive accomplishment 
in IT-enabled data management systems. The Chairman, NSC highlighted the 
need for reliability of data and timeliness of dissemination of information.  
FY 2023-24 
i. The Commission reviewed the progress of the Five Expert Committees constituted 
by it. 
ii. As Members of NSC recommended that the Commission need to review the 
practice of NSC taking over the task that was with the governing council of 
NSSO.  Accordingly, a Committee was formed by MoSPI to holistically review all 
decisions of the Cabinet regarding the Governing Council of NSSO. The 
Committee submitted the report to the Commission which has since been 
accepted.  
iii. The report of the NSC Expert Committee on Modernization of Information 
Technology and the Report of the NSC Expert Committee for Analytics on 
Government data were discussed.  

15 
 
iv. The proposal on Producer Price Index (PPI) (with base year 2017-18) from DPIIT 
was discussed and placed in the 129th Meeting of the Commission. The Senior 
Advisor, DPIIT highlighted the notable features of the proposed PPI. He underlined 
the use of a dedicated web portal for its data collection, complete with quality 
checks. 
v. A request from Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Communications 
was also reviewed by the Commission regarding ‘Proposal prepared for meeting 
regarding finalization of RFP and TOR to conduct a Household (HH) level survey 
on Telecom indicators.’ 
FY 2022-23 
i. The Commission was presented with an overview of the activities of various 
divisions of MoSPI. The Commission deliberated on issues pertaining to Surveys 
of MoSPI and CEO, NITI Aayog suggested that the Commission should follow its 
mandate while taking up specific agenda items and decided its future roadmap 
accordingly. NSC decided to constitute five expert committees on important issues 
existing in the present statistical system.  
ii. A presentation was made before the Commission on the Report of the Committee 
on Use of Alternative Sources of Data to reduce survey burden. The report was 
deliberated and NSC accepted the same and recommended for their 
implementation by the MoSPI in consultation with line Ministries at the Centre.  
iii. NSSO presented the status of ASUSE to the Commission. It also apprised the 
Commission on Pilot Survey on Living Condition of Tribals in India (PSLCT). 
Commission recommended that a Survey on Living Conditions and other related 
aspects of Tribals in India would be conducted by NSS as a part of the NSS 79th 
Round. The 'Survey on consumption basket for Development of Chain Base 
Indices (SCBDCBI)' was renamed as "Household Consumption Expenditure 
Survey (HCES)" to be followed by the year in which it is conducted. 
iv. The Commission was also apprised about the outcome of the meeting held with 
NITI Aayog on 1 June 2022 regarding the utility of the proposed survey data on 
Monthly Per Capita Consumption Expenditure (MPCE)/ Household Consumer 

16 
 
Expenditure Survey (HCES) for compilation of Poverty Estimates. The 
Commission was apprised about the Tabulation Plan and Estimation Procedure of 
NSSO 79th Round and the same was approved. 
v. The report on Multiple Indicator Survey had been taken up during the 78th Round 
(January, 2020 - August, 2021) and the 5th Annual Report of the PLFS was 
presented before the Commission and it was concurred by the Commission. 
vi. Field Operations Division (FOD) apprised the Commission on the Policy for 
providing tablets to contractual employees for undertaking survey related work in 
respect of surveys undertaken by MoSPI. The Commission was of the view that as 
a step towards digitalization and for reducing time-lag in collection of data from the 
field, tablet computer is a functional requirement and should be provided to all the 
field functionaries as essential equipment for the purpose of survey. 
FY 2021-22 
i. The Commission decided that for release of all NSS Reports, the Reports will be 
presented before the corresponding Working Group/Committee then it will be 
circulated to all NSC members for their comments within three days. If no further 
modifications are needed, the Report will be released immediately. 
ii. The Commission agreed that MoSPI's efforts needed to focus on reducing the 
excessive time-lag in release of PLFS results. They advised that Secretary, MoSPI 
and DG (NSS) should review the system to bring about improvements on this 
aspect. 
iii. Commission sought stage-wise expected time-lines of the new eSIGMA platform 
and NSO was advised to summarize all the glitches observed in the new platform 
and to be brought before the NSC. 
iv. The survey instruments, sampling design and the launch date of the fieldwork for 
survey on Consumption Basket for Development of Chain-Base Indices was 
discussed and approved by the Commission. 
v. NSS apprised the Commission on the developments and discussions with the 
Ministries and consequent modification suggested in the survey Plan of NSS 79th 

17 
 
Round. The Commission took note of the developments and directed to proceed 
further and also desired that the data of first sub-round may be presented before 
the NSC. 
vi. The schedule of Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey (CAMS) and Ayurveda, 
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH), as approved 
by Working Group of NSS 79th round, had been presented before the NSC. After 
deliberations, both the schedules of CAMS and AYUSH were approved by the 
NSC. 
vii. The Commission was apprised that the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises had not made any further necessary communication with NSS for 
conduct of survey on Credit Linked Facilities available for MSME. After detailed 
deliberations in the Commission, the survey had been dropped. 
viii. The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) presented 
the Revision of Base Year of Wholesale Price Index from 2011-12 to 2017-18 to 
NSC. With some observations, the methodology and the proposed new series of 
WPI with Base Year 2017-18 had been approved by the NSC. 
 
NATIONAL STATISTICAL OFFICE (NSO) 
  
1.25 The Chief Statistician of India, the post created specifically as the Head of the 
National Statistical Office is the Secretary of the Commission. He is also the Secretary 
to the Government of India in the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
The NSO brings out important economic indicators such as Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP), Index of Industrial Production (IIP) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) and other 
official statistics to support government decision making and framing of appropriate 
socio-economic policies/programmes. These statistical products/outcomes are 
consistent with the relevant international standards. The GDP estimates are released 
quarterly and annually as per an advance release calendar. The methodology used in 
the process is consistent with the United Nations guidelines contained in System of 
National Accounts-2008. The monthly Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is released 
with a lag of 42 days, as per the methodology adopted from international standards. It is 

18 
 
used as a short term indicator by planners and policy makers for assessing industrial 
growth. The monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) is released with a lag of 12 days on 
the 12th of every month (next working day if 12th is holiday) as per the methodology 
adopted from international standards/best practices. It is used as a short-term indicator 
by planners and policy makers for assessing levels of living. It is also used as a 
measure of retail inflation by the Reserve Bank of India in regulating its monetary policy. 
  
1.26 The NSO also has a vast network of field offices spread across the length and 
breadth of the country for conducting nationwide largescale socio-economic surveys on 
a regular basis for providing insight into various facets of economy and society at large. 
Being the nodal agency in the country for official Statistics, the Ministry coordinates 
statistical activities amongst Ministries /Departments of the Government of India as well 
as with the State/UT Governments. 
 
1.27 Broadly, the NSO is mandated with the following responsibilities: 
i. To act as the nodal agency for planning integrated development of the statistical 
system in the country. 
ii. To formulate and maintain norms and standards related to statistics. 
iii. To coordinate the statistical work in respect of the Central 
Ministries/Departments and State Directorate of Economics & Statistics (DESs). 
iv. To prepare and publish National Accounts Statistics, namely, Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP), Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE), Capital 
Formation, Savings, etc. 
v. To compile and release Consumer Price Index (CPI) numbers and Annual 
Inflation rates based on these CPI numbers. 
vi. To compile and release the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) every month. 
vii. To conduct large scale all-India socio-economic sample surveys. 
viii. To conduct the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI). 
ix. To conduct Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS). 
x. To conduct other surveys like price collection surveys, agriculture area 
enumeration and crop cutting experiments, urban frame surveys, etc. 

19 
 
xi. To conduct periodic all-India Economic Censuses and related activities. 
xii. To maintain liaison with international Statistical Organizations, such as the United 
Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), Economic and Social Commission for Asia 
and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific (SIAP), 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), Asian Development Bank (ADB), International 
LabourOrganisation (ILO), etc. 
xiii. To bring out reports as per the international/regional commitments such as 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) India Country Report and SAARC 
Development Goals India Country Report. 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS AND UTILIZATION 
 
2.1 The Demands for Grants under Demand No. 96 for the Ministry also includes 
Budgetary Allocation for major head 3451 under Demand No. 96 of National Statistical 
Commission (NSC). The allocation of funds and utilization of NSC for previous financial 
years are as follows:   
      (Rs. In crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2021-22 1.37 1.37 0.70 
2022-23 1.44 1.44 0.74 
2023-24 1.42 1.23 0.70 
2024-25 1.26 0.92 0.75 (as on 31.03.2025) 
 
2.2 There has been a shortfall in fund utilization by Rs. 0.67 core, 0.70 crore and 
0.72 crore against the BE of Rs. 1.37 crore, 1.44 crore and 1.42 crore in 2021-22, 2022-
23 and 2023-24 under budget allocation for National Statistical Commission. When 
asked about the reasons for the mismatch between budgetary allocation and its 
utilization, the Ministry in its written reply submitted as follows: 
Year BE RE Actuals Reasons 
2021-22 1.37 1.37 0.70 Owing to Covid-19 pandemic there were 
limited official tours and official meetings. 
Also, one post of Member of the 
Commission was vacant for the whole FY. 
2022-23 1.44 1.44 0.74 There were limited official tours and physical 
official meetings; some procurement and 
printing proposals did not materialize. Also, 
two posts of Member of the Commission 
were vacant for the whole FY. 
2023-24 1.42 1.23 0.70 There were limited official tours and physical 
official meetings; some procurement and 
printing proposals did not materialize. Also, 
two posts of Member of the Commission 
were vacant for most of the FY. 

21 
 
2.3 When asked about the impact of decreasing trend in funds allocation and 
utilization on the performance and development of National Statistical Commission 
(NSC), the Ministry submitted as under: 
“The expenditure incurred under Demand No. 96 of National Statistical 
Commission mainly relates to meetings of NSC during the year and payment 
of honorarium to the Chairperson and Members of the Commission. The 
expenditure on conducting the meetings of Steering Committee of NSC for 
National Sample Surveys including payment of sitting fee to the non-official 
members, travel and logistics, etc., are booked under Major head 3454-
Census, Survey and Statistics.  
Post-pandemic, the normal functioning of the National Statistical Commission 
(NSC) has resumed. During FY2024-25, six meetings of NSC have taken 
place so far. The fund allocation for the current year is adequate for 
performance and development of NSC.” 
 
2.4 Owing to Covid-19 pandemic there were limited official tours and official 
meetings of NSC. Also, one post of Member of the Commission was vacant during 
Financial Year 2021-22 and two posts of Member of the Commission were vacant 
during Financial Years 2022-23 and 2023-24. Thus an amount of 0.67 crore, 0.37 crore 
and 0.54 crore have been surrendered for Financial Years 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24 respectively.  However, vide Ministry’s O.M. dated 15.07.2024 and 17.01.2025, the 
Divisions were advised to prepare Budget Estimates considering the expenditure of the 
earlier years and the actual requirement of the current year to ensure that balances 
under the funds are optimally utilized and savings under various heads can be 
avoided/minimized. 
 
2.5 The National Statistical Commission (NSC) prepares its Annual Report for each 
financial year giving a full account of its activities during the financial year and forwards 
the same to the Central Government. The Central Government laid the Annual Report 
together with the action taken report on the recommendations therein before each 
House of Parliament. 
 

22 
 
2.6 Despite the broad audit mandate of NSC, the only notable example is the audit of 
the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) in 2011. When asked about this, the Ministry in 
its reply has stated that following steps have been taken to strengthen the NSC’s role in 
statistical auditing to ensure data quality, transparency, and accountability: 
 
 NSC decided to have a statistical audit conducted on the All India Index of 
Industrial Production (IIP), as a test case, before laying down comprehensive 
methodology for the purpose and a report was published in 2011.  
 
 MoSPI circulated the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF) in April 
2025. SQAF, based on United Nations Quality Assurance Framework 2019, lays 
down quality dimensions to facilitate and ensure effective management of quality 
in the National Statistical System and its processes and products. The 
Ministries/Departments/States/UTs are required to assess their data/statistical 
products and processes generated by them. The SQAF rests upon 19 Principles 
and 85 requirements. The assessment will help each 
Ministry/Department/State/UT in identifying and prioritise the gaps to improve 
data quality. 
 NSC has been briefed about various statistical products viz. National Metadata 
Structure, Compilation of unique identifiers, Compilation of national and 
international classification, Compendium of datasets and registries in India and 
Assessment tools developed by MoSPI.  There is mechanism put in place where 
NSC guides on definitional divergence of data. NSC is also overseeing the 
current exercise of base revision for GDP, IIP and CPI, which is to be adopted 
during Feb to May 2026. 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER III 
STATUTORY STATUS FOR NATIONAL STATISTICAL COMMISSION  
 
3.1 The National Statistical Commission (NSC) is chaired by an eminent statistician 
and its four members have specialization and experience in specified statistical and 
allied fields. The Chairman and Members of the National Statistical Commission are 
selected on the basis of the recommendations of a Search Committee duly constituted 
by the Government of India for the purpose, from time to time. 
 
3.2 As per provisions of Resolution dated 1June 2005, the Commission has the 
requisite autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. The Commission 
also has the authority to formulate its short and long term programmes. The NSC has 
evolved necessary measures and mechanism by constituting professional committees, 
expert committees and working groups to assist the Commission on various technical 
issues. 
 
3.3 The Steering Committee for National Sample Surveys, which is chaired by the 
Chairperson of the NSC, comprises of subject-matter experts as well as the 
representatives from Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Department 
of Economic Affairs, Reserve Bank of India, NITI Aayog and State Governments. The 
Steering Committee of NSC, inter alia, reviews the extant framework and addresses the 
issuesfrom time to time onthe subject results, methodology, questionnaire, sampling 
frame, sampling design, concepts and definitions, surveys instruments etc. related to all 
National Sample Surveys. 
 
3.4 Ministries/ Departments of the Central Government may submit their proposal or 
apprise to the Commission regarding statistical activity envisaged or being undertaken 
by them. The Commission from time to time holds interactive sessions with State 
Governments on their statistical systems and activities. 

24 
 
3.5 In addition, the NSC functions as the Oversight body and periodically reviews the 
progress of the roadmap on ‘Strengthening the Indian National Statistical System’. The 
representatives of Reserve Bank of India and Department of Economic Affairs 
participate in these reviews.  
 
3.6 When asked about any mandate provisioned for NSC through which it can give 
recommendations to the Ministry, the Ministry in its written reply submitted as follows:  
“As per the provisions in the Resolution dated 1 June 2005, the National 
Statistical Commission (NSC) can give recommendations to the Ministry. The 
NSC may recommend to the Central Government or State Government(s) 
measures to effectively implement the standards, strategies and other 
measures evolved by it. Further, the NSC may monitor and review the 
functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down policies, 
standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced 
performance” 
 
Draft National Statistical Commission (NSC) Bill, 2019 
 
3.7 The draft NSC Bill 2019 proposes to establish a National Statistical Commission 
(NSC), as the nodal and autonomous body for all core statistical activities for the 
country, to evolve, monitor and enforce statistical priorities and standards and to 
ensure statistical coordination. The salient features of the Bill are following: 
a) The Composition of NSC: The Bill proposes for the Commission to be composed 
of a fulltime Chairman and Members nominated from amongst eminent persons. It 
is proposed to include, amongst others, Deputy Governor, RBI as a member of 
Commission and the Chief Economic Adviser as ex-officio member. The revised 
composition of NSC aims to reinforce its independence and also align it with the 
vision and broad contours of national policies and priorities. 
b) Chief Statistician of India (CSI): The position of Chief statistician of India has been 
created by the same executive order that established the present NSC in 2005. 
The Act proposes to reaffirm the position and also include him as a Member of 
NSC. 
c) Statistical Audit: In the draft Bill, provision for Statistical Audit is proposed to be 
included. The bill provides for establishing a National Statistical Audit and 
Assessment Organization within NSC with a Chief Statistical Auditor in the rank of 
Secretary to the GoI. 

25 
 
d) Independent Secretariat for the Commission: To further strengthen the autonomy 
of the Commission, the Bill also proposes setting up of an independent secretariat 
for the Commission headed by a Secretary rank officer of GoI. The Bill also 
envisages financial autonomy for the Commission through an independent 
National Statistical Fund. The Bill also proposes the NSC to be a body corporate. 
e) Functions of NSC: The functions assigned to National Statistical Commission by 
the Rangarajan commission broadly classified into: 
1) Nodal empowered body for setting up mandatory standards in respect of 
Core Statistics defined as statistical indicators which are critical for 
monitoring the economy. 
2) Evolve, monitor and enforce statistical priorities and standards by way of 
periodical review and audit. 
3) Ensure strong coordination through close linkage between budget and 
statistical programming. 
 The Draft Bill deals in detail with the advisory role assigned to NSC in terms of 
regular periodical review of all aspects of Official statistical System at various levels, 
including legislative, overall policy, HR and technology intervention issues of Center as 
well as State statistical systems, including administrative data. While NSC can take up 
such matters suo moto, the Bill primarily envisages encouraging Government agencies 
to proactively bring forth issues pertaining to the national statistical system proactively 
for discussion in the Commission. 
 
3.8 The Committee wanted to know that despite seeking Public 
comments/suggestions on ‘Draft National Statistical Commission (NSC) Bill, 2019’, little 
progress has been made so far in terms of making it a law or giving it a statutory status, 
the Ministry in its written reply submitted the following:  
“The NSC has autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. The 
NSC has evolved adequate measures and mechanism in this regard In view of 
this, at present, regarding Statutory Body there is no such proposal under 
consideration.” 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER IV 
NATIONAL SAMPLE SURVEY OFFICE (NSSO) 
 
4.1 The National Sample Survey (NSS) is responsible for conducting large-scale 
sample surveys in diverse fields on all India basis. NSS functions with requisite 
autonomy in matters relating to data collection, processing and 
publication/dissemination of results/data based on its surveys. Director General (NSS) 
is responsible for overall coordination and supervision of all activities of NSS, who is 
assisted by four Additional Director Generals, each one being in-charge of a separate 
Division responsible for distinct aspects of large-scale surveys viz. household surveys, 
enterprise surveys, fieldwork/data collection and coordination between different 
Divisions of NSO alongwith quality control. 
 
Divisions of National Sample Survey (NSS) 
4.2  There are four main divisions of National Sample Survey which are as follows:  
(i) Coordination and Quality Control Division (C&QCD) This Division is 
responsible for proper monitoring and maintaining the quality of the NSS 
Surveys. It also coordinates the technical as well as administrative activities 
of various Divisions of NSS, besides being a nodal point for all Inter 
Ministerial consultations, Cabinet Notes, Legislation and Bills etc. with 
respect to NSS. It also brings out the bi-annual journal of NSS, titled 
‘Sarvekshana’. The Division organizes National Seminars on the results of 
various socio-economic surveys undertaken by NSS and conducts Data 
User Conferences after release of results of NSS surveys with an aim to 
engage stakeholders and enhance understanding of the survey’s findings, 
focusing on data access, interpretation, user concerns and survey 
methodology. The Division also serves as the secretariat to the Steering 
Committee of NSC for NSS. 
 

27 
 
(ii) Household Survey Division (HSD): This Division, located at Kolkata is 
responsible for conceptualizing, designing, processing, analysing and 
publishing survey results for various household surveys. The Division 
assists the States through training/workshops or other interactive methods 
as per requirements. Following surveys are covered under HSD: 
 Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES) 
 Land Holding Survey (LHS)  
 Situation Assessment Survey (SAS)  
 Surveys on Health  
 Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS)  
 Time Use Survey (TUS)  
 Survey on Migration  
 NSS Rounds  
 Rural Price Collection (RPC) 
 
(iii) Enterprise Survey Division (EnSD): This Division, located at Kolkata, is 
responsible for conceptualizing, designing, processing, analysing and 
publishing survey results for variousenterprise surveys. It is also responsible 
for development of digital platform for data collection and processing 
including CAPI (Computer Assisted Personal Interview). It also assists the 
States in providing IT solutions for their data processing related activities for 
the enterprise surveys, as also through periodic training/workshop and other 
interactive methods. Following surveys are covered under EnSD:  
 Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE)  
 Annual Survey of Industries (ASI)  
 Annual Survey of Services Sector Enterprises (ASSSE),  
 Forward Looking Survey on Private Corporate Sector CAPEX Investment 
Intentions 
 Ad-hoc Surveys/ Short term surveys 
 

28 
 
(iv) Field Operations Division (FOD): The Division with its headquarters at 
Delhi and a network of 52 Regional Offices and 117 Sub-Regional Offices 
spread throughout the country, is responsible for the collection of primary 
data for the surveys undertaken by MoSPI. The Agricultural Statistics Wing 
of FOD, headquartered at Faridabad, is entrusted with the responsibility of 
providing technical guidance and assistance to the States in developing 
suitable survey techniques for obtaining timely and reliable estimates of 
crop area and yield, and imparting training to State field personnel. 
 
 
4.3 When enquired about the steps that are being taken by Ministry to reduce 
MGNREGA data differences and to mitigate variation among data collected and grass 
root level data, the Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“Synchronization of data/datasets collected and disseminated by the Central 
Ministry/Departments/Organisations, administrative Departments/Organisations, 
has been a long felt need in the National Statistics Office (NSO). MoSPI 
institutionalized a mechanism for reconciliation of divergent datasets in the NSO. 
The Central Ministry/Departments/Organisations, and State/UT 
Departments/Organisations, may make references of any matters relating to 
data/ definitional divergences to NSO for suggesting ways and means of 
harmonious resolution of these divergences, or credibly explaining the reasons 
for such divergences. The NSO, however, may also take suo moto cognizance of 
such divergences for resolution. These may also be placed before National 
Statistical Commission (NSC) for their guidance, if divergence persists even after 
stakeholder consultations.  
 
The scope of Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) being workers at large 
without special focus on a specific group of workers (like MGNREGA worker). 
This, the sample design of PLFS is not tailored to specifically net worker 
engaged in MGNREGA. The number of MGNREGA workers in the PLFS sample 
is not enough to get reliable estimates of these category of workers even at all-
India level.” 
 
 
4.4  When asked to specify various social-economic surveys that are being 
conducted by NSSO, the Ministry has given the following reply: 

29 
 
“Presently NSO conducts the following surveys to capture the economic 
activities in organized and unorganized sectors (both for manufacturing & 
services):   
1. ASUSE: Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) is 
carried out with the primary objective of measuring various economic and 
operational characteristics of unincorporated non-agricultural establishments 
in manufacturing, trade and other services sectors (excluding construction). 
The survey collects data on various economic characteristics of this sector 
including number of workers, Gross Value Added (GVA), emoluments paid, 
fixed asset owned, outstanding loan, besides, different types of operational 
characteristics such as type of ownership, nature of operation, registration 
status, etc. 
2. ASI: Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) is the principal source of industrial 
statistics of the registered organized manufacturing sector in India conducted 
annually since 1959. It provides statistical information to assess and evaluate, 
objectively and realistically, the changes in the growth, composition and 
structure of organized manufacturing sector comprising activities related to 
manufacturing processes, repair services, gas and water supply and cold 
storage. 
3. CAPEX Survey: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI) has launched Forward-Looking Survey on Private Corporate Sector 
CAPEX Investment Intention in October 2024. This is the first survey being 
conducted by NSS to collect data on Private Corporate Sector CAPEX 
Investment Intentions. Main objective of the survey is to measure capital 
investment intentions of private corporate sector covering non-financial and 
financial corporation through collection of information from major resident 
enterprises on:  
i. Capital Expenditure incurred during last three financial years, 
ii. Capital Expenditure incurred or to be incurred during the current 
and forthcoming financial years on different asset groups and 
industries, 
In accordance with the Collection of Statistics Act, 2008, notices are issued to 
selected enterprises drawn from a frame of active resident private enterprises 
registered under the Companies Act, 2013 with the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs. Data collection is carried out via a dedicated web portal. 
 
4. Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS):The nationwide Periodic Labour 
Force Survey (PLFS) was launched from April 2017. The objective of PLFS is 

30 
 
primarily two-fold viz. (i) to measure the labour force indicators in the short 
time interval of three months for the urban areas only in the Current Weekly 
Status (CWS) and (ii) to generate estimates of all important labour force 
parameters in both usual status (principal status + subsidiary status) and 
CWS annually for both rural and urban areas and quarterly for urban areas.  
5. Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES): The NSO has 
been conducting surveys on household consumption expenditure at regular 
intervals since the inception of the National Sample Survey (NSS) in the year 
1951. HCES is designed to collect information on consumption and 
expenditure of the households on goods and services. It helps to understand 
the consumption and expenditure pattern, standard of living and well-being of 
the households. Besides, the data of HCES provides the budget shares of 
different commodity groups which is used to prepare the weighting diagram 
for compilation of official Consumer Price Indices (CPIs). 
The following Survey Reports have been released during 2024. 
a. Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES) 2022-23 
b. Survey on Ayush 2022-23, NSS 79th Round  
c. Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) 2021-22, 
2022-23 and 2023-24  
d. Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) 
e. Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) (2022-2023)  
f. Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey (July 2022- June 2023)” 
 
4.5  On being asked about the steps that are being taken to address the discrepancy 
regarding the significant variations/overlap between the sample survey data collected by 
the NSSO and that gathered by State Governments, particularly in relation to data on 
persons with disabilities, the Ministry in its written reply have stated as under: 
“The Ministry has recently advised the Ministry/Departments to review their 
data collection mechanism so as to harmonize all datasets produced already or 
are being produced, through all possible data collection venues in the 
Government. It was further suggested that the surveys may be designed/ 
recommended to fill up the data gaps, when such data are desirable and that if 
such data are available already in the Ministry/Departments, either through 
administrative data sources, statutory returns, alternative data sources, or 
through MIS portals, collecting them through surveys may be avoided, except if 

31 
 
such collection of data are taken up for a specific purpose of authentication or 
validation of existing datasets” 
 
4.6 When queried about the recent comprehensive survey of Persons with 
Disabilities carried out and the criteria to adopt different standards to measure disability 
impact services, the Ministry in its Post-Evidence reply have stated:  
“National Statistics Office (NSO), MoSPI had conducted a comprehensive 
survey on Persons with Disabilities during July – December 2018 as part of 
NSS 76thround. In this survey, a provision was made to collect information on 
persons with disabilities as per classification used in the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act (PWD Act) 2016. 
Disability impact services are services that help people with disabilities improve 
their daily lives. In the NSS 76th round survey on persons with disabilities 
provision for collection on information on the following aspects related to the 
disability impact services were collected 
 Status of education and vocational/technical training among persons with 
disabilities; 
 Treatment for disability and aid/appliances 
 Living arrangement, care giver, receipt of aid/help 
 Difficulty faced in accessing/ using public transport and accessing/using 
public building 
 Whether having certificate of disability and percentage of disability as per 
certificate.” 
 
Merger of CSO and NSSO 
4.7  MoS&PI vide its order dated 23 May 2019 merged CSO and NSSO into National 
Statistical Office (NSO) in order to streamline and strengthening the nodal functions of 
MoS&PI with respect to Indian Official Statistics System and to bring in more synergy by 
integrating its administrative functions within the Ministry. It aimed at streamlining 
administrative functions with the involvement of DG level officers. Merging of CSO and 
NSSO achieved better coordination among the survey and central statistics verticals. 
PLFS and ASUSE are helping in estimation of GDP for the unorganized sector. The 
base revision exercise of GDP, CPI and IIP, is also making use of survey results 
effectively.  Further, vide order dated 07 August 2024, the National Sample Survey 

32 
 
(NSS) was re-organized from process-based to product-based ecosystem with the 
objective to ensure that survey methodologies are strengthened and NSS is able to 
release qualitative results/ reports in shortest possible time. As a part of the re-
organization, two survey-wise verticals/ divisions, namely, Household Survey Division 
and Enterprise Survey Division, have been created in NSS to provide turnkey services 
with respect to a particular product/survey. The survey results are now released within 3 
months of the completion of data collection. 
 
4.8 The recent step for the merger of CSO and NSSO was originally aimed at 
leveraging the strengths of the two organisations so that it can meet the increasing 
demands. When asked about how this exercise proved successful in achieving its 
objective, the Ministry in its reply stated as below: 
 Recently, MoSPI has created /restructured verticals for new and focused 
functions and re-assigned human resources. The following initiatives have been 
undertaken: 
• Administrative Statistics and Policy Division for strengthening Administrative 
Statistics across Ministries/ Departments 
• Research and Analysis Division for undertaking research and encouraging 
research and innovation 
• Media and Publicity unit for creating awareness about MoSPI and its 
activities/products and for reaching out to data users, researchers and 
academia 
• Direct Recruit officers posted at the field level in Sub-Regional offices for 
monitoring and supervision of the survey work 
• Quality control in the Survey through regular monitoring and capacity building 
• Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Unit for enhanced data analysis  
• International Cooperation Unit for better coordination at international level as 
India became member of UNSC 
• Improved State Unit for enhanced coordination and providing support to 
States/UTs 
• Improved Project Monitoring through revamped portal and regular capacity 
building 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER   V 
STRENGTHENING STATISTICAL SYSTEMS 
 
5.1 The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has stated that it 
places significant emphasis on the coverage, accuracy, and quality of statistical data 
released in the country. There are various sources and sampling methods that are 
being used to compile these statistics.  
 
Coverage 
(i) Household Surveys: The Household Survey Division conducts large-scale 
sample surveys based on household queries. The primary data is collected 
using well-devised schedules, which are canvassed by trained survey 
enumerators.     
(ii) Enterprise Surveys:ASUSE 2022-23 covered unincorporated non-
agricultural establishments of rural and urban areas of India (except the 
villages in Andaman and Nicobar Islands which are difficult to 
access)belonging to three sectors viz.,Manufacturing, Trade and Other 
Services. 
(iii) The ASI survey covers all factories registered under sections 2m (i) and 2m 
(ii) of the Factories Act, 1948. The survey also covers bidi and cigar 
manufacturing establishments registered under the Bidi and Cigar Workers 
(Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966. All electricity undertakings engaged in 
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity, not registered with the 
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) are also covered under ASI.The coverage 
of ASI has been further extended to cover units with 100 or more employees, 
not registered under Section 2m (i) and 2m (ii) of the Factories Act, 1948 but 
registered under any one of the seven Acts / Board / Authority (Companies 
Act, 2013, Factories Act, 1948, Shops and Commercial Establishment Act, 
Societies Registration Act, Cooperative Societies Act, Khadi and Village 
Industries Board, Directorate of Industries [District Industries Center]). 

34 
 
(iv) The CAPEX covers two Institutional Sectors confined to private corporations viz. Non-financial and Financial. 
 
Accuracy and quality of Statistical data 
 
5.2 MoSPI apprises the NSC from time to time about various initiatives undertaken 
related to data harmonization, data standardisation, improved data quality, data 
dissemination and data innovation. The Commission deliberates on issues relating to 
data quality, inconsistencies, and duplication in its meetings and provides 
recommendations, to promote standardization, harmonization and consistency in 
statistical practices.  
 
5.3 When asked about any proper mechanism derived by NSC for resolving inter-
agency statistical inconsistencies and to address issues of data discrepancies and 
duplication, the Ministry in its post evidence replies have stated as under:  
“MoSPI in January, 2025 laid down an institutional mechanism for the 
Ministry/Departments/State/UT Governments for referring the matter of 
definitional divergence to MoSPI. MoSPI undertakes resolution of these 
divergences in consultation with the concerned Ministry/Departments/State/UT 
Governments to place them before the NSC for concurrence.  
MoSPI has undertaken the following initiatives related to datasets for data 
standardisation, improved data quality, data dissemination and data innovation. A 
dedicated vertical has been formed in MoSPI to form policies, directives, 
guidelines, practices to support acquisition, management and efficient use of 
Administrative Data. National Metadata Structure (NMDS 2.0) issued (Oct 2024) 
to Ministries/Departments for compliance, to ensure that data and information are 
uniformly represented and to bring in improved understanding of various data 
sets in public domain such as census, surveys, administrative and those from 
other sources. 
i. Compendium of Datasets and Registries 
A Compendium of 257 datasets and registries has been prepared based on the 
inputs received from M/Ds. M/Ds will need to prioritize the implementation 
strategy for the data related initiatives to improve data quality. 

35 
 
ii. Follow the system for National Metadata Structure (NMDS) 
National Metadata Structure (NMDS) provides a guideline for the data producer 
to adhere to a holistic and integrated approach to the presentation and 
dissemination of statistical data and enhance ease in sharing data. The key 
principles of NMDS 2.0 are data description and presentation, institutional 
mandate, quality management, accuracy and reliability, timelines, coherence and 
comparability, data processing and metadata update. All datasets need to adhere 
to NMDS 2.0. 
iii. Adherence to statistical standards/classifications 
Compliance to the systems of International/National Classification are an 
essential requirement for uniformity, consistency and coherence in the statistical 
datasets. MoSPI has so far compiled, circulated and released a total of 10 
National and 87 International Standards/Classification in the fields of 
Demographic and Social, Economic Statistics, Environment Statistics, and 
Others. The list provides for the details of the agency publishing the standards, 
availability of their latest version, and the brief about the classification. The M/Ds 
can select the relevant standards and ensure its implementation. 
iv. Usage of unique identifiers for improved interoperability of the 
datasets 
Unique identifiers (UIDs) are distinct codes or numbers assigned to objects, 
people, or data to distinguish them from others. They are crucial for identification, 
tracking, and management of data across various industries and systems. MoSPI 
compiled and circulated amongst the Ministry/Departments, recently in April, 
2025 a list of 17 UIDs, in the individual (7 IDs), enterprise (5 IDs), Geographical 
/Locational (4 IDs), and Vehicle (1 ID) categories. Each M/D can select identifiers 
based on the feasibility and relevance. 
v. Implement the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF) 
SQAF lays down quality dimensions to facilitate and ensure effective 
management of quality in the NSS and its processes and products. MoSPI 
circulated the SQAF in the month of April 2025. The Ministries/Departments are 
required to assess all their data/statistical products and processes generated by 
them. The SQAF rests upon 19 Principles and 85 requirements. The assessment 
will help each M/D identify and prioritise the gaps to improve data quality. 
 
 

36 
 
vi. Identification and resolution of definitional divergences 
MoSPI in January, 2025 laid down an institutional mechanism for the 
Ministry/Departments/State/UT Governments for referring the matter of 
definitional divergence to MoSPI. MoSPI proposed resolving these divergences 
consultation with the concerned Ministry/Departments/State/UT Governments 
and placing them before the National Statistical Commission (NSC) for 
concurrence. 
vii. Assessment tools for website and web-portals 
MoSPI has published and circulated the tools to assess "Institutional Readiness 
for Adoption of Emerging Technologies such as Al, ML and Big Data in Official 
Statistics", "Assessment of Websites for Effective Dissemination of Data", and 
"Assessment of Portals for Digital Dissemination of Data". This is a tool for 
improving the practices in these sectors. 
viii. Using empaneled survey agencies 
MoSPI, in March, 2025, empaneled 14 (fourteen) Survey Institutions for 
conducting sample surveys 'on Socio Economic indicators for Government of 
India. The list of the empanelled Survey Institutions along with the Grade, 
Sectoral Experience in Field Surveys, and Experience in Types of Surveys has 
been placed in the public domain. M/Ds may use these agencies to conduct 
various surveys which are not covered by MoSPI in their Calendar of surveys 
during 2025-27.  
ix. Leverage the use of the services of Statistical Advisors 
The Role of Statistical Advisors (SAS) posted in the Ministry/Departments has 
been laid down in August 2024, wherein they have been advised to undertake all 
data related work, including the NMDS, SQAF, IT, coordination with MoSPI etc. 
Further, Statistical Advisors have been advised to be integrated with Statistics 
vertical of the Data Strategy Unit (DSU) established in Ministry/Departments. 
x. e-Sankhyiki Portal 
MoSPI launched e-Sankhyiki portal, a user centric data portal which facilitates 
use and reuse of information and consists of three modules viz. Data Catalogue 
module, Macro Indicators module and the Economic Census. It currently consists 
of more than 135 million records across the three modules. M/Ds can help putting 
in more data through API in the e-Sankhyiki Portal for use by the people. 
 

37 
 
xi. Data Users Conference 
The Data User Conferences are organized on the statistical products of the 
MoSPI, including surveys and various macro-economic indicators. M/Ds are 
invited to participate and contribute in such Data User Conferences.” 
 
5.4 The Ministry has informed that the enterprise and household surveys are also 
being conducted using CAPI or web-based application with in-built validation 
mechanism to ensure consistency at the stage of data collection. Collected data are 
thoroughly scrutinized by the supervisory level officers from FOD as well as by the Data 
supervisors to identify inconsistency. Before commencement of any NSS surveys, 
extensive training on survey instruments as well as use of CAPI are provided to the field 
officials. Clarifications are also given on a regular basis on the queries raised by field 
officials during the course of the survey. Data quality workshops are also organised to 
address the conceptual queries and monitoring the survey data quality time-to-time. 
Sampling Design 
1. ASUSE: A multistage-stratified sampling design is adopted.  
2. ASI: The sampling strategy is a mix of complete enumeration and sampling. 
While a significant number of units are completely enumerated on census 
basis (based on some predefined criteria), from the rest of the units, samples 
are drawn using a stratified circular systematic approach based on size-class 
of employee criteria. 
3. CAPEX: The enterprises are stratified based on the Principal Business 
Activity. If the number of enterprises within a stratum is less than or equal to 
100, the entire stratum is completely enumerated. The strata having more than 
100 enterprises were divided into Census Sector and Sample Sector using 
certain criteria. 
4. Household Surveys: Household surveys deploy a multi-stage stratified 
sampling methodology, where stratification variable and sampling scheme at 
different stages vary, is used to draw samples from the population and 
subsequently to estimate the targeted indicators based on sample observation. 

38 
 
The first stage units are villages in the rural sector or UFS blocks in the urban 
sector. The ultimate stage of the unit is households in both sectors. 
MoSPI is responsible for compiling and releasing CPI & CFPI and their 
corresponding inflations on fixed date and time for States/UTs and at All India level as 
per international standards. Monthly price data are collected from 1181 villages and 
1114 markets in 310 selected towns by the Field Operations Division of NSO and the 
specified State/UT Directorates of Economics and Statistics. These markets are 
selected using robust statistical methods under the guidance of the Expert Group. 
 
5.5 When asked about major steps taken for streamlining the statistics collection 
machinery in recent period, the Ministry in its written reply mentioned as under:  
“In respect of systemic improvement and technological advancements, modern 
IT tools are being adopted for improved data capturing and processing. The NSS 
surveys are conducted through a dedicated web-portal or CAPI based application 
through digital platform. These have in-built validations, both soft and hard and a 
mechanism to reduce inconsistency at the stage of data collection. It enhances 
the efficiency of data collection by enabling real-time data entry and validation 
through handheld devices, significantly reducing manual errors. Moreover, it 
facilitates the real-time submission of survey data by field officials, ensuring 
timely and accurate data transmission. Almost all the activities related to the 
survey life cycle like frame updation, sample selection, data collection, scrutiny, 
validations etc. are carried out through this dedicated portal. 
Various measures have been taken to ensure the efficiency and accuracy of data 
collected by the National Statistics Office (NSO). For example, in the Household 
Consumption Expenditure Survey (2022-23 and 2023-24), the complete 
questionnaire of HCES was split into three separate questionnaires. These 
questionnaires were canvassed in three separate visits to reduce the occurrence 
of non-sampling error through reduction of canvassing time and respondent 
fatigue. Further, efforts were made to reduce canvassing time in different surveys 
by shortening the length of the schedules. 
Additionally, a multi-layered training system is adopted to ensure thorough 
training of primary field workers, supervisors and all officials associated with a 
survey. Regular inspection of fieldwork and scrutiny of data is undertaken by 
supervisory staff to ensure the quality of data being collected.” 
 
5.6 There are mainly two types of indices presently available and are being 
published by the Government of India viz. IIP and CPI.  When asked about what further 

39 
 
reforms are being proposed to modernize statistical system on State level, the Ministry 
in its written reply stated as below:  
“MoSPI releases Grant in Aid to States/UTs under the ongoing Central Sector 
sub-scheme Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) to strengthen the 
statistical capacity and operations of state statistical system for collecting, 
compiling and disseminating reliable official statistics. Under the scheme, State 
/UTs undertake various activities such as, compilation of local level statistics, 
creation of integrated State databases, studies and surveys to address data 
gaps, compilation of core indicators at State/Sub-State level, workshops, training 
programmes for statistical personal, awareness campaigns for statistics, 
strengthening of IT infrastructure etc. 
Guidelines of SSS scheme have been revised in 2024 to facilitate optimum fund 
availability and utilization by states/UTs. Guidelines have been made more 
concise and implemented States/UTs are also allowed to seek additional funds 
upto 50% of their original allocation. 
MoSPI organized the 28th Conference of Central and State Statistical 
Organizations (CoCSSO) on 12–13th August 2024. The theme of the conference 
was “Use of Data for Decision Making: Strengthening State Statistical Systems.” 
This event provided an institutional platform for discussions and improved 
coordination between Central and State statistical organizations, aiming to 
enhance the efficiency of the Indian Statistical System through a collaborative 
approach. 
A Meeting of State Secretaries (Planning & Statistics) was organised by MoSPI 
on 14th November, 2024 with the aim to strengthen the statistical coordination 
between MoSPI and State Governments/UT Administration. 
Appropriate sampling design is adopted to give reliable State level estimates. 
Provision for generating District level estimates has been kept in the sampling 
design adopted for ASUSE 2025. District level estimates may be generated 
combining Central and State samples by the participating states.” 
 
Index of Industrial Production (IIP) 
5.7 IIP is a composite indicator that measures the short-term changes in the volume 
of production of a basket of industrial products during a given period with respect to that 
in the base period.IIP covers three sectors viz. Mining, Manufacturing and Electricity. 
The current base year of IIP is 2011-12.The current series has a total of 407 items 
groups in the item basket of IIP.  
(a) Of these, the manufacturing sector comprises of 405 item groups.These have 
been selected from Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) covering at least 80 

40 
 
percent of the output of each manufacturing industry as per NationalIndustrial 
Classification (NIC). 
(b) The Mining Sector consists of 29 minerals which are represented in all India 
IIP by a composite index for the sector compiled by Indian Bureau of Mines 
(IBM). 
(c) The Electricity Sector is represented by a composite index, based on total 
electricity generation from both conventional and renewable sources. The 
data for this sector is sourced from Central Electricity Authority. 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
 
5.8 CPI is designed to measure the changes over time in general level of retail prices 
of selected goods and services that households purchase for the purpose of 
consumption. MoSPI compiles and releases Consumer Price Index (CPI) for Rural, 
Urban and Combined for all States/UTs and also at All India levels. CPI measures price 
changes by comparing, through time, the cost of a fixed basket of commodities. The 
item basket and their corresponding weight of the existing series is based on Consumer 
Expenditure Survey conducted in 2011-12 by NSS. There are 299 total items in 
commodity basket comprises of 6 groups and 23 sub-groups. 
 
5.9 When asked about scope for rationalisation and integration of these indices, the 
Ministry have stated as under:  
“A Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) for the base year (BY) revision of IIP 
has been constituted vide OM dated 27.09.2024. One of the committee's ToRs is 
to align the base year of IIP with the base year for National Accounts (2022-
23).Under the aegis of TAC-IIP, the methodology for compilation of the index is 
being reviewed to bring improvement in the same. In this regard potential to 
integrate the GST data in the IIP compilation process is being explored in base 
year revision of IIP. 
The exercise for Base year revision for CPI has been commenced under the 
guidance of an Expert Group comprising of academic experts, RBI officials, 
officers from other Ministries/ Departments. MoSPI has decided to update the 
base year of the CPI from the calendar year 2012 to 2024, using data from the 

41 
 
Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES) conducted during 2023-24. 
The envisaged improvements in new CPI series would include enhanced market 
coverage, data collection using Computer Assisted Personal Interview (CAPI) 
devices, capturing slab-wise data for Electricity index, and dissemination of 
State-level item indices. The inclusion of price collection from e-commerce 
platforms in the New Series (Base Year 2024) is also being explored” 
 
5.10 Administrative data systems like GST can be used for better statistical estimates 
to replace Index of Industrial Production (IIPs) or for revising price indices. On being 
asked whether any plan has been made to make GST database accessible to 
researchers and policy makers and the steps that are being taken to integrate income 
tax, land records and other administrative datasets with statistical system, the Ministry 
in its reply have stated as under:  
“Standardization is one of the basic pre-requisites for any statistical production 
process. It helps in making statistical processes more efficient and robust, and 
improve reporting on the quality of processes and output. Standards support the 
sharing of knowledge-based experiences and methodologies and, consequently, 
the sharing of tools, data, services and resources. The implementation of 
standard methods and tools, in turn improves the comparability of statistical 
outputs, thus benefiting users of statistics. 
As a standard, Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has 
released the National Metadata Structure (NMDS). These standards encourage 
sharing of information of Official Statistics and the spread of best practices, in 
particular for quality and metadata reporting. It aims to promote harmonized 
quality reporting across the National Statistical System (NSS) and facilitate cross-
comparisons of processes and outputs. The standard applies to all the 
stakeholders of NSS and others in their roles as producers, compilers and 
disseminators of Indian official statistics. 
Further, in order to enhance the inter-operability of government data bases a list 
of identifiers have been sent to all Ministries/ Departments vide communication 
dated 24 January 2025 with a request to integrate at least one of the listed 
identifiers in the data sets maintained by the Ministry/Department either directly 
or through the backend with a one to one mapping with any of the identifiers. 
The base year revision process of Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is in 
progress and a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) for base year revision of IIP 
has been constituted. Under the aegis of TAC-IIP, ESD is reviewing the 
methodology for compilation of the index and improvement in the same. In this 
regard potential to integrate the GST data in the IIP compilation process is being 
explored in base year revision of IIP.” 
 

42 
 
Research and Analysis Unit (RAU) 
5.11 Pursuant to the recommendations of the NSC, the Research and Analysis Unit 
(RAU) was established in the Ministry on 07 Feb 2024 with an objective to create in-
house capacity for Research and Data Analytics. The mandates of RAU inter-alia 
include the following functions: 
(i) Analyse various statistical products of MoSPI and suggest improvements as 
research and policy inputs. 
(ii) Study various survey data for assessment of quality of the surveys and 
suggest possible improvements 
(iii) Analyse publicly available datasets and share the findings of the analysis 
with government stakeholders as research and policy inputs 
(iv) Encourage various reputed Institutes /organizations for various research 
work utilizing official statistics or for development of official statistics 
 
5.12 The major activities that have been undertaken by Research and Analysis Unit  
(RAU)  in FY 2024-25 are as under: 
(i) International best practices on Press Releases of different statistical 
products were studied and model press releases on GDP, IIP, CPI, PLFS, 
etc. were prepared. Press Briefs on MoSPI now bring out highlights as 
well as infographics for better understanding by the readers/users. 
(ii) Working Papers/Note based on research and analysis of publicly available 
data have been prepared on the following subjects and shared with 
stakeholder Ministries/Departments in the Government as policy inputs: 
a. How to Enhance Labour Force Participation Rate of Women in 
India - Evidence-based Policy Suggestions 
b. Consumption of food by Indian households and ICMR-
recommended quantity - An analysis based on HCES 2022-23 data 
c. Pattern of Seasonal Price Volatility of Essential Vegetables in India: 
A Study on Tomato, Onion and Potato 
d. Note on Observations on methodology of estimation of ‘Prevalence 
of undernourishment’ (PoU) by Food and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO) of UN in respect of India. 
e. An assessment of skill gap of the workforce in India based on 
analysis of Periodic Labour Force Survey 2023-24 

43 
 
f. Some of the focus areas for enhancing domestic manufacturing 
and reducing reliance on imports: An Analysis based on data 
from Annual Survey of Industries, etc. 
g. As per the requirements of MoSPI, a consolidated list of research 
topics has been prepared for inviting research proposals from 
eligible institutions under the grant in aid component of the 
Capacity Development Scheme of the Ministry.  
 
5.13 The Ministry has further informed that RAU also engages with reputed 
Institutions to encourage them to take up research work in development of Official 
Statistics. When asked about usage of emerging technologies like Big Data Analytics, 
Artificial Intelligence to collect and analyze data, the Ministry replied as under:  
“For collection and analysis of data 
The enterprise and household surveys are being conducted using CAPI or web-
based application with in-built validation mechanism to ensure consistency at the 
stage of data collection.  
 In the Forward-Looking Survey on CAPEX 2024, a dedicated web portal was 
deployed for data collection, allowing access only to selected companies 
through their Corporate Identification Numbers (CINs). 
 A Natural Language Processing (NLP) based chatbot to assist in addressing 
the queries asked by the enumerator during field survey.  
 Dynamic range-based checks (soft checks) for real-time data validation 
during submission. 
 Manual verification by experienced data supervisors (DS users), ensuring 
accuracy and resolving anomalies observed in the data by referring back to 
the field. 
 
For data dissemination 
MoSPI launched the e-Sankhyiki portal on Statistics Day, 2024 (29 June 2024), 
to create a comprehensive system for managing and sharing data, facilitating the 
easy dissemination of official statistics across the country. The portal currently 
has 134 million records encompassing legacy data of various products brought 
out by MoSPI as well as other Ministry. In addition, all the reports and other 
release are also disseminated through the website of the Ministry. For providing 
easy understanding of data a dedicated visualization section with more than 
1700 visualizations has also been created.” 
 

44 
 
IT Modernization Plans and Data Innovation Labs 
5.14 The use of emerging technologies like Al, big data, and real-time analytics is 
gaining importance and the Ministry has informed that the Commission is cognizant of 
rapidly evolving landscape. In May 2023, the NSC has constituted an expert committee 
for ‘Modernisation of Information and Technology’ under the chairmanship of Member 
(IT), NSC. Implementation plan has been prepared by Ministry based on inputs/ 
recommendations of NSC, NITI Aayog and previous committees and apprised to NSC 
for their guidance. 
5.15 When asked about role of NSC in regulating and guiding the use of emerging 
technologies like Al, big data, and real-time analytics, while ensuring ethical and 
privacy-compliant practices, the Ministry in its reply has submitted as under:  
“To explore transformative potential of AI in official statistics and public sector decision-
making, MoSPI has organized an AI Literacy Workshop in New Delhi on 19 June 2025. 
The Workshop brought together various stakeholders including Voluntary Organisations 
working in the field of Artificial Intelligence, Multilateral Organisation (World Bank) and 
officers from MoSPI. The summary of deliberation, key takeaways and way forward 
were presented to the Commission. The Commission advised MoSPI to prepare a list of 
use cases of mobile phone data. 
 The privacy-related aspects are covered by various laws which are administered by 
respective Ministries/ Departments. The Collection of Statistics (CoS) Act, 2008 (7 of 
2009) was enacted by Parliament on 7 January, 2009. The Act provides for disclosure 
of information in certain cases and restrictions of their use. The Act inter-alia provides 
that the information collected from individuals would be kept confidential and would be 
used only for statistical purposes. In case, there is a need to publish/ disclose individual 
information, it would be done only after suppressing the identification details of the 
individual. 
Further, in accordance with National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy (NDSAP), 
2012, formulated by the Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India, the 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation (MoSPI), Government of India 
notified the Guidelines on Statistical Data Dissemination on April 1, 2019. It provides for 
classification of data as shareable and non-shareable, guidelines for dissemination and 
pricing, etc. within the overall framework laid down in NDSAP 2012. 
The data collected by MoSPI through National Sample Surveys are categorized into 
shareable and non-shareable; wherein, the data containing information, which may 
compromise national security and/or those containing identification particulars of 
individual informants/establishments, are not shared. Any data, which directly or 
indirectly attempts to reveal the identity of individual informant, are also not shared. 

45 
 
The Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023 has been enacted on 11 
August, 2023 that casts obligations on Data Fiduciaries to safeguard digital personal 
data, holding them accountable, while also enshrining the rights and duties of Data 
Principals. The DPDP Act, acts as a framework and sets out key principles in respect of 
processing of personal data. As per Section 17(2) of the DPDP Act, processing of 
personal data that is necessary for research, archiving or statistical purpose is 
exempted from the provisions of the DPDP Act, provided that such processing is 
undertaken in the form and manner prescribed there under.” 
 
5.16 As part of IT Modernization Plan of MoSPI, a Data Innovation (DI) Lab has been 
established to harness emerging technologies including AI/ML and big data analytics to 
enhance data collection, processing and dissemination. The Governing Council of DI 
Lab has included experts/professionals outside the government to broaden the policy 
perspective in respect of DI lab and its activities.  
 
5.17 When queried about establishment of Data Innovation Lab during evidence 
held on 09.01.2025, the representative of the Ministry deposed as below: 
“…This has also been set up… Data Innovation Lab is the one which is 
spearheading our e-Sankhyiki portal, which is where a lot of our data is placed 
in a manner which is easily usable by people. Otherwise, we had the data, but 
it was in a PDF form or in Excel sheets, which required a certain level of 
familiarity with computers and software before they can do it. Now, we are 
making it in charts and graphs so that it is easily usable by people. Data of the 
last 30 years has already been put. We are ensuring that the entire data from 
1950 onwards would be available on this. I think that we have already put 17 
million records on this, and once this data is in the public domain in a usable 
format, then it will spur other researchers and PhD students to try and use it 
further and that is the linkages which the Data Innovation Lab is also focusing 
on.” 
 
Collaboration with International Institutions and follow Global Best Practices 
 
5.18 NSC plays a crucial role in overseeing and guiding the statistical system in India, 
providing independent advice to the government, and ensuring the credibility, 
transparency, and quality of national statistics. NSC has helped promote independence 
within India’s statistical system, by ensuring quality and credibility of data. Its creation 
was a significant step forward in enhancing independence and it has been strengthened 

46 
 
since then. Through its review and oversight, NSC ensures that statistical outputs are 
impartial, credible, and based on rigorous methodologies. The Commission with all 
outside experts as well as the Steering Committee of NSC for national sample surveys 
with a vast majority of outside members, both ensure a forum catering to external view 
of distinguished experts on the methodology and quality of surveys.  Globally, different 
countries have different structures of Statistical Systems and they operate with different 
legal and institutional frameworks, sometimes supported by statutory mandates. A 
comparative table is attached at Annexure B. 
 
5.19 When asked about best practices that are being adopted in partnership with 
Global Statistical Organizations and Universities, the Ministry in its written reply have 
stated as under:  
“India is a member of the United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC) for the 
period 2024-2027 and actively participated in the discussion during the session of 
United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC). India also chaired the 
20thsession of the Governing Council (GC) of UN Statistical Institute for Asia 
Pacific (SIAP) during 9-10 December 2024. India has also become a member in 
various working groups/ committees such as UN Committee of Experts of Big 
Data and Data Science for Official Statistics (UNCEBD), Inter-agency and Expert 
Group on SDG Indicators, to leverage the best practices. Meetings have been 
held with Statistics Finland's to gain their insights in leveraging administrative 
data for generating statistics. Bilateral Meetings have been held with National 
Statistics Offices of UAE, South Africa and Brazil during the BRICS Summit in 
October 2024.” 
 
5.20 Adding further, the representative of the Ministry deposed during evidence as 
below: 
“…we are also actively pursuing to become members of different Committees 
in the UN system. In December, we have sent the request and they have 
accepted our request. There is a UN Committee of Experts on Big Data….. 
Recently, we had the BRICS National Statistical Offices meeting in Russia and 
they have a grouping of the CIS States on Statistics and they want to 
collaborate with us. We are working with them”. 
 

47 
 
5.21 The Ministry has further stated that India subscribes to the Special Data 
Dissemination Standard (SDDS) of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and has been 
fulfilling the requirements like (a)Data coverage, periodicity, and timeliness (b)  Access 
by the public (c) Integrity of data and (d)  Quality since 2001.  India meets all of these 
requirements as Quarterly Estimates of GDP at current and constant prices for different 
sectors are released on the last working day of second month of next quarter, that is 
one month earlier than the required deadline of timeliness, adhering to the pre-
announced Annual Release Calendar. It ensures simultaneous release of data, as no 
agency is provided with pre-release information. To achieve the objective of integrity, it 
provides requisite commentary on release of data, as part of press note; and to maintain 
quality, the latest UN System of National Account (SNA) 2008 is followed to the extent 
possible. All the methodology and data sources are documented and placed in public 
domain. 
SDG Indicators  
5.22 On a pointed query on specific indicator list used to measure progress towards 
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) during its Sitting, the Ministry in 
its Post-Evidence replies stated as under:  
“MoSPI has developed the National Indicator Framework (NIF) for sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) in sync with Global indicator Framework for SDGs, 
after thorough consultation with concerned Ministries/ Departments, UN 
Agencies and other stakeholders, to facilitate monitoring of the SDGs at national 
level. The NIF, comprising of national SDG indicators along with identified data 
sources and periodicity, serves as the backbone for monitoring SDGs at the 
national level, offering valuable guidance to policymakers and the implementing 
agencies of various schemes and programs.  
The NIF is evolving in nature. Government of India has established a High-Level 
Steering Committee (HLSC) on SDGs under the Chairmanship of the Chief 
Statistician of India (CSI) & Secretary, MoSPI to periodically review and refine 
the NIF.  This committee includes members from NITI Aayog, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC), the Ministry of Finance, 
and the MoSPI.  
A Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on SDGs has been constituted to provide 
technical support to HLSC. Proposals for the addition, deletion, or refinement of 
SDG indicators in the NIF, submitted by the line Ministries and Departments, are 
technically examined in TAC and presented to the HLSC for approval and 

48 
 
subsequent updation of SDGs-NIF. The latest SDGs-NIF was released on 
Statistics Day 2024 (29 June 2024).” 
 
5.23 The Aspiration District Programme (ADP) aims to reduce inter-district 
multidimensional inequalities. When enquired whether any survey been conducted in 
these districts for collection of data, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:  
“Comprehensive household survey has not been conducted specifically to 
assess the socio-economic aspects of Aspirational Districts. However, in various 
NSS household surveys, samples have been allocated to the Aspirational 
Districts for collection of data” 
 
 
5.24 Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) is also conducted 
by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation with the primary objective of 
systematically collecting information on various operational and economic 
characteristics of these units. When asked about the importance as well as various 
aspects of the ASUSE in offering detailed insights into the unincorporated sector and 
efficacy of this data in formulating policies that address the sector's specific challenges 
and opportunities, the Ministry replied as follows:  
 
“The survey results provide detailed insights into the unincorporated non-
agricultural sector in terms of various indicators like estimated number of 
establishments, number of workers, Gross Value Added (GVA) per worker, GVA 
per establishments, percentage of female headed establishments, emoluments 
per hired worker, percentage of establishments using internet for entrepreneurial 
purposes  etc. that may serve as critical inputs for policymakers in both the 
government and private sector, guiding informed decision-making and strategic 
planning.” 
 
Mitigation of Data Overlap 
 
5.25 The Ministry has recently advised the Ministry/Departments to review their data 
collection mechanism so as to harmonize all datasets produced already or are being 
produced, through all possible data collection venues in the Government. It was further 
suggested that the surveys may be designed/ recommended to fill up the data gaps, 
when such data are desirable and that if such data are available already in the 
Ministry/Departments, either through administrative data sources, statutory returns, 

49 
 
alternative data sources, or through MIS portals, collecting them through surveys may 
be avoided, except if such collection of data are taken up for a specific purpose of 
authentication or validation of existing datasets. 
5.26 While replying to a query of the Committee during evidence regarding instances 
of Data overlap between ISI, NSC, MoSPI and other Ministries and development of any 
mechanism or framework to mitigate the occurrence of data overlap, the representative 
of Ministry deposed as below:  
“…We have recently sent out a circular to all Ministries regarding the metadata 
that they need to maintain for each data. The metadata means, for each data set 
they have, what kind of structure they should have, what should be the periodicity 
of that renewal, and what kind of fields that they should maintain. We have 
issued those metadata uniformity guidelines also in the recent past. And largely 
the data that each Ministry publishes, relates to that domain it is…” 
 
Engagement with Institutions, Students and Researchers  
5.27 The Ministry has informed that it regularly engages with reputed Institutions to 
encourage them to take up research work in development of Official Statistics. As per 
the requirements of MoSPI, a consolidated list of research topics has been prepared for 
inviting research proposals from eligible institutions under the grant in aid component of 
the Capacity Development scheme of the Ministry. Publicity campaigns are being done 
for enhancing awareness about MoSPI’s data and reports.  
5.28 When asked about whether any structured system has been developed to 
involve students, researchers from various research institutes, entrepreneurs, scientists 
to help collect research induced data, the Ministry replied as below:  
“IIT, Kanpur is undertaking a research project on on development domestic 
software for seasonal adjustment in time series data on CPI. Proposals are also 
being received from various Institutes to undertake research projects on subject 
matter relating to development of Official Statistics. IIT, Kanpur has introduced in 
their curriculum, a component of project work to be done by their students using 
MoSPI data. 
MoSPI is implementing the National Internship in Official Statistics for 
pursuing or completed undergraduate/graduate/postgraduate/research scholars 
in recognized Institutes / Universities / Research Institute. During 2024, 219 
interns were engaged for undertaking research work on various topics. In 2025, a 

50 
 
total number of 272 interns are proposed to be selected during Phase I of 2025. 
The broad fields/disciplines for internship include National Accounts Statistics, 
Index Numbers, Energy Statistics, National Economic Classifications, 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Environment Statistics & Environment 
Accounting, Global Indices, Survey Subjects such as ASI, AS, SE, UFS, MCPC 
etc., Public Policy, Information Technology for Official Statistics, Official Statistics 
of respective field of different Departments of MoSPI and State Official Statistics.” 
 
5.29 Further, on being queried about any dedicated App that has been developed by 
Ministry to ask concerned queries related to statistics, the Ministry stated as under:  
“MoSPI has launched the e-Sankhyiki portal on Statistics Day 2024 i.e. 29 June 
2024.This portal contains time series data of important macro indicators and a 
catalogue of major data assets of the Ministry and has two sections viz. Macro 
Indicators and Data Catalogue. All major data assets of the Ministry e.g. National 
Account Statistics, Consumer Price Index, Index of Industrial Production and 
NSS surveys are listed in the Data Catalogue at one place for ease of access. 
The portal would facilitate data driven decision making as various indicators are 
readily available in a user-friendly format. It will facilitate ease of Data 
Management for Official Statistics in the Country. Through e-sankhyiki portal, the 
WPI data from DPIIT can also be accessed, which has been ingested through 
API provided by DPIIT.” 
 
Interactive Sessions and Panel Discussions 
5.30 Interactive sessions and panel discussions provide a platform for open 
discussions, allowing attendees to pose questions, share insights, and provide 
feedback. As part of the initiative towards strengthening the National Statistical System, 
MoSPI implemented a series of reform initiatives. The initiatives included continuous 
engagement and regular feedback from the data users and stakeholders, in order to 
improve data quality. Towards this, MoSPI organised a series of Data User 
Conferences with data users and stakeholders to take feedback from them and improve 
the statistical processes and products and promote effective utilization of official 
statistics and data for policymaking. The following interactions have been held in the 
past year: 
• Issue of Non-response in survey by high income groups/gated societies 

51 
 
• Conference with trade groups, associations, and business organizations on 
Upcoming Enterprise Surveys 
• Interaction with Forecasters & Economists of GDP and CPI 
• Estimation of Informal Sector in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
• Monitoring Frameworks of Sustainable Development Goals, compilation of 
Environment Accounts, and Gender statistics 
• Conceptual Framework of Gross Domestic Knowledge Product (GDKP) 
Measurement 
• Leveraging Citizen-Generated Data (CGD) for Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) in India 
• Leveraging Non-Conventional Data Sources for Official Statistics 
• Using Alternate Data Sources and Frontier Technologies for Policy Making 
• AI Literacy Workshop  
5.31 The Ministry informed that the Chairperson and Members of NSC regularly 
attend, actively interact with stakeholders and provide guidance during data user 
conferences and other workshops conducted by MoSPI.  
 
5.32 On being asked about details of data user conferences that have been held from 
last three years on various surveys to address strategies for fostering collaborative 
engagement, including creating inclusive environments for data discussions and 
leveraging technology for enhanced interaction, the Ministry in its written reply replied 
as follows:  
i. “Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES) 2022-23 – 19 
June 2024  
ii. Annual Survey on Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) 2022-
23 – 23 August 2024 
iii. Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) 2023-24 – 26 September 2024  
iv. Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) 2022-23 – 5 Dec 2024  
MoSPI also organised workshops/ sessions with stakeholders:  
1. To raise awareness about the upcoming enterprise surveys of MoSPI namely 
Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector 

52 
 
Enterprises (ASUSE), Economic Census (EC), Annual Survey of Service 
Sector Enterprises (ASSSE) and CAPEX, on 12 Sep 2024, MoSPI organised 
a Conference with Business Associations on Upcoming Enterprise Surveys to 
engage with various trade groups, associations, and business organizations. 
2. To address the issue of non-response in Sample Surveys, on 20 Sep 2024, 
MoSPI organised a Brainstorming session on the issue of non-response to 
sample surveys particularly by high income groups/gated societies/ high-rise 
housing facilities. Discussions were held on various facets of issue of non-
response in high income groups to develop strategies that encourage the 
aforementioned target population to contribute valuable data and build trust 
among them by educating on the importance of data and privacy policies.  
3. To explore potential enhancements in CPI Compilation Methodologies, 
another brainstorming session was organised by MoSPI on 20 Nov 2024, on 
the "Treatment of PDS items and other necessities in Household 
Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES) & Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
compilation.” 
 

53 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. Provision of statutory authority to NSC and empowering it as the nodal 
national body for statistics 
 
The Committee acknowledge that the vast information generated across 
various sectors has the power to reveal new insights and address complex 
societal issues. The real value of this data lies in accurate interpretation and 
effective application, which is crucial for informed policy-making, resource 
management, and sustainable development. The Committee observe that a 
strong, independent statistical authority is essential for ensuring public trust in 
official statistics. The Rangarajan Commission (2000) recommended creating a 
permanent, statutory body for official statistics, but the National Statistical 
Commission (NSC), established in 2005, was never given this legislative 
framework. The Committee further observe that the existence of different data 
producers, including a growing number of private data providers, creates the 
possibility of discrepancies between their statistical estimates and those 
published by the NSC, particularly for key indicators like GDP. These potential 
inconsistencies, which can undermine stakeholder confidence, are largely a 
result of the NSC's lack of statutory authority to enforce uniform standards and 
methodologies across all data producers, including those in the private sector. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) be established as the nodal and autonomous body for all 
core statistical activities, with full statutory backing. This empowerment would 
allow the NSC to prescribe and coordinate statistical standards and 
methodologies for both government and private sector data producers. To 
achieve this, the Committee desire that the NSC constitutes a permanent 
technical committee, including representatives from private statistical agencies, 
academia, and industry experts. The goal is to align definitions, methodologies, 
and data sources for critical economic and social indicators. The NSC should 

54 
 
also develop a comprehensive National Statistical Standards Framework, similar 
to the accounting standards set by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India (ICAI), to harmonize data collection procedures, sampling designs, and 
reporting protocols. The Committee further recommend institutionalizing regular 
data sharing, joint methodological reviews, and publishing reconciliation reports 
to explain and minimize differences between official and private sector 
estimates. By granting the NSC statutory authority, the credibility, comparability, 
and reliability of India's official statistics will be significantly improved, 
strengthening evidence-based policy decisions and public trust. 
 
2. NSC Statistical Audits: The Backbone of Reliable Data 
 
The Committee note that the quality and reliability of official statistics are 
vital for effective policymaking and public trust. The Committee observe that 
methodological gaps and a lack of standards can cause inconsistencies in 
statistical outputs, and that other countries, like the UK, have established regular 
statistical audit processes for quality assurance. While the National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) is mandated to perform statistical audits, its only notable 
action was an audit of the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) in 2011. In response 
to questions about this limited activity, the Ministry highlighted several recent 
efforts. These include the circulation of the Statistical Quality Assessment 
Framework (SQAF) in April 2025, which is based on the UN framework and aims 
to help various government bodies assess and improve their data quality. The 
Ministry also informed that the NSC is aware of the new statistical tools and is 
actively overseeing the base revision for key indicators like GDP, IIP, and CPI, 
which is planned for adoption in early 2026. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the NSC build on these efforts 
by formalizing a Statistical Audit function. This function should conduct periodic, 
comprehensive reviews of statistical processes, data collection methods, and 
outputs across both government and private agencies. The NSC should also 
develop a standardized audit framework and guidelines, aligning them with 
international best practices. This framework should define the audit's scope to 

55 
 
include critical aspects like methodology compliance, data validation, and 
sampling integrity. The Committee further recommend that audit findings be 
published in transparent reports that identify weaknesses, propose remedial 
actions, and track their implementation. This will ensure greater consistency and 
accuracy in official statistics, enhance transparency and trust among data users, 
and allow for the proactive correction of data quality issues. The 
institutionalization of this audit function will empower the NSC to build a 
sustainable and credible statistical system for the nation. 
 
 
3. GDP Data and Policy Formulation  
 
The Committee assert that official statistics are a public good and must be 
grounded in principles of professional independence, impartiality, and 
transparency. Despite India's agrarian history, the informal or unorganized 
sector now accounts for over 60% of the economy, making its economic 
contribution substantial. The Committee acknowledge that the National 
Statistical Office (NSO) generates vital macroeconomic indicators such as GDP, 
IIP, and CPI, and a base year revision is currently underway to refine their 
methodologies. The Committee emphasize that complete and accurate data are 
indispensable for effective policymaking, as deficiencies can create a policy void 
and harm the economy. Thus, a comprehensive reflection of all economic 
activities and services, including those within the informal sector, is imperative 
for a clear and accurate understanding of the economic landscape. 
The Committee, therefore, advocate for the refinement of GDP data to 
precisely capture all economic activity, particularly within the informal sector. 
Furthermore, the Committee desire for the establishment of a mechanism to 
explore novel administrative statistics, which would facilitate the generation of 
high-frequency data. Such an initiative would provide more robust inputs for the 
GDP, IIP, and CPI indices. By ensuring a more holistic representation of the 
unorganized and informal sectors, these refined GDP figures will empower 
policymakers to create interventions that are accurately aligned with the nation's 
economic realities. 

56 
 
 
4. Harmonizing Data Discrepancies and Overlap  
The Committee observe that there are different instrumentalities of the 
Government putting out data on the same subject causing discrepancies and 
instances of data overlap between Indian Statistical Institute, NSC, MoSPI and 
other Ministries and this continue to persist due to differences in set of samples, 
data collection and processing, resulting in mis-leading differences in outcomes 
of data analysis and results. The Committee have been apprised that to address 
the issue, MOSPI has recently advised the Ministry/Departments to review their 
data collection mechanism so as to harmonize all datasets produced already or 
are being produced, through all possible data collection venues in the 
Government. The Committee have also been apprised that metadata uniformity 
guidelines have been issued to Ministries for publication of data. The Committee 
are of the opinion that the issue of data overlap should be addressed at the 
earliest by making sincere efforts for accuracy and reliability of data. Also, the 
Committee recommend the synchronization and integration of all statistical 
activities including the publication of various indices to facilitate comprehensive 
analysis and support well-informed decision-making. 
 
5. Integrating Artificial Intelligence into the National Statistical System and 
Capacity Building 
 
The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s proactive approach towards 
integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI) within the National Statistical System (NSS) 
as part of the broader IT modernization efforts spearheaded by the Data 
Innovation (DI) Lab. The use of AI holds immense promise for enhancing data 
collection, processing, and analysis by improving efficiency, accuracy, and 
timeliness. This aligns well with the Ministry’s goal of leveraging emerging 
technologies such as AI, big data, and real-time analytics to modernize statistical 
operations. 
However, the Committee observe that alongside technological integration, there 
is a pressing need to build the necessary capacity within the NSS. This includes 

57 
 
developing specialized skills in AI and data science among personnel at all levels, 
ensuring that the workforce is well-equipped to implement and manage AI-driven 
solutions effectively and ethically. The Committee also highlight the importance 
of establishing clear operational guidelines, ethical frameworks, and oversight 
mechanisms to govern the use of AI, particularly given the sensitive nature of 
statistical data. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry prioritize the development 
and implementation of a comprehensive AI integration strategy within the NSS. 
This strategy should focus on capacity building through targeted training 
programs, collaboration with academic and research institutions, and continuous 
skill development. Further, the Ministry should institutionalize robust ethical and 
privacy standards specific to AI applications, ensuring compliance with existing 
laws such as the Collection of Statistics Act, 2008, and the Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023. To promote transparency and stakeholder engagement, the 
Committee also urge the Ministry to periodically publish detailed reports on AI 
adoption progress, its impact on data quality and efforts made towards workforce 
capacity building programmes. 
 
6. Promoting International Collaboration and Research and Development 
Initiatives 
 The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s engagement with international 
statistical organizations and global forums such as the United Nations Statistical 
Commission (UNSC), the UN Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific (SIAP), 
and various UN expert groups. India’s active participation including chairing the 
Governing Council of UN SIAP and membership in committees on Big Data and 
SDG Indicators demonstrates a strong commitment to aligning with global best 
practices in official statistics. The Committee also welcome bilateral 
collaborations with the National Statistics Offices of Finland, UAE, South Africa, 
and Brazil, which are instrumental for knowledge exchange and capacity building. 

58 
 
Further, the Committee commend India’s adherence to the IMF’s Special Data 
Dissemination Standard (SDDS) since 2001, which has contributed significantly 
to ensuring data transparency, integrity, and timeliness. The development of the 
National Indicator Framework (NIF) for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
supported by a High-Level Steering Committee and Technical Advisory 
Committee, reflects a coordinated and standards-driven approach to monitoring 
national progress. 
However, the Committee observe that despite these efforts, a gap remains in 
translating international engagements into tangible and outcome-oriented 
research and policy implementation. Participation in global forums and bilateral 
exchanges must be accompanied by substantive collaborations yielding 
measurable improvements in domestic statistical systems, The Committee are of 
the view that international affiliations should evolve into long-term, strategic 
partnerships focused on joint research, technical exchange, and capacity 
development with reputed global institutions and universities. Likewise, the 
recently established Research and Analysis Unit (RAU) and Data Innovation Lab 
must be more effectively utilized to spearhead high-impact, evidence-based 
research and strengthen data-driven policymaking within the Ministry. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry prepare and implement a 
comprehensive roadmap to operationalize international collaborations through 
formal MoUs and institutional partnerships. Priority should be given to joint 
research initiatives, adoption of global data standards, and structured capacity-
building programs. Simultaneously, efforts should be made to involve domestic 
doctoral students, researchers, and young professionals in these initiatives, 
thereby building a sustainable talent pool for India’s statistical ecosystem. 
The Committee further desire that a detailed progress report be submitted 
outlining the concrete outcomes of international collaborations and the 
performance of the RAU and Data Innovation Lab in driving research-led, globally 
aligned statistical advancements. 
 

59 
 
7. Conclusion 
The Committee firmly believe that a robust, reliable, and independent 
statistical system is the cornerstone of informed governance, effective policy 
formulation, and public trust. In the era of data-driven decision-making, it is 
imperative that India's official statistics ecosystem be strengthened with legal 
authority, institutional independence, and modernized infrastructure. The 
National Statistical Commission (NSC), originally envisioned as the apex body for 
statistical governance, has yet to realize its full potential due to the absence of 
statutory backing and limited enforcement capacity. By granting the NSC 
statutory authority, empowering it to coordinate and prescribe national statistical 
standards, and institutionalizing functions such as regular statistical audits, India 
can establish a harmonized, transparent, and credible statistical framework. 
Drawing from global best practices, particularly models like the UK Statistics 
Authority, the NSC should be restructured as an autonomous and accountable 
institution reporting to Parliament, supported by a professionally managed 
statistical office. 
Furthermore, integrating Artificial Intelligence into data workflows, 
strengthening research and development initiatives, standardizing methodologies 
across government and private entities, and promoting international 
collaboration are essential steps to modernize and future-proof the national 
statistical system. A revitalised and empowered NSC will not only enhance the 
accuracy, comparability, and timeliness of India’s statistics but will also ensure 
that policy decisions are based on comprehensive and inclusive data. This is 
crucial for India to achieve its long-term developmental goals and establish itself 
as a data-resilient, knowledge-driven economy by 2047. 
New Delhi;  
26 November, 2025 
05 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB,  
Chairperson  
Standing Committee on Finance 
  

60 
 
Annexure A 
 
A brief on the reform initiatives for ‘Strengthening the National Statistical System’  
 
MoSPI has prepared the action plan for implementation of these 
recommendations by dividing them into eight specific goals and for each goal, a 
dedicated team of senior officers (DDG level officers) under Divisional Heads has been 
formed and the progress on each goal is being monitored by Secretary, MoSPI through 
bi-monthly review meetings. The reforms are aimed at improving the data management 
and governance ecosystem across the Government, wherein MoSPI, various 
Ministries/Departments, States/UTs are the key stakeholders. The objectives of the 
reforms are as follows:  
• Enhanced accuracy, timeliness and reliability of Official Statistics  
• Better data governance by way of uniform guidelines  
• Adoption of new technologies and techniques  
• Enhancing credibility of the National Statistical System  
• Making data more accessible and user-friendly  
• Promote data-driven decision making  
• Appropriately impart skills and knowledge to the human resources in MoSPI 
and across Ministries/ Departments to take forward these reforms.  
 
Goal 1: Sample Surveys  
Survey reports have been released as per timelines in last one year. To meet the 
increasing demand for data, MoSPI has taken the following initiatives:  
a. Frequency of surveys results has been enhanced  
• Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) – monthly and quarterly results from 
2025  
• Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES) after completion of every 
three years  
• Time Use Survey (TUS) after every five years  
• Regular Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) with 
quarterly results  
• Comprehensive Annual Modular Survey  
• Forward looking CAPEX intentions– Annual  
 
b. New surveys are being undertaken/planned  
 
• Two Annual Enterprise Surveys (ASUSE and ASSSE) to comprehensively 
capture the three components of the country’s economy along with Annual 
Survey of Industries (ASI) to bridge the existing data gap; services sector and un-
incorporated sector, having significant share in GDP  
• Forward-Looking Survey on Private Corporate Sector Capex Investment 
Intentions to assess investment plans and anticipated capital spending of major 
resident private enterprises  
• Domestic Tourism Expenditure Survey to collect data on domestic tourism 
spending  

61 
 
• National Household Travel Survey to gather data on daily domestic travel 
patterns  
• Health Survey: Household Social Consumption to gather information on 
household social consumption, related to health (out of pocket expenditure)  
• Household Income Survey (2026) for information on income distribution  
• Index of Services Production (ISP) to assess growth of services sector  
 
c. Transformation of Sample Surveys has been done with the following changes  
 
 Introduction of technology in survey work  
 Use of Computer Aided Personal Interview (CAPI)  
 In-built validations, menu driven data entry for ensuring data quality  
 Statistical survey processes streamlined leading to reduction in time lag in 
releasing the reports; Survey data lag reduced from 8-9 months to 45-90 days  
 District level estimates can be generated by States participating in surveys of 
MoSPI 
 
Goal 2: Institutional Structure  
 
MoSPI has formed new verticals for new and focused functions and restructured 
existing verticals to make them more efficient and also taken steps to strengthen its field 
offices located across various States in the country. The following steps have been 
taken:  
• Administrative Statistics and Policy Division for strengthening Administrative 
Statistics across Ministries/ Departments  
• Research and Analysis Division for undertaking research and encouraging 
research and innovation  
• Product based Household and Enterprise Survey verticals created to handle 
end-to-end survey process and reduce timelines in processing the survey data  
• Media and Publicity unit for creating awareness about MoSPI and its 
activities/products and for reaching out to data users, researchers and academia  
• Direct Recruit officers posted at the field level in Sub-Regional offices for 
monitoring and supervision of the survey work  
• Quality control in the Survey through regular monitoring and capacity building  
• Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Unit for enhanced data analysis  
• International Cooperation Unit for better coordination at international level as 
India became member of UNSC  
• Improved State Unit for enhanced coordination and providing support to 
States/UTs  
• Improved Project Monitoring through revamped portal and regular capacity 
building  
 
Goal 3: Derived Statistics - Base Revision of Key macro-economic Indicators  
MoSPI has started the process for base revision of its macro-economic indicators 
viz. CPI, IIP and GDP initiated. Technical Committees have been constituted for the 
same and the work has been started. The new bases expected to be adopted by Feb to 
May 2026.  

62 
 
For, CPI base revision enhanced market coverage across sectors, data collection using 
Computer Assisted Personal Interview devices, enhanced coverage of services data, 
inclusion of data from online platforms is under progress. MoSPI is pro-actively working 
on expansion of data sources (GST, eVAHAN, NPCI, PFMS), improvement in 
methodology, use of alternative data and adoption of SNA 2025 (statistical standard for 
national accounts, adopted by the United Nations Statistical Commission in March 
2025). Re-engineering of processes is being undertaken and MoSPI would be shifting to 
digital platform for preparation of macro-economic indicators. The process is also going 
on for wider consultation with State/UT Directorates of Economics and Statistics and 
other stakeholders.  
 
Goal 4: Measures for strengthening Administrative Statistics  
A new vertical has been put in place policies, directives, guidelines, practices to 
support acquisition, management and efficient use of Administrative Data. The following 
measures have been taken for harmonization of data sets across 
Minsitries/Departments:  
 
1. Compendium of Datasets and Registries  
A Compendium of 257 datasets and registries has been prepared based on the inputs 
received from M/Ds. M/Ds will need to prioritize the implementation strategy for the data 
related initiatives to improve data quality.  
 
2. Follow the system for National Metadata Structure (NMDS)  
National Metadata Structure (NMDS) provides a guideline for the data producer to 
adhere to a holistic and integrated approach to the presentation and dissemination of 
statistical data and enhance ease in sharing data. The key principles of NMDS 2.0 are 
data description and presentation, institutional mandate, quality management, accuracy 
and reliability, timelines, coherence and comparability, data processing and metadata 
update. All datasets need to adhere to NMDS 2.0. Administrative and National Metadata 
Structure (NMDS 2.0) issued (Oct 2024) to Ministries/Departments for compliance  
• To ensure that data and information are uniformly represented  
• To bring in improved understanding of various data sets in public domain such 
as census, surveys, administrative and those from other sources.  
 
3. Adherence to statistical standards/classifications  
Compliance to the systems of International/National Classification are an essential 
requirement for uniformity, consistency and coherence in the statistical datasets. MoSPI 
has so far compiled, circulated and released a total of 10 National and 87 International 
Standards/Classification in the fields of Demographic and Social, Economic Statistics, 
Environment Statistics, and Others. The list provides for the details of the agency 
publishing the standards, availability of their latest version, and the brief about the 
classification. The M/Ds can select the relevant standards and ensure its 
implementation.  
 
4. Usage of unique identifiers for improved interoperability of the datasets  
Unique identifiers (UIDs) are distinct codes or numbers assigned to objects, people, or 
data to distinguish them from others. They are crucial for identification, tracking, and 

63 
 
management of data across various industries and systems. MoSPI compiled and 
circulated amongst the Ministry/Departments, recently in April, 2025 a list of 17 UIDs, in 
the individual (7 IDs), enterprise (5 IDs), Geographical /Locational (4 IDs), and Vehicle 
(1 ID) categories. Each M/D can select identifiers based on the feasibility and relevance.  
 
5. Implement the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF)  
SQAF lays down quality dimensions to facilitate and ensure effective 
management of quality in the NSS and its processes and products. MoSPI circulated 
the SQAF in the month of April, 2025. The Ministries/Departments are required to 
assess all their data/statistical products and processes generated by them. The SQAF 
rests upon 19  
Principles and 85 requirements. The assessment will help each M/D identify and 
prioritise the gaps to improve data quality.  
 
6. Identification and resolution of definitional divergences  
MoSPI in January, 2025 laid down an institutional mechanism for the 
Ministry/Departments/State/UT Governments for referring the matter of definitional 
divergence to MoSPI. MoSPI proposed resolving these divergences consultation with 
the concerned Ministry/Departments/State/UT Governments and placing them before 
the National Statistical Commission (NSC) for concurrence.  
 
Goal 5: Non-official data  
MoSPI has taken initiatives to counter the incorrect narratives on India with 
reference to global indices published. In this regard, a study of methodologies behind 
the indices of international organisations who do cross-country comparisons has been 
done and review of 28 Global indices undertaken. The methodology and data sources 
for these indicators have been studied and findings shared with line Ministries for 
necessary action and suggested improvements. Wherever data/method ambiguities 
exist, Ministries have been requested to engage with publishing agencies keeping 
MoSPI in loop. The exercise would facilitate Ministries/Department in ensuring that 
correct and updated official data are available for use by international organisations for 
calculations of indices.  
 
Goal 6: Capacity building  
MoSPI has prepared a comprehensive 2-3 years’ capacity-building plan for ISS 
Officers, SSS Officers as well as the contractual staff with a strong focus on technical, 
domain-specific as well soft skills . The following are its main features:  
• Regular interactions with experts on emerging new technologies /subjects  
• Strengthening of infrastructure in Zonal Offices for imparting training to SSS 
officers and contractual staff  
• Encouraging ISS officers to undertake research work in collaboration with 
eminent Institutes/ Organizations  
• Upgradation of technical skills (R, Python etc.) of ISS officers for enabling them 
to extract and analyze data and to strengthen the Statistical verticals in MoSPI as 
well as in Ministries/Departments  
• MoUs are being entered into with specialized Institutes/ Organizations for 
knowledge and resource sharing.  

64 
 
• Training oriented towards addressing tangible issues through a project-based 
approach  
• Capacity building in collaboration with Capacity Building Commission  
 
Goal 7: Enhancement in credibility of Statistical System  
MoSPI has taken various steps to enhance the credibility of the Statistical 
System. This is being done by strengthening the coordination with 
Ministries/Departments, States/UTs, enhancing interaction with stakeholders and 
promoting dialogue for better data and also encouraging research and innovation.  
 
a. Strengthening Statistical Coordination with Central Ministries/ Departments 
and States / UTs  
• ISS officers are being re-designated as Statistical Advisors by amendment in 
Service Rules . 
• Role of Statistical Advisers (SAs)/Senior ISS officers in different Ministries has 
been clearly defined for better coordination amongst Ministries/Departments  
• Sensitization workshops of SAs of Central Ministries held to improve 
coordination and to ensure a well-integrated monitoring and data system, with 
focus on data quality and security providing support for creating mechanisms for 
regular data analysis within the Ministry/Department and facilitate informed policy 
decisions.  
• Resources have been provided to more number of Ministries/Departments for 
strengthening of their Statistical Units as per their requirements  
• 09 new Ministries/ Departments have been allocated ISS posts at various level  
• To strengthen their statistical verticals in Ministries, higher level posts of STS 
and JAG are being augmented  
• 28th Conference of Central and State Statistical Organizations (CoCSSO) on 
the theme "Use of Data for Decision Making: Strengthening State Statistical 
Systems” in 2024. The CoCSSO for 2025 is being planned.  
• All India Conferences held at the level of State Ministers and State Principal 
Secretaries have been organized.  
• Strengthening statistical systems of States through financial and technical 
support under the State Statistical Strengthening Scheme  
 
b. Stakeholder Consultations/ Data User Conferences for enhancing data quality  
 
From 2024-25, MoSPI has published its Advance Release Calendar for all 
surveys and statistical products to inform users of the data/reports planned for release 
by MoSPI. All the reports/data releases are being done as per the pre-fixed release 
calendar.  
MoSPI has also been organizing Data User Conference to seek 
inputs/suggestions from academia/researchers/users of data for all data releases. 
Regular engagement with data providers and data users are organized through 
Brainstorming sessions/ Conferences/ Workshops. The following 
sessions/Conferences/Workshops have been organized in the past year:  
• Issue of Non-response in survey by high income groups/gated societies  

65 
 
• Conference with trade groups, associations, and business organizations on 
Upcoming Enterprise Surveys  
• Interaction with Forecasters & Economists of GDP and CPI  
• Estimation of Informal Sector in Gross Domestic Product (GDP)  
• Monitoring Frameworks of Sustainable Development Goals, compilation of 
Environment Accounts, and Gender statistics  
• Conceptual Framework of Gross Domestic Knowledge Product (GDKP) 
Measurement  
• Leveraging Citizen-Generated Data (CGD) for Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) in India  
• Leveraging Non-Conventional Data Sources for Official Statistics  
• Using Alternate Data Sources and Frontier Technologies for Policy Making  
• AI Literacy Workshop  
 
c. Research, Analytics and Innovation  
 
MoSPI has taken steps to promote research, analysis and innovation and has 
created new vertical for undertaking research and analysis in-house. Data Innovation 
(DI) Lab has been set up to promote innovation and adoption of new technologies. 
Research and Analysis Unit has been set up to promote innovate, adoption of emerging 
technologies etc. in field of Official Statistics, to analyse publicly available datasets and 
share findings of analysis for policy inputs.  
 
Data Innovation Lab (DI-Lab)  
• Self-evaluation tool to assess readiness of M/D to adopt emerging technologies 
and Big Data in Official Statistics  
• Self-assessment tool for Websites for Effective Dissemination of Data and for 
Portals for Digital Dissemination of Data  
 
Research and Analysis Division (RAD)  
• Promote innovation, adoption of emerging technologies etc. in field of Official 
Statistics, to analyse publicly available datasets and share findings of analysis for 
policy inputs  
• Collaborate with institutes of repute for undertaking research  
• Measures taken to create awareness about the work of MoSPI and its data 
/reports/publications through print and social media  
• Multiple Hackathons organized for engaging students/Institutes to leverage 
Data Sciences For Official Statistics  
 
Goal 8: Technical Upgradation  
• All surveys undertaken in CAPI mode replacing the pen and paper mode  
• MoSPI launched eSankhyiki in June 2024, for enhanced user experience and 
data accessibility through cutting-edge technology  
• Data Catalogue of around 2300 datasets with  
• Specific metadata and visualization  
• Time series data of key macro indicators with features for filtering, visualizations  
• 135 million records  

66 
 
• Pool of more than 1900+ data visualizations for key products of Ministry  
• Revamped micro-data portal  
• GoIStats Mobile app released in June 2025  
 
Initiatives for Harmonisation of Datasets  
 
7. Assessment tools for website and web-portals  
MoSPI has published and circulated the tools to assess "Institutional Readiness 
for Adoption of Emerging Technologies such as Al, ML and Big Data in Official 
Statistics", "Assessment of Websites for Effective Dissemination of Data", and 
"Assessment of Portals for Digital Dissemination of Data". This is a tool for improving 
the practices in these sectors.  
 
8. Using empanelled survey agencies  
MoSPI, in March, 2025, empanelled 14 (fourteen) Survey Institutions for 
conducting sample surveys 'on Socio Economic indicators for Government of  
India. The list of the empanelled Survey Institutions along with the Grade, Sectoral 
Experience in Field Surveys, and Experience in Types of Surveys has been placed in 
the public domain. M/Ds may use these agencies to conduct various surveys which are 
not covered by MoSPI in their Calendar of surveys during 2025-27.  
 
9. Leverage the use of the services of Statistical Advisors  
The Role of Statistical Advisors (SAS) posted in the Ministry/Departments has 
been laid down in August 2024, wherein they have been advised to undertake all data 
related work, including the NMDS, SQAF, IT, coordination with MoSPI etc. Further, 
Statistical Advisors have been advised to be integrated with Statistics vertical of the 
Data Strategy Unit (DSU) established in Ministry/Departments.  
 
10. e-Sankhyiki Portal  
MoSPI launched e-Sankhyiki portal, a user centric data portal which facilitates 
use and reuse of information and consists of three modules viz. Data Catalogue 
module, Macro Indicators module and the Economic Census. It currently consists of 
more than 135 million records across the three modules. M/Ds can help putting in more 
data through API in the e-Sankhyiki Portal for use by the people.  
 
11. Data Users Conference  
The Data User Conferences are organized on the statistical products of the 
MoSPI, including surveys and various macro-economic indicators. M/Ds are invited to 
participate and contribute in such Data User Conferences.  
 
  

67 
 
Annexure B 
Comparative Table of Statistical Systems in various countries 
 
Country NSO  Commission/ 
Authority  
Key Functions of 
Commission/Authority  
Nature of Body  
Countries where Commission set up through an Act 
UK  Office for National 
Statistics (ONS)  
UK Statistics 
Authority (UKSA)  
Regulates statistics, 
oversees ONS, ensures 
transparency & public 
trust  
Independent statutory body directly 
reporting to UK Parliament  
Switzerland  Federal Statistical 
Office  
Committee for 
Federal Statistics  
Advises the Federal 
Council and the federal 
statistics generators on 
important issues related 
to federal statistical 
bodies  
Article 13 of the Federal Statistics Act 
stipulates the introduction of a Federal 
Statistics Committee by the Federal 
Council. The Federal Department of 
Home Affairs appoints members to the 
Federal Statistics Committee.  
Australia  Australian Bureau of 
Statistics (ABS)  
Australian 
Statistics Advisory 
Council (ASAC)  
Key advisory body to the 
Minister and the 
Australian Bureau of 
Statistics (ABS) on 
statistical services.  
Established in 1975 under the 
authority of the Australian Bureau of 
Statistics Act 1975  
Canada  Statistics Canada  National Statistics 
Council  
NSC advises the Chief 
Statistician on issues of 
statistical policy and 
priorities.  
On December 12, 2017, the Act to 
amend the Statistics Act received 
Royal Assent, providing the authority 
for the Government of Canada to 
establish the Canadian Statistics 
Advisory Council.  
Other Countries 
Netherlands  Central Bureau of 
Statistics 
(internationally 
known as Statistics 
Netherlands)  
Central 
Commission for 
Statistics  
The Central Commission 
for Statistics (CCS) is an 
independent 
administrative body 
without corporate rights 
that, under the Act on the 
Central Bureau of 
Statistics (Statistics 
Netherlands) of 2003, is 
assigned a number of 
tasks related to the 
Statistics Netherlands 
and the provision of 
official statistics for 
central government.  
Members appointed by the Minister of 
Economic Affairs on recommendations 
by the Commission  
USA  Different statistical 
agencies including 
Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, Census  
-- In the U.S. decentralized statistical system, authority for 
statistics is in the separate statutes for each agency.  
 
  

68 
 
Appendix – I 
 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th January, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1300 
hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
5. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
6. Thiru Arun Nehru 
7.  Shri N. K. Premachandran 
8. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
9. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
10. Shri Manish Tewari 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13 Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
14. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
     
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 
1. Dr. Saurabh Garg, Secretary 
2. Smt. Geeta Singh Rathore, DG (NSS) 
3. Shri Narender Kumar Santoshi, DG (CS) 
4. Shri P.R Meshram, DG (DG)  
5. Smt. Puja Singh Mandol, AS (PI)  
6. Shri Tanweer Qamar Mohammad, JS (Admin) 

69 
 
7. Shri  Anindya Banerjee, DDG 
8. Shri Arindam Modak, DDG (PI) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After customary introduction, the Ministry gave a PowerPoint 
Presentation on the background and mandate of the National Statistical Commission. 
The Ministry emphasized upon the overview of Indian Statistical System and monitoring 
of functioning and reform initiatives of MoSPI by NSC. The Ministry briefed the 
Committee about administrative statistics, sample surveys, derived statistics, non official 
data institutional structures and mechanism, capacity building, enhancement of 
credibility of the statistical system and overall technical up-gradation in data 
management and sharing. The subsequent issues discussed include Data Innovation 
Lab, collaboration with Ministries, States, UTs and international institutions, survey on 
AYUSH, short and medium term strategies for data collection, development of 
mechanism to capture economic activities and services of unorganized sector, Annual 
Survey of Unincorporated Sector and Services Sector Enterprises, inclusion of GST 
data in GDP calculations. The Members asked their queries on exercise over diverse 
landscape of data dissemination, National Statistical Institute, integrity and reliability of 
data, sample size of primary data, variations among data collected, use of census data 
as primary source with regard to derivative data, flaws in socio economic data, 
statistical data on unemployment, authority of NSC to monitor issues regarding 
contradictory data, revision of GDP Base Year, credibility of economic data, delayed 
Economic Census,  involvement of research institutes for collecting data, budget 
allocation, procedure adopted for compilation and dissemination of data, fixation of 
indicators for performance review, evolving a plan for creation of an App to ask 
questions,  focusing on Aspirational Districts for collection of data, shortfall in fund 
utilization, telecom survey, survey on disabled persons, specific indicator list to measure 
progress towards achieving of SDGs, overlap of data etc.  
 
3. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members and the 
Chairperson then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 

70 
 
Members which could not be readily replied by them during the discussion within two 
weeks’ time to the Secretariat.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
* * * 

71 
 
Appendix-II 
Minutes of the Thirty First Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti 
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
5. Shri K. Gopinath 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Kishori Lal 
8. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
9. Thiru Arun Nehru 
10. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
11. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
12. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
13. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
14. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
15. Shri Manish Tewari 
16. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
17. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
18. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
19. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
20. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
21. Shri Sanjay Seth 
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
23. Smt. Darshana Singh 
24. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
25. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
     

72 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 
1. Dr. Saurabh Garg, Secretary 
2. Shri. Narender Kumar Santoshi, DG(CS) 
3. Shri. P.R Meshram, DG (DG) 
4. Ms. Puja Singh Mandol, AS(PI) 
5. Shri. S C Malik, ADG(SSD) 
6. Dr. Dalip Singh, ADG(ESD) 
7. Shri. Sanjay, ADG(NAD) 
8. Shri. Supreet Singh Gulati, JS(Admin.) 
9. Shri. C F Joseph, DDG (MPLADS) 
10. Shri. Brijendra Singh, DDG(NAD) 
11. Ms. Ankita Singh, DDG(ESD) 
12. Ms. Deepti Srivastava, DDG(PSD) 
13. Shri MS Subramanya Rao, DDG(CQCD) 
14. Shri. Siljo V.K,  DDG(NSC) 
15. Smt. Anindita Sinharay, DDG(RAU) 
16. Shri. Antony Cyriac, Economic Advisor 
 
PART I 
 
2.    XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
PART II 
 
3.    XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
  

73 
 
PART III 
 
4.     After that, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to the 
sitting of the Committee. After customary introduction, the Ministry gave a PowerPoint 
Presentation on the subject ‘Macroeconomic and Social Sector Indicators of the 
Economy and Initiatives by MOSPI’. The Ministry elaborated its major activities; release 
of major macroeconomic and social sector indicators complied by Ministry;  broad 
sectors of macroeconomic indicators such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 
Consumer Price Index (CPI), Index of Industrial Production (IIP) and social sector 
indicators related to Sustainable Development Goals (SGDs); growth of India’s GDP in 
last decade; international comparison of GDP and PPP from 2018 onwards; base 
revision of GDP; new initiatives undertaken in current base revision; importance of 
robust state level accounts; key uses of CPI data;  groups and sub-groups under CPI; 
trend of inflation rate based on CPI; progress related to base revision in CPI; planned 
improvements in the new series of IIP data, trends in IIP and its base revision; 
development of National Indicator Framework (NIF) to measure and monitor the SDGs; 
technical support for State and sub State level Indicator frameworks, publications on 
social sector indicators; inputs from National Sample Survey (NSS) for compilation of 
Macroeconomic Indicators; flagship socio economic surveys of MOSPI; improvements 
in Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS);  telecom survey; major initiatives taken in 
Infrastructure Project Monitoring Division (IPMD); revamping of OCMS portal to 
PAIMANA etc. The Members asked their queries about adequate autonomy and 
authority of NSC to enforce its recommendations; measures taken by Government to 
address the disparity between GDP and employment growth; need for a permanent 
‘Data Portal for Fiscal Federalism’; challenges in data collection from higher income 
sections and gated societies and measures taken to address this issue;  fiscal indicators 
deficit debt revenue; India’s current account and foreign reserves; trends of Gross 
Capital Formation and Private Investment; variations between the sample survey data 
collected by the different Government and private entities; mandate of NSC to lay down 
national quality standards; suggestions to include Gross National Happiness Index akin 
to Bhutan; details of regular statistical audits conducted by NSC; reasons for delay in 
setting up of a national child index; use of statistical data in shaping policies to reduce 

74 
 
unemployment among the higher-educated; current legal, financial, and institutional 
status of NSC and reforms that are needed to improve its autonomy etc.  
 
5. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members and the 
Chairperson then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation to furnish written replies to the points raised by the 
Members which could not be readily replied by them during the discussion upto 11 
August, 2025 to the Secretariat.  
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
* * * 

75 
 
Appendix-III 
Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2025-26). 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26th November, 2025 from 1230 hrs. to 
1310 hrs in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
3. Shri Kishori Lal  
4. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
5. Thiru Arun Nehru  
6. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
7. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
8. Shri Manish Tewari  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
10. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
12. Shri Sanjay Seth  
13. Smt. Darshana Singh  
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
15. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja  - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana  - Deputy Secretary 
 3. Shri T. Mathivanan   - Deputy Secretary 
  
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for 
consideration and adoption: 

76 
 
i. Twenty-Seventh Report on ‘Performance review of National Statistical 
Commission (NSC)’; and  
ii. Twenty-Eighth Report on ‘Review of working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
and Emerging Issues’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament in the upcoming Winter Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
* * * 
 
 