 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance 
on the subject ‘Performance Review of National Statistical Commission (NSC)’ of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation] 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
   NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
38 

ii 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Finance 
on the subject ‘Performance Review of National Statistical Commission (NSC)’ of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation] 
 
 
       Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 August, 2026 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 August, 2026 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                      iv 
Introduction                                                                                                                    v 
 
Page No. 
Chapter-I Report  1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
11 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
24 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
25 
Chapter-V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited  
29 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06 August, 
2026 
30 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations Contained in the Twenty-
Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Performance Review of 
National Statistical Commission (NSC)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde*  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai#  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Manish Kumar  Under Secretary 
5.  Smt. Mradula Dubey Assistant Committee Officer 
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee vice Smt. Darshana Singh w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 02 April 2026 and re-nominated as Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-Eighth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh 
Report of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance Review 
of National Statistical Commission’ of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
 
2. The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on 02 December, 2025.  The Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations were received from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation on 27 February, 2026.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 06 
August, 2026.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
06 August, 2026      
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Seventh 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Performance Review of National Statistical 
Commission (NSC)’ of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation which was 
presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 02 December, 2025.  
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
six recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and categorized 
as follows: 
 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2,3,4,5 and 6  
       (Total: 5) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
                  (Total: NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
Recommendation No.  1 
       (Total : 1)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL                  (Total: NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
1.3.  The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 

2 
 
1.4.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comment. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Provision of statutory authority to NSC and empowering it as the nodal national body 
for statistics  
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee acknowledge that the vast information generated across various 
sectors has the power to reveal new insights and address complex societal issues. 
The real value of this data lies in accurate interpretation and effective application, 
which is crucial for informed policy-making, resource management, and sustainable 
development. The Committee observe that a strong, independent statistical authority 
is essential for ensuring public trust in official statistics. The Rangarajan Commission 
(2000) recommended creating a permanent, statutory body for official statistics, but 
the National Statistical Commission (NSC), established in 2005, was never given this 
legislative framework. The Committee further observe that the existence of different 
data producers, including a growing number of private data providers, creates the 
possibility of discrepancies between their statistical estimates and those published by 
the NSC, particularly for key indicators like GDP. These potential inconsistencies, 
which can undermine stakeholder confidence, are largely a result of the NSC's lack of 
statutory authority to enforce uniform standards and methodologies across all data 
producers, including those in the private sector. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the National Statistical Commission (NSC) 
be established as the nodal and autonomous body for all core statistical activities, with 
full statutory backing. This empowerment would allow the NSC to prescribe and 
coordinate statistical standards and methodologies for both government and private 
sector data producers. To achieve this, the Committee desire that the NSC constitutes 
a permanent technical committee, including representatives from private statistical 
agencies, academia, and industry experts. The goal is to align definitions, 
methodologies, and data sources for critical economic and social indicators. The NSC 
should also develop a comprehensive National Statistical Standards Framework, 
similar the accounting standards set by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
(ICAI), to harmonize data collection procedures, sampling designs, and reporting 
protocols. The Committee further recommend institutionalizing regular data sharing, 
joint methodological reviews, and publishing reconciliation reports to explain and 
minimize differences between official and private sector estimates. By granting the 
NSC statutory authority, the credibility, comparability, and reliability of India's official 
statistics will be significantly improved, strengthening evidence-based policy decisions 
and public trust.” 
 

3 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
has stated as under:- 
“The National Statistical Commission (NSC) is chaired by an eminent statistician and 
its four members have specialization and experience in specified statistical and allied 
fields. The Chairman and Members of the National Statistical Commission are 
selected on the basis of the recommendations of a Search Committee duly constituted 
by the Government of India for the purpose, from time to time. 
 
As per provisions of Resolution dated 1 June 2005, the Commission has the requisite 
autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. The Commission also 
has the authority to formulate its short and long term programmes. The NSC has 
evolved necessary measures and mechanism by constituting professional 
committees, expert committees and working groups to assist the Commission on 
various technical issues. 
 
The Steering Committee for National Sample Surveys, which is chaired by the 
Chairperson of the NSC, comprises of subject-matter experts as well as the 
representatives from Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
Department of Economic Affairs, Reserve Bank of India, NITI Aayog and State 
Governments. The Steering Committee of NSC, inter alia, reviews the extant 
framework and addresses the issue from time to time on the subject results, 
methodology, questionnaire, sampling frame, sampling design, concepts and 
definitions, surveys instruments etc. related to all National Sample Surveys.  
Ministries/ Departments of the Central Government may submit their proposal or 
apprise to the Commission regarding statistical activity envisaged or being undertaken 
by them. The Commission from time to time holds interactive sessions with State 
Governments on their statistical systems and activities.  
 
In addition, the NSC functions as the Oversight Body and periodically review the 
progress of the roadmap on ‘Strengthening the Indian National Statistical System’. 
The representatives of Reserve Bank of India and Department of Economic Affairs 
participate in these reviews.  
 
The National Statistical Commission performs various functions including  
 
1. Identifying the core statistics, which are of national importance and are critical to 
the development of the economy;  
2. Constituting professional committees or working groups to assist the Commission 
on various technical issues 
3. Evolving standard statistical concepts, definitions, classifications and 
methodologies in different areas in statistics and lay down national quality 
standards on core statistics;  
4. Evolving national strategies for the collection, tabulation and dissemination of core 

4 
 
statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets;  
5. Evolving national strategies for human resource development on official statistics 
including information technology and communication needs of the statistical 
system;  
6. Evolving measures for effective co-ordination with State Governments, Union 
Territory Administrations and between Ministries, Departments and other agencies 
of the Central Government on statistical activities;  
7. Exercising statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and 
integrity of the statistical products, making recommendations to the Central 
Government or any State Government regarding measures to effectively 
implement the standards, strategies and other measures; and  
8. Reviewing the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down 
policies, standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced 
performance. 
 
The Commission has power to require production of any document before it which 
serve statistical purposes, require statistical agencies and institutions to provide 
details of statistical activities, including concepts and definitions used, methodologies 
followed, quality standards adopted, sampling and non-sampling errors, etc., in 
respect of core statistics, and require attendance of any person including any public 
servant on matters connected with core statistics and issuing notices for the 
examination of witnesses and documents or any matters connected with core 
statistics. 
 
The Commission prepares its Annual Report for each financial year giving a full 
account of its activities during the financial year and forwards the same to the Central 
Government. The Annual Report and the Action Taken Report on the 
recommendations of the Commission are laid before each House of Parliament. 
The NSC provides guidance and prescribe and coordinate statistical standards and 
methodologies for the statistical system through the mechanism of regular reviews 
and also through technical Committees such as the Steering Committee and other 
expert Committees. The data harmonization initiatives undertaken by the MoSPI which 
mark a decisive shift toward a more coherent, transparent, and integrated national 
data ecosystem are reviewed and guided by the NSC. Institutionalizing these 
mechanisms would enable seamless data flows across the entire data lifecycle, from 
collection to dissemination, and foster greater coherence, reliability, and policy 
relevance among diverse statistical outputs.” 
 
  

5 
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended that the National Statistical Commission 
(NSC) be established as the nodal and autonomous body for all core statistical 
activities, with full statutory backing. The Committee had further recommended to 
constitute a permanent technical committee to align methodologies for data 
collection. The Committee had also recommended to develop a comprehensive 
National Statistical Standards Framework, similar to the accounting standards set by 
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), to harmonize data collection 
procedures, sampling designs, and reporting protocols. 
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry highlighting the existing 
institutional framework, functions and powers of the National Statistical Commission 
and its role in evolving statistical standards, methodologies and coordination 
mechanisms. The Committee also note the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry for 
data harmonisation through various technical committees. However, the Ministry has 
not specifically addressed the Committee's recommendation regarding the grant of 
statutory status to the National Statistical Commission. Further, no specific 
information has been furnished regarding the development of a comprehensive 
National Statistical Standards Framework, as recommended by the Committee. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the feasibility of 
granting statutory status to the National Statistical Commission may be examined so 
as to strengthen its role as the nodal body for core statistical activities in the country. 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry take necessary steps towards 
development of a comprehensive National Statistical Standards Framework and keep 
the Committee apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
NSC Statistical Audits: The Backbone of Reliable Data 
1.8 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the quality and reliability of official statistics are vital for 
effective policymaking and public trust. The Committee observe that methodological 

6 
 
gaps and a lack of standards can cause inconsistencies in statistical outputs, and that 
other countries, like the UK, have established regular statistical audit processes for 
quality assurance. While the National Statistical Commission (NSC) is mandated to 
perform statistical audits, its only notable action was an audit of the Index of Industrial 
Production (IIP) in 2011. In response to questions about this limited activity, the 
Ministry highlighted several recent efforts. These include the circulation of the 
Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF) in April 2025, which is based on 
the UN framework and aims to help various government bodies assess and improve 
their data quality. The Ministry also informed that the NSC is aware of the new 
statistical tools and is actively overseeing the base revision for key indicators like 
GDP, IIP, and CPI, which is planned for adoption in early 2026. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the NSC build on these efforts by formalizing a Statistical 
Audit function. This function should conduct periodic, comprehensive reviews of 
statistical processes, data collection methods, and outputs across both government 
and private agencies. The NSC should also develop a standardized audit framework 
and guidelines, aligning them with international best practices. This framework should 
define the audit's scope to include critical aspects like methodology compliance, data 
validation, and sampling integrity. The Committee further recommend that audit 
findings be published in transparent reports that identify weaknesses, propose 
remedial actions, and track their implementation. This will ensure greater consistency 
and accuracy in official statistics, enhance transparency and trust among data users, 
and allow for the proactive correction of data quality issues. The institutionalization of 
this audit function will empower the NSC to build a sustainable and credible statistical 
system for the nation.” 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
has submitted as under:- 
 “With regard to statistical audit, it was, in past, suggested to National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) that India should start thinking on the development of its own 
National Quality Assurance Framework, benefiting from its participation in the current 
deliberations of UN Statistical Commission and the outcome of the efforts of the 
United Nations Expert Group on National Quality Assurance Frameworks and making 
use of the mandate of the National Statistical Commission. Such a National Quality 
Assurance Framework, if and when developed by India, will provide the umbrella to 
the NSC for conducting statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality 
and integrity of the statistical products. 
MoSPI prepared and circulated the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF) 
in April 2025. SQAF, based on United Nations Quality Assurance Framework 2019, 
lays down quality dimensions to facilitate and ensure effective management of quality 
in the National Statistical System and its processes and products. The Ministries/ 
Departments/ States/ UTs are required to assess their data/statistical products and 
processes generated by them. The SQAF rests upon 19 Principles and 85 
requirements. The assessment will help each Ministry/Department/State/UT in 
identifying and prioritise the gaps to improve data quality. The Statistical Quality 

7 
 
Assessment Framework prepared by MoSPI was presented before the National 
Statistical Commission. 
With the SQAF (basic framework) in place, the procedural aspect of statistical audit 
may be examined by NSC in due course.  
NSC has been briefed about various statistical products viz. National Metadata 
Structure, Compilation of unique identifiers, Compilation of national and international 
classification, Compendium of datasets and registries in India and Assessment tools 
developed by MoSPI. There is mechanism put in place where NSC guides on 
definitional divergence of data. NSC is also overseeing the current exercise of base 
revision for GDP , IIP and CPI, which is to be adopted during Feb to May 2026.”  
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended to formalize a Statistical Audit function to 
conduct periodic, comprehensive reviews of statistical processes, develop a 
standardized audit framework aligned with international best practices and publish 
audit reports to identify weaknesses, propose remedial actions and track their 
implementation. 
 The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the Statistical Quality 
Assessment Framework (SQAF), based on the United Nations Quality Assurance 
Framework, 2019 has been prepared and circulated to facilitate assessment of the 
quality of statistical products and processes by the 
Ministries/Departments/States/UTs. The Committee further note that the Framework, 
which rests upon 19 Principles and 85 Requirements, is intended to assist the 
concerned Ministries/Departments/States/UTs in identifying and prioritising gaps for 
improving the quality of official statistics. The Committee also note that the Statistical 
Quality Assessment Basic Framework has been placed before the National Statistical 
Commission. 
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry towards 
strengthening the quality assurance framework through the preparation and 
circulation of the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF). The Committee 
also note the Ministry's submission that the procedural aspects of statistical audit 
would be examined by the National Statistical Commission in due course. The 
Committee, however, reiterate their recommendation that the Statistical Audit function 
may be institutionalised by developing a comprehensive audit framework in line with 
international best practices and by putting in place a mechanism for periodic 

8 
 
statistical audits, at the earliest. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the 
progress made in operationalising the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework 
(SQAF) and the further action taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Integrating Artificial Intelligence into the National Statistical System and Capacity 
Building 
 
1.11 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s proactive approach towards integrating 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) within the National Statistical System (NSS) as part of the 
broader IT modernization efforts spearheaded by the Data Innovation (DI) Lab. The 
use of AI holds immense promise for enhancing data collection, processing, and 
analysis by improving efficiency, accuracy, and timeliness. This aligns well with the 
Ministry’s goal of leveraging emerging technologies such as AI, big data, and real-time 
analytics to modernize statistical operations. However, the Committee observe that 
alongside technological integration, there is a pressing need to build the necessary 
capacity within the NSS. This includes developing specialized skills in AI and data 
science among personnel at all levels, ensuring that the workforce is well-equipped to 
implement and manage AI-driven solutions effectively and ethically. The Committee 
also highlight the importance of establishing clear operational guidelines, ethical 
frameworks, and oversight mechanisms to govern the use of AI, particularly given the 
sensitive nature of statistical data. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry prioritize the development and 
implementation of a comprehensive AI integration strategy within the NSS. This 
strategy should focus on capacity building through targeted training programs, 
collaboration with academic and research institutions, and continuous skill 
development. Further, the Ministry should institutionalize robust ethical and privacy 
standards specific to AI applications, ensuring compliance with existing laws such as 
the Collection of Statistics Act, 2008, and the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 
2023. To promote transparency and stakeholder engagement, the Committee also 
urge the Ministry to periodically publish detailed reports on AI adoption progress, its 
impact on data quality and efforts made towards workforce capacity building 
programmes.” 
 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
has stated as under:- 

9 
 
"Data Innovation Lab focuses on experimentation with alternative sources of 
emerging technology by creating an ecosystem of experimentation. Currently, MoUs 
have been signed with 17 premium academic institutions of the country, which 
include IITs/IIMs/IIITs. 12 use cases have been identified and out of these, 5 use 
cases are in various stages of implementation in collaboration with StartUps/ 
Academia or done in-house including cases related to NS. The Data Innovation Lab 
portal (https://datainnovation.mospi.gov.in/home) has also been made operational in 
November, 2025, wherein details regarding the collaborations made with different 
Academic institutions, the pilots undertaken in the field of Official Statistics, the 
repository of Use Cases, etc. are made available. Also, MoSPI has published an e-
book on "Use cases of data Science and Al in Official Statistics", which is available 
on https://datainnovation.mospi.gov.in/home. One Hackathon has been successfully 
conducted with IIT Gandhinagar in March, 2025. Another Hackathon is on-going, in 
collaboration with Innovation Cell of Ministry of Education, which started off in July, 
2025. Govt of India has notified the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 in 
November, 2025. MoSPI is in the process of identification of roles and responsibility 
for accordance to DPDP Rules, 2025.  
MoSPI has also introduced the Model Context Protocol (MCP) as an initiative to 
enhance access to official statistics. MoSPI MCP acts as a universal adapter that 
securely connects AI agents directly to the eSankhyiki portal. The protocol is 
designed for seamless integration. Any AI system compatible with MCP can integrate 
with MoSPI MCP in just a few simple steps, enabling smooth interoperability across 
platforms. This ensures that researchers, policymakers, analysts, and other 
stakeholders can access official statistics within their existing AI environments 
without disruption. 
MoSPI MCP significantly simplifies data discovery by enabling users to move from 
questions to actionable insights within seconds. It facilitates cross-sectoral analysis, 
allowing comparison and alignment of multiple datasets—such as CPI and WPI—
through a single prompt. The system also enables users to generate instant 
visualizations from natural language prompts, transforming queries into plots without 
the need for coding. Additionally, it provides real-time access to updated official 
statistics, ensuring that users always work with the latest available data.” 
 
1.13 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry formulate a comprehensive 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) integration strategy within the National Statistical System, 
with particular emphasis on capacity building through targeted training programmes, 
collaboration with academic and research institutions and continuous skill 
development. The Committee had also recommended that periodic reports on AI 
adoption, its impact on data quality and workforce capacity building be published. 
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry highlighting the initiatives 
undertaken through the Data Innovation Lab, collaborations with academic 

10 
 
institutions, implementation of various AI-based use cases, operationalisation of the 
Model Context Protocol (MCP) and publication of an e-book on the use of Data 
Science and AI in Official Statistics. The Committee appreciate these initiatives 
towards leveraging emerging technologies for strengthening the statistical system. 
However, the Ministry has not specifically addressed the Committee's 
recommendations regarding formulation of a comprehensive AI integration strategy 
focused on capacity building and publication of periodic reports on AI adoption and 
its impact. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that a comprehensive 
AI integration strategy for the National Statistical System may be developed with due 
emphasis on institutional capacity building through targeted training programmes and 
continuous skill development. The Committee also reiterate their recommendation that 
periodic reports on AI adoption, its impact on data quality and workforce capacity 
building may be published and desire to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard.  
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
NSC Statistical Audits: The Backbone of Reliable Data 
 The Committee note that the quality and reliability of official statistics are vital for 
effective policymaking and public trust. The Committee observe that methodological gaps 
and a lack of standards can cause inconsistencies in statistical outputs, and that other 
countries, like the UK, have established regular statistical audit processes for quality 
assurance. While the National Statistical Commission (NSC) is mandated to perform 
statistical audits, its only notable action was an audit of the Index of Industrial Production 
(IIP) in 2011. In response to questions about this limited activity, the Ministry highlighted 
several recent efforts. These include the circulation of the Statistical Quality Assessment 
Framework (SQAF) in April 2025, which is based on the UN framework and aims to help 
various government bodies assess and improve their data quality. The Ministry also informed 
that the NSC is aware of the new statistical tools and is actively overseeing the base revision 
for key indicators like GDP, IIP, and CPI, which is planned for adoption in early 2026. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the NSC build on these efforts by formalizing a 
Statistical Audit function. This function should conduct periodic, comprehensive reviews of 
statistical processes, data collection methods, and outputs across both government and 
private agencies. The NSC should also develop a standardized audit framework and 
guidelines, aligning them with international best practices. This framework should define the 
audit's scope to include critical aspects like methodology compliance, data validation, and 
sampling integrity. The Committee further recommend that audit findings be published in 
transparent reports that identify weaknesses, propose remedial actions, and track their 
implementation. This will ensure greater consistency and accuracy in official statistics, 
enhance transparency and trust among data users, and allow for the proactive correction of 
data quality issues. The institutionalization of this audit function will empower the NSC to 
build a sustainable and credible statistical system for the nation. 
 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to statistical audit, it was, in past, suggested to National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) that India should start thinking on the development of its own National 
Quality Assurance Framework, benefiting from its participation in the current deliberations of 
UN Statistical Commission and the outcome of the efforts of the United Nations Expert 
Group on National Quality Assurance Frameworks and making use of the mandate of the 
National Statistical Commission. Such a National Quality Assurance Framework, if and 
when developed by India, will provide the umbrella to the NSC for conducting statistical 
audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and integrity of the statistical products. 
MoSPI prepared and circulated the Statistical Quality Assessment Framework 
(SQAF) in April 2025. SQAF, based on United Nations Quality Assurance Framework 2019, 
lays down quality dimensions to facilitate and ensure effective management of quality in the 
National Statistical System and its processes and products. The Ministries/ Departments/ 
States/ UTs are required to assess their data/statistical products and processes generated 
by them. The SQAF rests upon 19 Principles and 85 requirements. The assessment will 
help each Ministry/Department/State/UT in identifying and prioritise the gaps to improve 
data quality. The Statistical Quality Assessment Framework prepared by MoSPI was 
presented before the National Statistical Commission. 
With the SQAF (basic framework) in place, the procedural aspect of statistical audit 
may be examined by NSC in due course.  
NSC has been briefed about various statistical products viz. National Metadata 
Structure, Compilation of unique identifiers, Compilation of national and international 
classification, Compendium of datasets and registries in India and Assessment tools 
developed by MoSPI. There is mechanism put in place where NSC guides on definitional 
divergence of data. NSC is also overseeing the current exercise of base revision for GDP, 
IIP and CPI, which is to be adopted during Feb to May 2026.  
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.  H-11011/03/2024-25-Parl. Cell (E-74050) dated 27.02.2026] 
        
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I)  
 
 

13 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
GDP Data and Policy Formulation 
 
The Committee assert that official statistics are a public good and must be grounded 
in principles of professional independence, impartiality, and transparency. Despite India's 
agrarian history, the informal or unorganized sector now accounts for over 60% of the 
economy, making its economic contribution substantial. The Committee acknowledge that 
the National Statistical Office (NSO) generates vital macroeconomic indicators such as 
GDP, IIP, and CPI, and a base year revision is currently underway to refine their 
methodologies. The Committee emphasize that complete and accurate data are 
indispensable for effective policymaking, as deficiencies can create a policy void and harm 
the economy. Thus, a comprehensive reflection of all economic activities and services, 
including those within the informal sector, is imperative for a clear and accurate 
understanding of the economic landscape. 
The Committee, therefore, advocate for the refinement of GDP data to precisely 
capture all economic activity, particularly within the informal sector. Furthermore, the 
Committee desire for the establishment of a mechanism to explore novel administrative 
statistics, which would facilitate the generation of high-frequency data. Such an initiative 
would provide more robust inputs for the GDP, IIP, and CPI indices. By ensuring a more 
holistic representation of the unorganized and informal sectors, these refined GDP figures 
will empower policymakers to create interventions that are accurately aligned with the 
nation's economic realities. 
Reply of the Government 
The exercise of the base revision of the current GDP series has already been initiated 
and for this purpose an Advisory Committee on National Accounts Statistics (ACNAS) has 
been constituted. In the first meeting of ACNAS, the FY 2022-23 has been decided as the 
new base year for the revised series of National Accounts Statistics. It has also been decided 
that the new series of National Accounts Statistics would be released on 27 February 2026. 
The Sub-Committees have been formed under ACNAS to examine various aspects of 
rebasing exercise, such as new data sources, methodological changes, use of deflators etc. 

14 
 
The base revision will cover use of new/alternative data sources, improve methodology for 
estimation of both current and constant price estimates. 
To enhance coverage and accuracy, Ministry has undertaken the following measures: 
a.  Improving the compilation of Private Corporate by better segregation of activities in 
multi-activity enterprises, improving coverage of LLPs. 
b.  Better and dynamic coverage of household/unorganized sector by incorporating 
ASUSE and PLFS data.  
c.  Use of administrative data from different sources, primarily GST, eVahan data, PFMS, 
Petroleum & Gas sector data, etc. in estimation as well as triangulation. 
d.  Use of results available through studies related to fisheries, milk, fodder, construction, 
road transport etc. 
e.  Making the rates and ratios dynamic based on ASI, ASUSE and other sources, which 
used to be fixed on base year results. 
f.  Use of better method of deflation. Manufacturing is likely to have double deflation and 
the revised series will do away with single deflation entirely. Wherever, double deflation is not 
feasible, single/volume extrapolation method will be used. 
g.  The revised series will have much better synchronization between Production and 
Expenditure side estimates as we intend to integrate the compilation in Supply and Use 
Table framework.      
These initiatives are expected to provide a more comprehensive reflection of all economic 
activities, particularly within the informal and unorganized sectors, thereby enabling more 
robust, timely, and evidence-based policymaking. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.  H-11011/03/2024-25-Parl. Cell (E-74050) dated 27.02.2026] 
 
  

15 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
Harmonizing Data Discrepancies and Overlap 
 The Committee observe that there are different instrumentalities of the Government 
putting out data on the same subject causing discrepancies and instances of data overlap 
between Indian Statistical Institute, NSC, MoSPI and other Ministries and this continue to 
persist due to differences in set of samples, data collection and processing, resulting in 
misleading differences in outcomes of data analysis and results. The Committee have been 
apprised that to address the issue, MOSPI has recently advised the Ministry/Departments to 
review their data collection mechanism so as to harmonize all datasets produced already or 
are being produced, through all possible data collection venues in the Government. The 
Committee have also been apprised that metadata uniformity guidelines have been issued to 
Ministries for publication of data. The Committee are of the opinion that the issue of data 
overlap should be addressed at the earliest by making sincere efforts for accuracy and 
reliability of data. Also, the Committee recommend the synchronization and integration of all 
statistical activities including the publication of various indices to facilitate comprehensive 
analysis and support well-informed decision-making. 
Reply of the Government 
As part of the statistical reform initiatives, MoSPI has taken various measures towards 
harmonisation of datasets. These have been presented before the Commission for their 
guidance. In their capacity as the Oversight Body for monitoring the roadmap for statistical 
reforms, NSC also monitors progress of implementation of recommendations under the 
reform initiatives from time to time. These measures are as follows: 
a. A Compendium of 257 datasets and registries has been prepared by MoSPI based on 
the inputs received from M/Ds. M/Ds would need to prioritize the implementation strategy 
for the data related initiatives to improve data quality. 
b. In June 2025, MoSPI circulated National Metadata Structure (NMDS 2.0) among the 
State and UT Governments with the objective of promoting a uniform reporting structure 
for referential metadata, in line with that followed by Central Ministries/Departments, who 
are encouraged to actively use the platform for populating NMDS-compliant metadata 
corresponding to the datasets they generate and disseminate in the public domain. 

16 
 
Through NMDS 2.0, States/UTs are encouraged to disseminate datasets generated 
through censuses, surveys, administrative records, and other sources in NMDS 2.0–
compliant, machine-readable formats, wherever feasible. This initiative seeks to bring a 
wider range of stakeholders and administrative datasets into the official statistical domain, 
thereby ensuring the completeness, consistency, comparability, and interoperability of 
national metadata holdings.  
c. To support consistency across datasets, a consolidated repository of 10 national and 
87 international classification standards has been compiled and circulated to all 
Ministries/Departments. Ministries and Departments have been advised to align their data 
systems with these standards for better comparability and sectoral coherence. 
d. MoSPl has circulated a revised list of unique identifiers in April 2025 to 
Ministry/Departments with a request to integrate at least one of listed unique identifiers in 
the data sets maintained by them. 
e. Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF) has been introduced to serve as a 
benchmark for assessing statistical products and processes. It has been circulated to 
Ministries /Departments and State/UT Governments and encouraged them to evaluate all 
their statistical outputs against the standards. 
f. An institutional mechanism for reconciliation of divergent datasets has been 
established. Central Ministries/Departments/Organizations and State/UT Departments/ 
Organizations may make references relating to data/definitional divergences to NSO, 
MoSPI for resolution. In this context, definition of Kutcha/ Pucca housing structure being 
used in various surveys has been harmonised this year with the approval of National 
Statistical Commission.  
g. With regard to ‘harmonize data collection procedures, sampling designs, and reporting 
protocols’, survey instruments for all Household and Enterprise surveys conducted by 
MoSPI are deliberated in detail in the Technical Advisory Group (TAG) and Steering 
Committee (SC) before their finalization. TAG and SC comprise of experts from 
academia, representatives from stakeholders and line ministries. Deliberations held in 
these expert groups ensures that set of well aligned definitions and methodologies are 
followed in the surveys conducted by MoSPI.  
h. MoSPI brings out data, reports and publications, schedule of which has been laid down in 
an Advance Release Calendar published in the website. Ministries/ 

17 
 
Departments/States/ UTs have been requested to prepare their respective Advance 
Release Calendars (ARCs) for the statistical products/surveys to be published by 
November every year.  
i. The Role of Statistical Advisors posted in the Ministry/Departments has been laid down 
in August 2024, wherein they have been advised to undertake all data related work, 
including the NMDS, SQAF, IT, coordination with MoSPI etc. Statistical Advisors have 
been advised to be integrated with Statistics vertical of the Data Strategy Unit (DSU) 
established in Ministry/Departments and also furnish a quarterly progress report on the 
matter relating to data harmonization and standardization. 
The data harmonization initiatives undertaken by the MoSPI mark a decisive shift toward a 
more coherent, transparent, and integrated national data ecosystem. These measures 
systematically address various issues of heterogeneity, duplication, and overlap of various 
statistical datasets/products across Ministries and Departments, while fostering consistency, 
comparability, and credibility of official statistics within a modern, standardized statistical 
production environment. Institutionalizing these mechanisms will enable seamless data flows 
across the entire data lifecycle, from collection to dissemination, and foster greater 
coherence, reliability, and policy relevance among diverse statistical outputs. 
MoSPI envisions dynamic synchronization and seamless integration of statistical activities 
across Ministries, Departments, and States/UTs through a whole-of-government approach 
aimed at strengthening coordination and enhancing the quality, consistency, and timeliness 
of official statistics. To institutionalize these efforts, the Ministry provides structured support to 
Statistical Advisers posted in various Ministries/Departments through phased interactive 
sessions that comprehensively map sectoral statistical activities, streamline processes, and 
reinforce coordination mechanisms.  
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.  H-11011/03/2024-25-Parl. Cell (E-74050) dated 27.02.2026] 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Integrating Artificial Intelligence into the National Statistical System and Capacity 
Building 
 
 The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s proactive approach towards integrating 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) within the National Statistical System (NSS) as part of the broader 
IT modernization efforts spearheaded by the Data Innovation (DI) Lab. The use of AI holds 
immense promise for enhancing data collection, processing, and analysis by improving 
efficiency, accuracy, and timeliness. This aligns well with the Ministry’s goal of leveraging 
emerging technologies such as AI, big data, and real-time analytics to modernize statistical 
operations. 
However, the Committee observe that alongside technological integration, there is a 
pressing need to build the necessary capacity within the NSS. This includes developing 
specialized skills in AI and data science among personnel at all levels, ensuring that the 
workforce is well-equipped to implement and manage AI-driven solutions effectively and 
ethically. The Committee also highlight the importance of establishing clear operational 
guidelines, ethical frameworks, and oversight mechanisms to govern the use of AI, 
particularly given the sensitive nature of statistical data. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry prioritize the development and 
implementation of a comprehensive AI integration strategy within the NSS. This strategy 
should focus on capacity building through targeted training programs, collaboration with 
academic and research institutions, and continuous skill development. Further, the Ministry 
should institutionalize robust ethical and privacy standards specific to AI applications, 
ensuring compliance with existing laws such as the Collection of Statistics Act, 2008, and the 
Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. To promote transparency and stakeholder 
engagement, the Committee also urge the Ministry to periodically publish detailed reports on 
AI adoption progress, its impact on data quality and efforts made towards workforce capacity 
building programmes. 
 
 

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
Data Innovation Lab focuses on experimentation with alternative sources of emerging 
technology by creating an ecosystem of experimentation. Currently, MoUs have been signed 
with 17 premium academic institutions of the country, which include IITs/IIMs/IIITs. 12 use 
cases have been identified and out of these, 5 use cases are in various stages of 
implementation in collaboration with StartUps/ Academia or done in-house including cases 
related to NS. The Data Innovation Lab portal (https://datainnovation.mospi.gov.in/home) has 
also been made operational in November, 2025, wherein details regarding the collaborations 
made with different Academic institutions, the pilots undertaken in the field of Official 
Statistics, the repository of Use Cases, etc. are made available. Also, MoSPI has published 
an e-book on "Use cases of data Science and Al in Official Statistics", which is available on 
https://datainnovation.mospi.gov.in/home. One Hackathon has been successfully conducted 
with IIT Gandhinagar in March, 2025. Another Hackathon is on-going, in collaboration with 
Innovation Cell of Ministry of Education, which started off in July, 2025. Govt of India has 
notified the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 in November, 2025. MoSPI is in the 
process of identification of roles and responsibility for accordance to DPDP Rules, 2025.  
MoSPI has also introduced the Model Context Protocol (MCP) as an initiative to 
enhance access to official statistics. MoSPI MCP acts as a universal adapter that securely 
connects AI agents directly to the eSankhyiki portal. The protocol is designed for seamless 
integration. Any AI system compatible with MCP can integrate with MoSPI MCP in just a few 
simple steps, enabling smooth interoperability across platforms. This ensures that 
researchers, policymakers, analysts, and other stakeholders can access official statistics 
within their existing AI environments without disruption. 
MoSPI MCP significantly simplifies data discovery by enabling users to move from 
questions to actionable insights within seconds. It facilitates cross-sectoral analysis, allowing 
comparison and alignment of multiple datasets—such as CPI and WPI—through a single 
prompt. The system also enables users to generate instant visualizations from natural 
language prompts, transforming queries into plots without the need for coding. Additionally, it 
provides real-time access to updated official statistics, ensuring that users always work with 
the latest available data. 

20 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.  H-11011/03/2024-25-Parl. Cell (E-74050) dated 27.02.2026] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Promoting International Collaboration and Research and Development Initiatives  
The Committee acknowledge the Ministry’s engagement with international statistical 
organizations and global forums such as the United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC), 
the UN Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific (SIAP), and various UN expert groups. 
India’s active participation including chairing the Governing Council of UN SIAP and 
membership in committees on Big Data and SDG Indicators demonstrates a strong 
commitment to aligning with global best practices in official statistics. The Committee also 
welcome bilateral collaborations with the National Statistics Offices of Finland, UAE, South 
Africa, and Brazil, which are instrumental for knowledge exchange and capacity building. 
Further, the Committee commend India’s adherence to the IMF’s Special Data 
Dissemination Standard (SDDS) since 2001, which has contributed significantly to ensuring 
data transparency, integrity, and timeliness. The development of the National Indicator 
Framework (NIF) for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), supported by a High-Level 
Steering Committee and Technical Advisory Committee, reflects a coordinated and 
standards-driven approach to monitoring national progress. 
However, the Committee observe that despite these efforts, a gap remains in 
translating international engagements into tangible and outcome-oriented research and 
policy implementation. Participation in global forums and bilateral exchanges must be 
accompanied by substantive collaborations yielding measurable improvements in domestic 
statistical systems, The Committee are of the view that international affiliations should evolve 
into long-term, strategic partnerships focused on joint research, technical exchange, and 
capacity development with reputed global institutions and universities. Likewise, the recently 
established Research and Analysis Unit (RAU) and Data Innovation Lab must be more 

21 
 
effectively utilized to spearhead high-impact, evidence-based research and strengthen data-
driven policymaking within the Ministry. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry prepare and implement a 
comprehensive roadmap to operationalize international collaborations through formal MoUs 
and institutional partnerships. Priority should be given to joint research initiatives, adoption of 
global data standards, and structured capacity-building programs. Simultaneously, efforts 
should be made to involve domestic doctoral students, researchers, and young professionals 
in these initiatives, thereby building a sustainable talent pool for India’s statistical ecosystem. 
The Committee further desire that a detailed progress report be submitted outlining 
the concrete outcomes of international collaborations and the performance of the RAU and 
Data Innovation Lab in driving research-led, globally aligned statistical advancements. 
Reply of the Government 
MoSPI represents India on various international Statistical forums. As a beﬁtting 
recognition of the Indian Statistical System, India has been elected in United Nations 
Statistical Commission (UNSC) as a member for a term of four years starting 1st Jan 2024 
(after two-decades of vacuum). Through UNSC, MoSPI have a crucial role in deﬁning 
international standards, concepts and methodologies in Official Statistics.  
International participation is being aligned with national priorities to ensure that 
engagements in global forums and bilateral exchanges contribute meaningfully to 
strengthening the domestic statistical system. Efforts are being made to institutionalize 
learnings from such engagements through structured knowledge-sharing mechanisms, 
adoption of best practices, methodological improvements, and capacity-building initiatives. 
For example, the United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC) established the Inter-
agency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) in March 2015 to create a robust 
framework i.e. Global Indicator Framework (GIF) for monitoring progress on the Goals and 
targets set forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It was subsequently 
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in July 2017. India, through the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), as a member of the IAEG-
SDGs for the terms 2015-2017, 2017-2019, 2021-2023 and 2023-2025, has contributed 

22 
 
significantly in development and subsequent revisions in GIF ensuring that national priorities 
are accurately reflected.  
Further, the other international statistical groups where India has registered its contribution 
through participation in meetings /memberships are as following: 
S. no Name of the Group/ Committee 
1 Oslo Group on energy Statistics 
2 United Nations Committee of Experts on International Statistical Classifications (UNCEISC) 
3 Standing Task Team on ISIC and CPC (STT-ISIC-CPC) 
4 Inter secretariat Working Group on Household Surveys 
5 Technical Working Group (TWG) on Revision of International Standard Classification of 
Occupation (ISCO)  
6 Technical Working Group (TWG) on International Statistical Standards for Care Work 
7 Working group (WG) on statistical standards concerning digital platform work and employment 
8 UN Committee of Experts on Environmental-Economic Accounting (UNCEEA) Bureau  
9 UNECE Task Force on Measuring Circular Economy                  
10 Inter-agency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators 
11 Expert Group on Environment Statistics 
12 The Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Gender Statistics 
13 United Nations Expert Group on Food Security and Nutrition data and statistics (UN EG-FSN) 
14 Expert Group on the Integration of Statistical and Geospatial Information 
15 Working Group on Data Stewardship (WGDS) 
16 United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific through the DASH 
Team for AI in Official Statistics in individual capacity 
17 UN Committee of Experts on Big Data and Data Science for Official Statistics (UNCEBD) – 
Advisory Board 
Ministry also recognizes the importance of evolving international affiliations into long-term 
and strategic partnerships. In this regard, steps are being taken to foster sustained 
collaboration with reputed global institutions and statistical agencies, for technical exchange, 
and capacity development. Emphasis is being placed on formal cooperation frameworks that 
facilitate measurable outcomes and contribute to the modernization and resilience of India’s 
statistical system.  

23 
 
Ministry is committed to ensuring that such international engagements are systematically 
institutionalized through structured knowledge-sharing, methodological refinements, capacity-
building initiatives, and adoption of best practices within the national statistical system. 
As part of research initiatives, MoSPI has strengthened collaboration with reputed 
Institutes/organisations. Publicly available datasets in areas such as economic growth, 
prices, women's participation in the labour force, food consumption and nutrition, skill gaps 
and industrial efficiency, irrigation practices, etc. are analysed and important insights shared 
in the form of working papers are shared with Ministries to support them in policy formulation 
and interventions. International best practices and reports are disseminated to provide inputs 
for improvement of data quality and reports. Active collaboration with academic / research 
institutions is done to encourage them to participate in research in official statistics under 
funding support in the form of grant-in-aid from the Ministry. Multiple meetings have been 
conducted in this regard and more than 50 research proposals have been received. 
Students are engaged on internship by the Ministry to encourage them to undertake research 
work on official data. 
Collaboration on Consumer Price Index (CPI) and Index of Industrial Production (IIP) 
Technical Assistance Mission of The International Monetary Fund (IMF) was conducted to 
review compilation practices and suggest improvements in the Indian CPI. An IMF expert 
undertook a study of the base revision exercise and expressed that overall, the concepts and 
methods used to compile the updated CPI largely reflected the standards and best practice 
as defined in the 2020 CPI Manual. 
IMF has also been requested at various forums to nominate Indian members to the 
committee formed for revising and updating the International Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
Manual. India’s participation will help ensure that national practices and concerns are 
adequately reflected in the revised CPI Manual.  
The Technical Assistance (TA) Mission of International Monetary Fund (IMF) was held in 
February, 2025 to seek the technical support on seasonally adjusted series and chain base 
index of the industrial production to incorporate in the new series of IIP. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.  H-11011/03/2024-25-Parl. Cell (E-74050) dated 27.02.2026] 
 

24 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTE 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Provision of statutory authority to NSC and empowering it as the nodal national body 
for statistics 
 
The Committee acknowledge that the vast information generated across various 
sectors has the power to reveal new insights and address complex societal issues. The real 
value of this data lies in accurate interpretation and effective application, which is crucial for 
informed policy-making, resource management, and sustainable development. The 
Committee observe that a strong, independent statistical authority is essential for ensuring 
public trust in official statistics. The Rangarajan Commission (2000) recommended creating 
a permanent, statutory body for official statistics, but the National Statistical Commission 
(NSC), established in 2005, was never given this legislative framework. The Committee 
further observe that the existence of different data producers, including a growing number of 
private data providers, creates the possibility of discrepancies between their statistical 
estimates and those published by the NSC, particularly for key indicators like GDP. These 
potential inconsistencies, which can undermine stakeholder confidence, are largely a result 
of the NSC's lack of statutory authority to enforce uniform standards and methodologies 
across all data producers, including those in the private sector. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the National Statistical Commission (NSC) 
be established as the nodal and autonomous body for all core statistical activities, with full 
statutory backing. This empowerment would allow the NSC to prescribe and coordinate 
statistical standards and methodologies for both government and private sector data 
producers. To achieve this, the Committee desire that the NSC constitutes a permanent 
technical committee, including representatives from private statistical agencies, academia, 
and industry experts. The goal is to align definitions, methodologies, and data sources for 
critical economic and social indicators. The NSC should also develop a comprehensive 
National Statistical Standards Framework, similar to the accounting standards set by the 

26 
 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), to harmonize data collection procedures, 
sampling designs, and reporting protocols. The Committee further recommend 
institutionalizing regular data sharing, joint methodological reviews, and publishing 
reconciliation reports to explain and minimize differences between official and private sector 
estimates. By granting the NSC statutory authority, the credibility, comparability, and 
reliability of India's official statistics will be significantly improved, strengthening evidence-
based policy decisions and public trust. 
Reply of the Government 
The National Statistical Commission (NSC) is chaired by an eminent statistician and its four 
members have specialization and experience in specified statistical and allied fields. The 
Chairman and Members of the National Statistical Commission are selected on the basis of 
the recommendations of a Search Committee duly constituted by the Government of India for 
the purpose, from time to time. 
As per provisions of Resolution dated 1 June 2005, the Commission has the requisite 
autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. The Commission also has the 
authority to formulate its short and long term programmes. The NSC has evolved necessary 
measures and mechanism by constituting professional committees, expert committees and 
working groups to assist the Commission on various technical issues. 
The Steering Committee for National Sample Surveys, which is chaired by the Chairperson of 
the NSC, comprises of subject-matter experts as well as the representatives from Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation, Department of Economic Affairs, Reserve Bank of 
India, NITI Aayog and State Governments. The Steering Committee of NSC, inter alia, 
reviews the extant framework and addresses the issue from time to time on the subject 
results, methodology, questionnaire, sampling frame, sampling design, concepts and 
definitions, surveys instruments etc. related to all National Sample Surveys.  
Ministries/ Departments of the Central Government may submit their proposal or apprise to 
the Commission regarding statistical activity envisaged or being undertaken by them. The 
Commission from time to time holds interactive sessions with State Governments on their 
statistical systems and activities.  

27 
 
In addition, the NSC functions as the Oversight Body and periodically review the progress of 
the roadmap on ‘Strengthening the Indian National Statistical System’. The representatives of 
Reserve Bank of India and Department of Economic Affairs participate in these reviews.  
The National Statistical Commission performs various functions including  
1. Identifying the core statistics, which are of national importance and are critical to the 
development of the economy;  
2. Constituting professional committees or working groups to assist the Commission on 
various technical issues 
3. Evolving standard statistical concepts, definitions, classifications and methodologies in 
different areas in statistics and lay down national quality standards on core statistics;  
4. Evolving national strategies for the collection, tabulation and dissemination of core 
statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets;  
5. Evolving national strategies for human resource development on official statistics 
including information technology and communication needs of the statistical system;  
6. Evolving measures for effective co-ordination with State Governments, Union Territory 
Administrations and between Ministries, Departments and other agencies of the 
Central Government on statistical activities;  
7. Exercising statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and integrity of 
the statistical products, making recommendations to the Central Government or any 
State Government regarding measures to effectively implement the standards, 
strategies and other measures; and  
8. Reviewing the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down policies, 
standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced performance. 
The Commission has power to require production of any document before it which serve 
statistical purposes, require statistical agencies and institutions to provide details of statistical 
activities, including concepts and definitions used, methodologies followed, quality standards 
adopted, sampling and non-sampling errors, etc., in respect of core statistics, and require 
attendance of any person including any public servant on matters connected with core 
statistics and issuing notices for the examination of witnesses and documents or any matters 
connected with core statistics. 
The Commission prepares its Annual Report for each financial year giving a full account of its 
activities during the financial year and forwards the same to the Central Government. The 

28 
 
Annual Report and the Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the Commission are 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
The NSC provides guidance and prescribe and coordinate statistical standards and 
methodologies for the statistical system through the mechanism of regular reviews and also 
through technical Committees such as the Steering Committee and other expert Committees. 
The data harmonization initiatives undertaken by the MoSPI which mark a decisive shift 
toward a more coherent, transparent, and integrated national data ecosystem are reviewed 
and guided by the NSC. Institutionalizing these mechanisms would enable seamless data 
flows across the entire data lifecycle, from collection to dissemination, and foster greater 
coherence, reliability, and policy relevance among diverse statistical outputs. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No.  H-11011/03/2024-25-Parl. Cell (E-74050) dated 27.02.2026] 
 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I)  
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER- V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
06 August  2026                                                                                                 Chairperson,                                                           
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                                   Standing Committee on Finance 
  

30 
 
ANNEXURE  
Minutes of the Forty-Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance  
(2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 06th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1710 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Thiru Arun Nehru  
10. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
11. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
12. Prof. Sougata Ray  
13. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
14. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
15. Shri Manish Tewari  
16. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri P. Chidambaram  
18. Shri Praful Patel  
19. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
20. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
21. Shri Sanjay Seth  
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
23. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal     - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rathore  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 

31 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration and adoption: 
i) Thirty-Eighth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Performance Review of 
National Statistical Commission’ of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
 
ii) Thirty-Nineth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
iii) Fortieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 
iv) Forty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Planning. 
 
v) Forty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports without any 
modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the 
Parliament. 
 
PART II 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

32 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF NATIONAL 
STATISTICAL COMMISSION (NSC) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 06  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government (vide 
Recommendations at SI. Nos.2,3,4,5 & 6) 
05 83.33% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies 
NIL -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at SI. No 1) 
 
01 16.67% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
 
 