 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services)] 
 
  
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
44 

ii 
 
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services)] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 August, 202603.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 August, 202603 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 

iii 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
19 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
45 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
46 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
54 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2026 55 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Financial Services) 
 57 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde*  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai#  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee vice Smt. Darshana Singh w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 02 April 2026 and re-nominated as Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-Fourth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second 
Report of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
2. The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2026. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Financial Services) on 17 July, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
11 August, 2026.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
11 August, 2026 
20 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty- 
Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) which was presented to Lok 
Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2026.  
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the eleven Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report on 17 July, 
2026. These have been analyzed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation No. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
       Total - 09 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
                  Total - Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 1, 4 and 12 
       Total - 03 
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. Nil                 
Total - Nil  
(Chapter- V) 
 

2 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
DEMAND NO.32 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES  
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Department’s budget estimates for 2026-27 have 
seen a substantial increase, reaching Rs. 3,746.95 crore from the previous 
year’s budget estimate of Rs. 1,688.14 crore. The Committee observe that this 
surge is predominantly driven by gap funding requirements for social security 
schemes, including Rs. 596.40 crore for the Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana 
Yojana (PMVVY), Rs. 160 crore for the senior citizen pension plan, and Rs. 202 
crore for the Atal Pension Yojana (APY). Additionally, the introduction of a Rs. 
2000 crore allocation to incentivize low-value BHIM-UPI transactions 
significantly inflates the overall demand. The Committee recommend that the 
Department of Financial Services enforce stringent monitoring mechanisms to 
ensure these funds are released strictly based on utilization trends and the 
projections of implementing agencies to prevent the idle parking of funds. 
Furthermore, the Department must strategically balance these gap funding 
requirements by evaluating the long-term financial sustainability of defined-
benefit schemes.” 
 
1.6 Regarding incentive scheme for promotion of Rupay debit cards and low-value 
BHIM-UPI transactions (person-to-merchant), the Committee, in their Report, had 
further observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note the massive Rs. 2000 crore budgetary allocation for 2026-
27 designed to offset ecosystem costs caused by the zero-MDR policy on 
RuPay and low-value UPI transactions. The Committee observe that while UPI 
is expected to process up to 150 billion transactions per month and add 600 
million new users, the current government incentive covers merely 11% of the 
industry’s actual costs and 14% of potential MDR collections, creating a 
structural funding gap impacting long-term infrastructural investment. The 
Committee recommend that while the proposed 3-year multi-year scheme and 
cashback components are necessary to democratize digital payments in 
untapped Tier 3-6 cities, the Department of Financial Services must 
concurrently explore a self-reliant, tiered revenue model. The Committee would 
like to emphasize that establishing a viable revenue mechanism is critical to 
ensuring the UPI ecosystem achieves financial sustainability without 
perpetually straining the Government exchequer.” 

3 
 
 
1.7 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has furnished the following written submission: 
1) Regarding Atal Pension Yojana (APY), the following is submitted: 
 
A. “The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) 
has been conducting annual actuarial valuations of APY since 2020. Based on 
these actuarial findings, gap funding requirements are determined and placed 
before the EFC for approval for the relevant cycle period. 
 
B. In the previous EFC cycle, a gap funding of ₹271 crore per annum was 
approved annually from FY 2022 to FY 2025. Subsequently, under the new 
EFC cycle, the approved gap funding for FY 2026 onwards has been revised 
downward from ₹271 crore to ₹202 crore per annum, valid up to the end of this 
cycle (i.e., 2031). 
 
C. Further, the gap funds released are invested by PFRDA in accordance 
with the approved guidelines. As on 31.03.2026, the APY Gap Fund has an 
AUM of ₹1,457 crore.” 
 
2) Regarding BHIM-UPI transactions, the following is submitted: 
A. “Till Dec 2019, MDR upto 0.30% of transaction value was applicable 
for UPI (P2M) transactions. From Jan 2020, Zero MDR was announced on all 
UPI (P2M) transactions to accelerate digital payment adoption and encourage 
a shift from cash to digital.  
 
B. The zero MDR policy had eliminated the core revenue streams for the 
UPI ecosystem. In order to mitigate this and also to encourage banks and other 
ecosystem participants to promote digital payments, Government has been 
implementing the Incentive Scheme. 
 
C. Accordingly, for FY 2026-27, a budget provisioning of ₹2,000 crore was 
made as part of BE 2026-27, against an estimated cost of ₹20,700 crore 
incurred by the industry (i.e., cost of ₹1.38 per transaction multiplied by total 
P2M transactions of 15,000 crore recorded last year). Further, it is submitted 
that the incentive is paid on reimbursement mode only after the transactions 
have been completed and data is submitted by the banks. Since, the payout is 
on actual basis, incidents of parking of idle funds doesn’t arise.  
 
D. Given the sustainability of the UPI ecosystem and the burden on the 
Government exchequer, the Department is currently exploring two options: (i) 
Examining the feasibility of restoring MDR for certain high threshold 
transactions/ merchants; and (ii) a tiered incentive structure to phase-out the 
Government support in the next few years.” 

4 
 
 
3) Regarding Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY), the following 
is submitted: 
 
Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY) was launched in 2017 to 
provide social security during old age and to protect elderly persons aged 60 
and above against a future fall in their interest income due to uncertain market 
conditions. The scheme is being implemented through Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (LIC). The scheme enables old age income security for 
senior citizens through provision of assured pension/return of 7.40% per annum 
linked to the subscription amount based on government guarantee to Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). 
 
The funds are reimbursed to LIC as gap subsidy between the assured returns 
and the actual returns guaranteed by the investment under the schemes. 
At present, the portfolio is generating a yield of about 6.95% p.a., resulting in a 
negative carry vis-à-vis the assured return. 
 
The scheme's investments were mainly made in Central and State Government 
Securities during 2020 to 2023 ensuring high credit quality and safety of capital 
at the then prevailing yield below 7% p.a. The monies were invested in 
accordance with investment pattern for pension fund as outlined by IRDAI. 
Most investments are classified as Held to Maturity (HTM) and are intended to 
be held until maturity to avoid market volatility. 
 
Also, the rising interest rates have reduced the market value of these securities 
and any sale of such securities would result in realization of losses. The scheme 
is a closed-ended fund, limiting LIC's ability to reinvest in higher-yielding 
instruments. There is also limited secondary market liquidity, especially for 
State Government Securities. 
 
Given the above factors, the subsidy burden has grown from Rs. 27.58 crore in 
2022-23 to Rs. 597.33 crore in 2025-26. 
 
However, the fund continues to follow a prudent and conservative investment 
strategy, focused on capital preservation and accrual income, ensuring 
alignment with regulatory and fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
1.8.1 The Committee had specifically recommended that the Department of 
Financial Services enforce stringent monitoring to prevent the idle parking of 
funds under the Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY) and the Atal 
Pension Yojana (APY), while evaluating the long-term financial sustainability of 
defined-benefit and incentive schemes. Regarding the incentive scheme for 
promotion of RuPay Debit Cards and low-value BHIM-UPI transactions, the 
Committee had expressed concern that providing a Rs.2,000 crore budgetary 

5 
 
allocation to offset zero-MDR losses needlessly inflates the overall Demand for 
Grants of the Department, while covering barely 10 per cent of actual operational 
costs. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Department 
explore a self-reliant, tiered revenue mechanism to ensure financial 
sustainability without perpetually straining the exchequer. 
1.8.2  The Committee note that, in pursuance of their earlier recommendation 
emphasizing the imperative of a viable revenue model, legislative enabling 
provisions for a tiered Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) structure have been 
brought forward. However, the Committee remain deeply concerned by the 
staggering mismatch between the Rs.2,000 crore allocation and the industry's 
estimated operational cost of Rs.20,700 crore. In the view of the Committee, 
while statutory enablement now exists to permit calibrated MDR on high-value 
transactions, any delay in notifying and operationalizing this framework leaves 
payment service providers heavily dependent on inadequate subsidies, thereby 
threatening critical investments in cybersecurity, fraud prevention, and network 
infrastructure. 
1.8.3   Regarding PMVVY and APY, the Committee express grave concern over 
the exponential surge in PMVVY's subsidy burden—rising from Rs.27.58 crore 
in FY 2022–23 to Rs.597.33 crore in FY 2025–26 (and Rs.596.40 crore in BE 2026–
27)—attributable to a negative carry between lower asset yields (6.95%) locked 
in Held-to-Maturity securities and assured statutory payouts (7.40%). Similarly, 
APY remains structurally dependent on continuous Government gap funding 
(Rs.202 crore annually) to satisfy pension liabilities. The Committee observe 
that while the Department has furnished retrospective explanations detailing 
portfolio illiquidity, its reply remains conspicuously silent on formulating 
concrete, forward-looking measures to insulate guaranteed-return schemes 
from fluctuating interest rate cycles. 
1.8.4 The Committee, therefore, reiterate recommendation to expedite the 
implementation of a self-reliant, tiered revenue framework for higher-value 
merchant transactions while safeguarding small merchants and P2P transfers, 
thereby transitioning the digital payments ecosystem to a self-sustaining model. 
Additionally, the Department of Financial Services should enforce stringent 

6 
 
monitoring; and evaluate the long-term financial sustainability of defined-
benefit schemes like PMVVY and APY to protect the exchequer from escalating 
gap-funding liabilities. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI VAYA VANDANA YOJANA (PMVVY) 
 
1.9 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note the escalating gap funding requirement for PMVVY, which 
has reached Rs. 596.40 crore for the fiscal year 2026-27. The Committee 
observe that while the scheme effectively provides an assured 7.40% return to 
8,25,967 senior citizen subscribers, the subsidy burden borne by the 
Government—covering the differential between LIC’s actual investment yields 
and the guaranteed payouts—has grown exponentially from Rs. 27.58 crore in 
2022-23 to Rs. 597.33 crore in 2025-26 due to market volatility. The Committee 
recommend that the Government closely monitor this widening differential and 
its sensitivity to fluctuating interest rate environments. The Department should 
devise structural mechanisms to insulate future social security initiatives from 
such unpredictable and heavy reliance on direct fiscal support.” 
1.10 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has furnished the following written submission: 
“Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY) was launched in 2017 to 
provide social security during old age and to protect elderly persons aged 60 
and above against a future fall in their interest income due to uncertain market 
conditions. The scheme is being implemented through Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (LIC). The scheme enables old age income security for 
senior citizens through provision of assured pension/return of 7.40% per annum 
linked to the subscription amount based on government guarantee to Life 
Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). 
 
The funds are reimbursed to LIC as gap subsidy between the assured returns 
and the actual returns guaranteed by the investment under the schemes. 
 
At present, the portfolio is generating a yield of about 6.95% p.a., resulting in a 
negative carry vis-à-vis the assured return. 
 
The scheme's investments were mainly made in Central and State Government 
Securities during 2020 to 2023 ensuring high credit quality and safety of capital 
at the then prevailing yield below 7% p.a. The monies were invested in 
accordance with investment pattern for pension fund as outlined by IRDAI. 
 
Most investments are classified as Held to Maturity (HTM) and are intended to 
be held until maturity to avoid market volatility. 

7 
 
 
Also, the rising interest rates have reduced the market value of these securities 
and any sale of such securities would result in realization of losses. The scheme 
is a closed-ended fund, limiting LIC's ability to reinvest in higher-yielding 
instruments. There is also limited secondary market liquidity, especially for 
State Government Securities. Given the above factors, the subsidy burden has 
grown exponentially from Rs. 27.58 crore in 2022-23 to Rs. 597.33 crore in 
2025-26. 
 
However, the fund continues to follow a prudent and conservative investment 
strategy, focused on capital preservation and accrual income, ensuring 
alignment with regulatory and fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
 
1.11.1 The Committee had noted with concern the exponential surge in the 
PMVVY subsidy burden—from Rs.27.58 crore in 2022-23 to Rs.597.33 crore in 
2025-26 (and Rs.596.40 crore in BE 2026-27)—driven by the gap between LIC's 
actual investment yield and the assured 7.40% return, and recommended closely 
monitoring this yield differential while devising structural mechanisms to 
insulate future social security initiatives from heavy reliance on direct fiscal 
support.  
 
1.11.2 In response, the Department of Financial Services has furnished 
justifications, explaining that funds were locked in lower-yielding (6.95%) Held-
to-Maturity (HTM) Central and State Government Securities during 2020–2023, 
and that the closed-ended nature of the scheme, secondary market illiquidity, and 
rising interest rates constrained LIC from reinvesting in higher-yielding assets.  
 
1.11.3 The Committee, however, are constrained to observe that while these 
portfolio explanations account for the past negative carry, the Department's 
Action Taken Reply is silent on formulating forward-looking structural 
mechanisms for future schemes. 
 
1.11.4 The Committee are of the considered view that rigid, guaranteed-return 
structures instituted during low-interest regimes inherently subject the 
exchequer to open-ended and expanding fiscal liabilities when market cycles 
shift.  While acknowledging the fiduciary compliance and capital preservation 

8 
 
strategy followed by LIC for this closed-ended portfolio, the Committee stress 
that future social security initiatives ought to avoid such unhedged reliance on 
direct budgetary gap funding. 
 
1.11.5   The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that 
the Department of Financial Services, in consultation with regulatory bodies such 
as IRDAI and PFRDA, evaluate sustainable structural frameworks for future 
senior citizen and income-security initiatives. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that: 
(i) The Department may explore the feasibility of transitioning future social 
security schemes away from rigid, fixed-return guarantees toward calibrated, 
floating-rate or periodic rate-reset mechanisms benchmarked against prevailing 
sovereign yields; and 
(ii) The feasibility of incorporating structural risk-mitigation features—such as 
interest rate stabilization buffers and dynamic Asset-Liability Management (ALM) 
guidelines—into the design of future government-guaranteed welfare schemes 
may be examined. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (Sl.No. 8) 
 
DISTRICT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE/ DISTRICT LEVEL REVIEW 
COMMITTEE 
 
1.12  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note the pivotal role played by Public Representatives, 
including Members of Parliament and MLAs, in the quarterly District 
Consultative Committee (DCC) and District Level Review Committee (DLRC) 
meetings. These meetings, serve as the primary oversight mechanism for 
monitoring the Lead Bank Scheme and ensuring that credit flow is prioritized 
toward the needs of the local community and the priority sector. The Committee 
observe that the active participation of elected representatives brings 
necessary legislative accountability to the implementation of financial schemes 
and ensures that credit distribution aligns with the immediate needs of rural and 
underserved populations. The Committee observe, however, that the 
effectiveness of these oversight bodies is frequently undermined by procedural 
lapses and a lack of seniority in representation. In many instances, meetings 
are scheduled without providing sufficient notice to Members of Parliament, 
hindering their ability to participate and provide legislative guidance. 
Furthermore, the Committee is concerned by the trend of banks deputing junior-

9 
 
level staff who lack the decision-making authority required to resolve systemic 
bottlenecks or commit to the district-wise credit targets discussed during these 
sessions. Such practices render the consultative process redundant and dilute 
the impact of the Lead Bank Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Financial Services issue a comprehensive Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for holding State Level Bankers' Committees 
(SLBCs) meetings. To augment this oversight, the Committee further 
recommend the development of a structured, centralized digital dashboard-
modeled after the DISHA platform - to streamline the tracking of DCC/DLRC 
and SLBC data. The DCC be presided over by the senior most MP of the 
district. The Committee emphasize that replacing fragmented, quarterly-
updated SLBC websites with a real-time tracking mechanism will significantly 
empower stakeholders to monitor Annual Credit Plans, credit-deposit ratios, 
and systemic bottlenecks effectively, thereby ensuring that financial inclusion 
goals are met with transparency and precision”. 
 
 
1.13 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has submitted the following written replies: 
 
“Under the Lead Bank Scheme, District Consultative Committee (DCC) and 
District Level Review Committee (DLRC) are the important district level fora 
facilitating coordination among commercial banks, Government agencies and 
other stakeholders at the district level to review and find solutions to the 
problems hindering developmental activities. While the objective of the DCC is 
to serve as a coordination and implementation forum, the DLRC is expected to 
serve as a review forum. Both are distinct fora and as per RBI guidelines both 
the meetings are required to held separately. 
 
The District Collector is the Chairman of the DCC meetings. RBI, NABARD, all 
commercial banks including Small Finance Banks, Wholly Owned Subsidiary of 
Foreign Banks, Regional Rural Banks, Payment Banks, State / District Central 
Co-operative Banks, various State Government departments and allied 
agencies are the members of the DCC. The participants of the DLRC meetings 
include all the member of the DCC and Public Representative. Minutes of both 
DCC and DLRC meetings are recorded separately and conduct of these 
meeting is monitored by RBI. 
 
The DLRC, constituted under the Lead Bank Scheme, serves as a key district-
level forum for reviewing credit plans and improving the flow of credit to priority 
sectors. It also provides a platform for public representatives, including 
Members of Parliament and MLAs, to offer feedback on credit requirements and 
banking services in the district. The DLRC is chaired by the District 
Collector/District Magistrate and comprises representatives from RBI, 
NABARD, commercial banks (including SFBs, RRBs, payments banks, and co-
operative banks), as well as relevant State Government departments and allied 
agencies. 
 

10 
 
Recognising the importance of public representatives in strengthening the 
effectiveness of DLRC meetings, Lead Banks have been instructed to schedule 
meetings in consultation with MPs/MLAs, circulate agenda papers well in 
advance, and prepare an annual calendar of DCC/DLRC meetings at the 
beginning of each year. This calendar is to be drawn in consultation with the 
Chairperson, RBI’s Lead District Officer, and public representatives, and 
circulated to all stakeholders to ensure advance blocking of dates and timely 
participation. 
 
To further strengthen coordination, the Reserve Bank of India has advised its 
Regional Offices (vide communication dated July 01, 2024) to ensure that 
DLRC meetings are scheduled strictly in line with the convenience of 
MPs/MLAs/Zilla Panchayat Chiefs, and that Lead Banks/LDMs make enhanced 
efforts to secure their participation. 
 
Further, a comprehensive review of the Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) has been 
undertaken. RBI vide its Circular No. RBI/2026-27/150 
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.03/02.01.001/2026-27 dated 19.06.2026…..has issued 
revised guidelines on the Lead Bank Scheme. The revised guidelines, inter-
alia, provide for the standardisation of the functioning of SLBCs/DCCs including 
the preparation of annual meeting calendars and improved dissemination of 
information. 
 
Lead Banks are also required to maintain SLBC websites containing relevant 
data, schedules, and minutes of meetings for greater transparency and 
accessibility. In addition, a unified data reporting portal for the Lead Bank 
Scheme is being developed, as announced in the Monetary Policy Statement 
of February 06, 2026, to replace fragmented reporting systems and enhance 
data quality, consistency, and real-time monitoring of credit flow and related 
parameters. 
 
These measures collectively aim to improve stakeholder participation, 
strengthen coordination with public representatives, and enhance 
transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness in the implementation of the Lead 
Bank Scheme” 
 
1.14 The Committee note that the Department of Financial Services has 
accepted several of their key recommendations regarding the preparation of 
annual meeting calendars; nomination of senior-level District Co-ordinators by 
banks for District Consultative Committee (DCC) meetings; issuance of 
comprehensive Standard Operating Procedures under the revised RBI Lead 
Bank Scheme guidelines dated 19.06 2026; and the development of a unified 
Lead Bank Scheme data portal integrated with Centralized Information 
Management System(CIMS). The Committee, however, observe that while the 

11 
 
DCC functions as a coordination and implementation forum, the District Level 
Review Committee (DLRC) is explicitly designed to review credit flow. 
Considering that the DLRC serves as the primary platform for MPs, MLAs and 
other public representatives, the Committee recommend that the senior-most 
MP of the District be designated to preside over the DLRC, as in the District 
Development Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA), to review the 
fulfilment of the credit needs of the District. The Committee desire to be apprised 
of the action taken in this regard in the Final Action Taken Statement. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (MSMEs) 
 
1.15 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note the critical importance of the MSME sector- employing 
33.34 crore individuals across 7.55 crore registered enterprises- and commend 
initiatives like the Rs. 10,000 crore SME Growth Fund and the deployment of 
new digital credit assessment models. The Committee observe that despite a 
21.8% year-on-year growth in bank credit to MSMEs, structural deficits persist, 
forcing MSMEs to rely heavily on NBFCs, which borrow from PSBs but lend at 
higher risk-adjusted rates, resulting in a 36% CAGR in NBFC-MSME credit. The 
Committee urge the Government to further bridge this $530 billion formal credit 
gap by aggressively expanding structured co-lending arrangements between 
banks and NBFCs to reduce the overall cost of capital. Additionally, the 
Committee recommend the robust expansion of the Trade Receivables 
Discounting System (TReDS) to resolve acute liquidity constraints caused by 
delayed receivables, thereby ensuring uninterrupted operational cash flow for 
the 'missing middle'.” 
1.16 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has furnished the following written submission: 
“1. Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana (PMMY) provides access to institutional 
collateral free credit to micro enterprises upto Rs.20 lakh, which is expanding 
every year. 
As on 31.03.2026, more than Rs.58.31 crore loans amounting to Rs. 40.56 lakh 
crore have been sanctioned since the launch of Scheme, where about 67% of 
loan beneficiaries were Women Entrepreneurs & 49% loans have been 
sanctioned to SC/ST/OBC category of borrowers. 
 Category-wise break-up: - 

12 
 
Category Percentage as per No. 
of Loans 
Percentage as per 
Amount Sanctioned 
Shishu 74% 32% 
Kishor 24% 43% 
Tarun   2% 25% 
Tarun Plus 0% 0% 
Total 100% 100% 
  
Year-wise sanction amount: - 
Financial Year No. of Loans Sanctioned  
(in Crore) 
Amount Sanctioned  
(Rs. in Lakh Crore) 
2015-16 3.49 1.37 
2016-17 3.97 1.80 
2017-18 4.81 2.54 
2018-19 5.98 3.22 
2019-20 6.22 3.37 
2020-21 5.07 3.22 
2021-22  5.38 3.39 
2022-23 6.23 4.56 
2023-24 6.67 5.41 
2024-25 5.46 5.52 
2025-26* 5.00 6.14 
Total 58.31 40.56 
  *Provisional (as on 31.03.2026) 
  
2.         The Public Sector Banks (PSBs) launched Credit Assessment 
Model (CAM) for sanctioning of MSME loan based on digital footprints for Micro, 
Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) in the year 2025, which is being 
implemented in earnest. 
During 1st April 2025 to 31st March, 2026, over 5.95 lakh MSME loan 
applications amounting to more than ₹87,700 crore have been sanctioned by 
the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) under the digital credit underwriting 
programmes. 
3.         Major PSBs and Private Sector Banks (PVBs) in India actively maintain 
co-lending partnerships under the Reserve Bank of India (Co-Lending 
Arrangements) Directions, 2025.  
4.  Also, to increase liquidity of TReDS, the following improvements are 
envisaged, as announced in the Union Budget 2026-27: 
 Mandate TReDS as the transaction settlement platform for all 
purchases from MSMEs by CPSEs, serving as a benchmark for other 
corporates. 
 Introduce a credit guarantee support mechanism through CGTMSE for 
invoice discounting on TReDS platform. 

13 
 
 Linking of GeM with TReDS for sharing information with financiers 
about government purchases from MSMEs, encouraging cheaper and 
quicker financing. 
 Introduce TReDS receivables as asset-backed securities, helping 
develop a secondary market, enhancing liquidity and settlement of 
transactions.” 
 
1.17.1 The Committee had recommended expanding Bank-NBFC co-lending 
arrangements and TReDS to bridge the $530 billion formal MSME credit gap. The 
Committee note the Department's submission detailing progress under Pradhan 
Mantri MUDRA Yojana (PMMY), Public Sector Banks' digital Credit Assessment 
Model (CAM) sanctions (Rs.87,700 crore in FY 2025–26), the RBI (Co-Lending 
Arrangements) Directions, 2025, and proposed TReDS enhancements in Union 
Budget 2026–27. 
 
1.17.2 The Committee also note with appreciation the key TReDS measures 
announced in Union Budget 2026–27—mandating CPSE purchases on TReDS, 
introducing CGTMSE credit guarantees, integrating GeM, and enabling 
secondary market ABS securitization. The Committee recognize that enhancing 
liquidity and financial depth through these mechanisms serves as a direct 
catalyst for the structural expansion of TReDS, lowering financing costs for 
MSMEs. 
 
1.17.3   The Committee, however, observe that despite these policy frameworks, 
credit flow remains heavily skewed—as reflected in the sharp 36 per cent CAGR 
in NBFC-MSME credit—indicating that MSMEs continue to rely on high-cost 
standalone NBFC loans rather than benefiting from lower blended interest rates 
under co-lending partnerships.   
 
1.17.4   Furthermore, the Committee are of the view that the structural expansion 
of TReDS will remain incomplete if restricted largely to CPSE transactions, 
making the onboarding of large private sector corporate buyers—who account 
for the major share of delayed receivables—critical to resolving cash flow 
constraints for the 'missing middle'. 

14 
 
 
1.17.5   In view of the above, the Committee emphasize the need to actively scale 
up and monitor Bank-NBFC co-lending arrangements, ensuring that lower 
interest rate benefits reach MSMEs directly rather than getting absorbed by 
financial intermediaries. Simultaneously, the Department of Financial Services, 
in coordination with the RBI and Ministry of MSME, should fast-track the newly 
announced TReDS liquidity measures; and explore mechanisms to 
progressively onboard large private corporate buyers. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
CYBER FRAUD 
 
1.18 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note with grave concern the escalating sophistication of cyber-
enabled financial crimes, which have evolved from simple greed-based 
inducements to complex "extraneous" threats such as digital arrest scams, 
phishing, and investment frauds. The Committee note that while the Chakshu 
portal and the Digital Intelligence Unit (DIU) under the Department of 
Telecommunications are operational, their success is entirely contingent upon 
real-time financial API integration and seamless data sharing managed by the 
Department of Financial Services and the banking sector. The Committee 
further acknowledge the submission of Department of Financial Services 
regarding a proposed compensation framework for small-value digital frauds 
(up to ₹25,000) to be funded via the Depositor Education and Awareness Fund 
(DEAF) and banks, which is expected to have a negligible impact on the record 
profits of Public Sector Banks. 
The Committee observe several critical systemic failures that facilitate 
the laundering of proceeds of crime within the formal banking system. Firstly, 
there is a glaring failure in KYC and real-time monitoring; despite large, high-
velocity inflows and outflows of unaccounted money, bank systems often fail to 
trigger red flags, raising serious questions about technological obsolescence or 
potential complicity at the branch level. Secondly, the "Golden Hour"—the 
critical 3-to-4-hour window for freezing defrauded funds—is frequently lost 
because victims are often too ashamed to report crimes immediately, and local 
law enforcement (at the District SP level) lacks the technological wherewithal 
and specialized training to interface with banks to stop transactions in real-time. 
Finally, while criminals leverage government-enabled modes like IMPS for rapid 
fund siphoning, banking technology has not kept pace with distributed ledger 
solutions or advanced DDoS protection. 

15 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Financial 
Services and RBI implement a "Penal Framework for Negligent Branches," 
where banks hosting multiple "mule accounts" are strictly penalized and held 
accountable for KYC lapses. Further, the Committee urge the Department to 
mandate that all public and private sector banks provide a seamless, 24/7 
digital interface with the DIU to ensure that "Freezing Orders" are executed 
within the golden hour. Furthermore, the Department must evaluate the 
integration of Blockchain-based security and AI-driven Mule Account Detection 
(such as MuleHunter.AI) to proactively flag suspicious account activity. To 
bridge the enforcement gap, the Department must lead a "Knowledge Sharing 
Initiative" to equip district-level police with the technical knowledge needed to 
recover funds. Lastly, the Committee recommend exploring "Double-Check 
Verification" for high-velocity IMPS transactions and launching a massive, 
shame-neutralizing awareness campaign to educate the public on the 
mechanics of non-greed scams like "Digital Arrests." 
 
1.19 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial 
Services) has furnished the following written submission: 
“The Government has been constantly engaging with the financial sector 
regulators and other concerned stakeholders to review the issues related to 
threats such as digital arrest scams, phishing, and investment frauds in the 
country. Based on the review assessment, various regulatory and supervisory 
interventions have been taken from time to time. This inter-alia includes the 
following:  
 
i. Banks have been advised to ensure deployment and adoption of robust 
software for real-time transaction monitoring and use of AI / ML tools in 
detecting suspicious and fraudulent transaction patterns as well as use 
of network analytics in identifying mule networks. 
ii. Issuance of various Advisories delineating specific actions to be taken by 
the banks in mitigating the misuse of banking channel through robust 
systems and controls for the prevention and detection of cyber enabled 
frauds & suspected money mules. 
iii. Close monitoring of any misuse of the banking channels for proliferation 
of the cyber-enabled frauds and coordination with other stakeholders to 
arrest spread of money-mules in banking sector. 
iv. Focused thematic assessments carried out in major banks, with high 
number of money mule accounts, to assess any gaps in the systems and 
controls so as to prevent cyber-frauds / money mules. This was followed 
by meetings with the banks concerned and issuance of Supervisory 
Letters to these banks for rectification of the identified gaps. 
v. Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued Master Directions on Digital 
Payment Security Controls in February, 2021 to combat web and mobile 
app threats. These guidelines mandate the banks to implement a 
common minimum standards of security controls for various payment 
channels like internet, mobile banking, card payment etc.  

16 
 
vi. RBI has launched an Artificial Intelligence (AI) based tool ‘MuleHunter’ 
for identification of money mule and advised the banks and financial 
institutions for its uses.  
vii. Additionally, National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) provides a 
fraud monitoring solution to all the banks to generate alerts and decline 
transactions by using AI/ ML based models for UPI transactions.   
viii. In order to facilitate citizens to report all types of cyber fraud including 
financial fraud, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has launched the National 
Cyber Crime Reporting portal (https://cybercrime.gov.in) as well as a 
National Cybercrime Helpline Number ”1930. Department of 
Telecommunications has also launched Digital Intelligence Platform 
(DIP) and ‘Chakshu’ facility. ‘Chakshu’ facilitates citizens to report 
suspected fraud communication received over call, SMS or WhatsApp 
with the intention of defrauding like KYC expiry or update of bank account 
/ etc.  
ix. Regular outreach programmes through seminars / workshops are being 
conducted to sensitise both Top Management and field functionaries in 
banks on the importance of adherence to the KYC AML / CFT regulations 
and consequences of non-compliance. This also includes participation of 
Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) including Indian Cybercrime 
Coordination Centre (I4C), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and FIU-IND. 
 
Further, the existing instructions on ‘Limiting Liability of Customers in 
Unauthorised Electronic Banking Transactions’ were reviewed by the Reserve 
Bank and the draft revised instructions on ‘Customer Protection in Electronic 
Banking Transactions’ have been issued on March 6, 2026 for public 
consultation. The draft instructions propose to introduce a compensation 
mechanism for small value fraudulent electronic banking transactions. As per 
the proposed compensation mechanism, a bona fide victim, being an individual 
person and having lodged a complaint involving gross loss of an amount up to 
₹50,000 on account of fraudulent electronic banking transaction(s) covered 
under paragraphs 76M and 76N of the draft instructions, shall be compensated 
85 per cent of the net loss amount (calculated after reducing recoveries made, 
whether before or after paying the compensation, from the gross loss amount), 
or ₹25,000, whichever is less, once during his / her lifetime subject to conditions. 
Out of the 85 per cent compensated to the customer, 65 per cent shall be borne 
by the Reserve Bank, 10 per cent by the customer’s bank and the remaining 10 
per cent by the beneficiary bank. 
 
RBI guidelines on the ‘Operation of Bank Accounts and Money Mules’, 
mandates that the bank shall strictly adhere to the instructions on opening of 
accounts and monitoring of transactions, to minimize the operations of ‘Money 
Mules’ that are used to launder the proceeds of fraud schemes (e.g., phishing 
and identity theft) by criminals who gain illegal access to deposit accounts by 
recruiting third parties that act as ‘money mules’. The bank shall undertake 
diligence measures and meticulous monitoring to identify accounts which are 
operated as Money Mules and take appropriate action, including reporting of 
suspicious transactions to FIU-IND. Further, if it is established that an account 
opened and operated is that of a Money Mule, but STR was not filed by the 

17 
 
concerned bank, it shall then be deemed that the bank has not complied with 
these directions.  
 
Further, it may be noted that RBI (Commercial Banks - KYC) Directions, 2025 
dated November 28, 2025 (updated as on December 29, 2025) do not contain 
any instructions on imposition of lien or freezing of accounts, except for freezing 
of financial assets under Section 51A of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 
(UAPA), 1967 and Section 12A of WMD Act, 2005.” 
 
 
1.20.1   The Committee, in their earlier Report, had expressed grave concern 
over the escalation of complex cyber-enabled financial crimes, such as "digital 
arrest" scams, phishing, and investment frauds, and recommended establishing 
a strict penal framework for negligent bank branches hosting mule accounts, 
mandating a 24/7 real-time digital interface between banks and the Digital 
Intelligence Unit (DIU) to freeze funds within the "Golden Hour", integrating AI-
driven mule detection tools, implementing double-check verification for high-
velocity IMPS transactions, and launching targeted, shame-neutralizing public 
awareness campaigns.  
 
1.20.2  In response, the Committee note the Department’s submission detailing 
various supervisory and regulatory measures, including the deployment of 
AI/ML tools by banks, thematic assessments resulting in Supervisory Letters, 
the launch of 'MuleHunter' by the RBI, NPCI’s fraud monitoring model, MHA’s 
1930 helpline, DoT’s 'Chakshu' portal, the RBI (Commercial Banks - KYC) 
Directions, 2025, and the draft instructions on 'Customer Protection in Electronic 
Banking Transactions' proposing a compensation framework for small-value 
frauds up to Rs.25,000. 
 
1.20.3 The Committee, however, are constrained to observe that the 
Department’s reply remains largely procedural and fails to offer effective 
solutions to plug critical operational gaps. In particular, assigning 65 per cent of 
compensation payouts to the RBI while imposing a mere 10 per cent burden on 
beneficiary banks creates a severe moral hazard, failing to enforce direct 
accountability on receiving institutions that host mule accounts.  Furthermore, 
retrospective STR filings and macro-level advisories do not resolve the "Golden 

18 
 
Hour" bottleneck or establish branch-level deterrence against negligent KYC 
verification. 
 
1.20.4   The Committee, therefore, stress that curbing cyber-fraud requires 
holding receiving institutions directly accountable, necessitating a re-calibration 
of the draft liability framework to impose substantial loss-sharing burdens on 
banks harboring mule accounts. Concurrently, the Department of Financial 
Services and RBI should deploy an automated 24/7 API interface between 
reporting portals and Core Banking Systems for Golden-Hour fund recovery, 
accompanied by mandatory transaction safeguards and strict branch-level 
accountability for KYC lapses. 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
PRADHAN MANTRI JAN DHAN YOJANA (PMJDY) 
The Committee note the monumental scale of PMJDY, which has evolved into the 
world's largest financial inclusion initiative, successfully opening of 57.64 crore 
accounts with a cumulative balance of Rs. 2.90 lakh crore as of February 2026. The 
Committee, however, observe that approximately 25% to 26% of these accounts 
remain inoperative or dormant, prompting the Government to conduct a massive 
saturation campaign resulting in the re-KYC of over 5.20 crore accounts. The 
Committee urge the Government to officially pivot its policy focus from mere account 
acquisition to active usage, increased digital literacy and sustained, outcome-based 
financial utilization. To achieve this, the Committee recommend aggressive leveraging 
of the 16.33 lakh Business Correspondent (BC) network of the banks and the 2,421 
Centres for Financial Literacy (CFLs) to drive continuous behavioral interventions, 
ensuring that newly banked households are seamlessly integrated into the formal 
digital footprint via UPI and Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT). 
Reply of the Government 
As per RBI guidelines, savings and current accounts are treated as inoperative if there 
are no customer-induced transactions for more than two years. Banks have been 
advised to undertake annual reviews of such accounts, trace account holders, and 
simplify the activation process through measures such as updation of KYC via 
mobile/internet banking, non-home branches, Video Customer Identification Process 
(V-CIP), Aadhaar OTP-based e-KYC, and self-declaration where there is no change in 
KYC details. During the recent saturation campaign, re-KYC of about 5.20 crore PMJDY 
accounts was completed. Banks also conduct regular awareness programmes and 
camps to encourage active usage of accounts, which is being continuously monitored 
by the Government. 
 

20 
 
Further, the Government has undertaken several initiatives to promote meaningful 
account utilisation, digital inclusion, and financial literacy, including the following: 
 
i. Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT): Leveraging the JAM Trinity to facilitate direct 
transfer of benefits into bank accounts, thereby promoting active account usage 
and reducing leakages. 
ii. Expansion of Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI): Significant growth in digital and 
UPI transactions has strengthened financial inclusion, enabled creation of digital 
financial footprints, and improved access to formal credit channels, especially for 
underserved sections. UPI has been the major driving force in the overall growth 
of digital payment transactions in the country accounting for 84% of digital payment 
transactions in FY 2025-26. 
No. of UPI transactions have grown from 92 crore in FY 2017-18 to 24,162 crore 
in FY 2025-26 at CAGR of 101%. During the same period, the overall value of 
transactions has grown from ₹ 1.10 lakh crore to ₹ 314 lakh crore. During the 
current financial year FY 2026-27 (as on 06.05.2026), volume of UPI transactions 
stands at 3,155 crore and value stands at ₹ 42 lakh crore. 
iii. Business Correspondent (BC) Network: A strong network of about 17.05 lakh 
BCs is facilitating last-mile banking services and spreading awareness regarding 
digital and financial services in rural and remote areas. As per banks, currently 
around 47 banking services are being offered by these BCs. 
iv. Financial Literacy Initiatives: As per Reserve Bank of India (RBI), the country 
has built a massive financial education network consisting of 2,421 Centres for 
Financial Literacy (CFLs) and 1,516 Financial Literacy Camps (FLCs) as on 
December 31, 2025. Between 01.04.2025 and 31.12.2025, these CFLs and FLCs 
actively conducted 7,99,796 and 1,38,347 awareness camps, respectively. These 
initiatives successfully drive grassroots financial inclusion by educating diverse 
target groups on secure digital payments, smart banking habits, and basic financial 
management. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-Parl. 
dated 17.07.2026] 
 

21 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
ATAL PENSION YOJANA (APY) 
The Committee note the allocation of Rs. 202 crore towards the APY Gap Fund for 
2026-27, alongside impressive gross enrolments that consistently exceed 1 crore 
annually, reaching 1.19 crore as of February 2026. The Committee observe, however, 
that the persistency rate of subscribers remains stagnant at around 50-51%, which 
directly resulted in a significant underutilization of incentive funds during the 2024-25 
fiscal year, leaving Rs. 55.95 crore in savings. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Financial Services deploy highly targeted capacity-building 
programs for field staff, BCs, and Self-Help Groups (SHGs) to actively pursue inactive 
subscribers. The department can also consider introducing flexibility in contributions 
for informal workers to improve overall persistency. Furthermore, as recommended by 
the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the Committee strongly urge the 
Department to critically re-evaluate the transition of pension payments to Pension 
Fund Managers (PFMs) by 2030-31, a move that could significantly minimize the 
reliance on government gap funding. 
Reply of the Government 
Atal Pension Yojana (APY) was launched on 09.05.2015, with the objective of creating 
a universal social security system for all Indians, especially the poor, the under-
privileged and the workers in the unorganised sector. APY is being administered by 
the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) under the overall 
administrative and institutional architecture of National Pension System (NPS).  
The gross enrolment figure of 1.35 crore in FY 2025-26, continuing a trend of 
exceeding 1 crore enrolments over the last 4 years reflects the coordinated efforts of 
PFRDA, APY Providers (APY-SPs), State Level Bankers’ Committees (SLBCs), LDMs 
and other stakeholders making it the highest ever APY enrolment in a financial year 
since the inception of the Scheme. 
Improving subscriber retention has been a sustained focus area for PFRDA and it is 
pertinent to note that the persistency rate has been consistently maintained at around 
50-51% over the last three years even after enrolling nearly 4 crore subscribers, which 
is a testament to the continued and concerted efforts of PFRDA, APY-SPs, SLBCs, 

22 
 
and other stakeholder institutions in retaining subscribers who predominantly belong 
to the informal sector with irregular and seasonal income flows. Sustaining even this 
level of persistency among such a financially vulnerable segment of the population, in 
itself, reflects the effectiveness of the outreach and engagement mechanisms put in 
place by PFRDA. 
However, the Department/PFRDA is fully committed to building upon the existing 
momentum through a series of well-targeted and strengthened interventions.  
Detailed below are the initiatives undertaken by PFRDA to improve persistency and 
outreach:  
 (a) Targeted Capacity-Building and Outreach 
 
PFRDA has proactively engaged in extensive outreach and capacity-building 
initiatives at the ground level for targeted capacity-building and outreach. The details 
are as under:  
 32 APY Outreach Programs have been conducted across the country in FY 
2025-26, in coordination with State Level Bankers' Committees (SLBCs) and 
Lead District Managers (LDMs), attended by senior officials of PFRDA, Banks, 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD), State Governments, and State Rural Livelihood 
Missions (SRLMs). 
 A dedicated campaign ‘Power to Persist’ has been launched to encourage the 
banks to improve the persistency and 382 APY Awareness Programs were 
conducted in FY 2025-26 (till Q3, FY 2025-26) in Hindi, English, and regional 
languages, specifically targeting APY subscribers to reinforce the importance 
of regular contributions and the long-term benefits of the scheme. 
 PFRDA has empaneled a dedicated training agency for imparting Awareness 
Programs through for ensuring wider reach even in geographically remote 
areas. 
 Engagement with National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) has been done for 
outreach at the grassroot level, as Sakhis under NRLM are well suited for re-
engaging non-persistent subscribers. 

23 
 
 Protean Central Recordkeeping Agency (PCRA) also conducts need-based 
training programs for Banks, SLBCs/UTLBCs, LDMs, and SRLMs on a regular 
basis, equipping field functionaries with the knowledge and tools to actively 
pursue and retain subscribers. 
  
(b) Engagement with Banks, SLBCs, BCs and SHGs 
Sustained engagement with banks at every level is at the heart of making APY a truly 
inclusive scheme. To this end, PFRDA maintains regular and structured engagement 
with all APY Service Provider banks through a multi-pronged approach encompassing 
periodic performance review letters, regular data sharing on enrolment and 
persistency metrics, and Video Conference (VC) calls with Nodal Officers of banks 
and SLBCs. These interactions are not merely administrative in nature but also serve 
as meaningful platforms where challenges faced by banks on the ground is heard, 
actionable strategies are jointly deliberated, and successful practices of well-
performing banks are shared. Banks have been specifically advised to leverage their 
Banking Correspondent (BC) networks as a critical last-mile channel. 
  
(c) Flexibility in Contribution Mechanisms for Informal Workers 
The APY scheme already has built-in flexibility in its contribution structure, specifically 
designed keeping in mind the irregular and seasonal income patterns of informal 
sector workers. Subscribers have the option to contribute on a monthly, quarterly, or 
half-yearly basis, allowing them to align their contributions with their income. This 
reflects PFRDA's longstanding sensitivity to the financial circumstances of the target 
subscriber base. Furthermore, a non-persistent subscriber can seamlessly re-activate 
their account by paying a nominal delayed contribution interest of merely Rs. 1 for 
every Rs. 100 or part thereof of contribution for each month of delay. It is also 
noteworthy that this amount is not a penalty in the conventional sense, it is essentially 
the interest foregone due to the delayed investment of funds, and importantly, this 
amount is credited directly into the subscriber's own account, thereby further building 
their pension corpus rather than being forfeited. This subscriber-friendly provision 
ensures that temporary financial hardships do not permanently exclude informal 
workers from the long-term benefits of the scheme. 

24 
 
PFRDA shall nonetheless continue to explore further to the contribution framework 
through its ongoing policy reviews and stakeholder consultations including DFS, 
remaining responsive to the evolving needs of its subscriber base. 
  
(d) Encouragement of APY-SPs (Banks/DoP) 
For the re-engagement of non-persistent subscribers, PFRDA has been actively 
encouraging APY-Service Providers (APY-SPs) to contact the subscribers via regular 
SMS or telephone and also through branches and channel partners. 
  
(e) Media and Communication Campaigns 
PFRDA undertakes multi-media campaigns for APY promotion and subscriber 
awareness in Hindi, English, and regional languages, covering TV, Radio, Print, social 
media and theatre campaigns. A special advertisement on Persistency has also been 
released. PFRDA and APY also maintain an active presence across LinkedIn, X, 
Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube. 
  
On the Transition of Pension Payments to Pension Fund Managers (PFMs) by 
2030-31 EFC, during the appraisal of the scheme recommended to closely monitor 
the learnings and outcomes emerging from the Unified Pension Scheme (UPS) model 
for Central government employees over the next 2-3 years. The insights drawn from 
the UPS experience shall be duly incorporated in the next EFC proposal in 2031.  
 The first pay out from the scheme will commence in 2035.  
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
PRADHAN MANTRI MUDRA YOJANA (PMMY) 
The Committee note the massive scale and transformative economic impact of PMMY, 
under which more than 56.78 crore collateral-free loans amounting to ₹38.93 lakh 
crore have been sanctioned to non-corporate, small enterprises since its inception in 

25 
 
April 2015. The Committee observe the critical insights and key recommendations 
from the "Impact Assessment Report of Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana" (2023) 
conducted by NITI Aayog. The key recommendations of NITI Aayog include the 
complete digitization of the lending process for transparency, the establishment of a 
real-time beneficiary data portal, and the mandate for E-KYC and Udyam registration 
for robust credit checks. Furthermore, NITI Aayog recommended a shift toward online 
and social media advertising to reach tech-savvy youth, the implementation of 
Chatbots for grievance redressal, and the creation of a recognition mechanism to 
incentivize Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) performing well in aspirational districts 
and among SC/ST/OBC categories. The Committee further note that while the scheme 
has successfully generated self-employment—with nearly 68% of loans sanctioned to 
women entrepreneurs—the assessment identifies a persistent structural imbalance 
with credit saturation being significantly higher in urban clusters compared to deep 
rural pockets. The Committee acknowledge that the credit guarantee framework is 
robustly supported by a ₹3,000 crore corpus provided to the National Credit Guarantee 
Trustee Company (NCGTC) under the Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro Units 
(CGFMU). The Committee recommend that the Department of Financial Services 
(DFS) proactively implement the NITI Aayog recommendations to strengthen the 
scheme's architecture. Specifically, the Department should prioritize the development 
of a real-time tracking portal and enforce the use of digital background checks to 
provide a security net for collateral-free lending. 
Reply of the Government 
The Jan Samarth portal is a one-stop digital platform for linking twelve Government-
sponsored loans and subsidies schemes. It provides a quick and efficient way to apply 
for loans and obtain approvals based on a digital evaluation of the applicant's data. 
Further, many banks and financial institutions have developed online platforms and 
mobile apps for end to end digital processing of loan applications, reducing the need 
for physical paperwork and in-person visits. Applications submitted by borrowers are 
reflected in the banks' portal, while sanction/disbursement updates are transmitted 
back to the Jan Samarth Portal via reverse API. 

26 
 
As per RBI Master Direction on Lending to Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
(MSME) Sector, MSMEs are required to register online on the Udyam Registration 
portal and obtain ‘Udyam Registration Certificate’ and for Priority Sector Lending (PSL) 
purposes banks shall be guided by the classification recorded in the Udyam 
Registration Certificate (URC). Banks are mandated to obtain URC from MSME 
borrowers. Further, banks also facilitate the prospective borrowers to obtain the same. 
The digital lending process incorporates multiple due diligence mechanisms, including 
mandatory E-KYC and Udyam Registration. Member Lending Institutions (MLIs) utilize 
various Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) tools such as PAN validation, GSTIN 
verification, ITR verification, Bank Statement Analyzer, and credit history reports for 
digital background checks and credit assessment. 
 
To enhance awareness regarding PMMY, the Government undertakes publicity 
campaigns through print, electronic and social media, financial literacy camps, town 
hall meetings, and financial inclusion drives. Banks also conduct outreach activities 
through branches and Banking Correspondents (BCs). 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
INCENTIVE SCHEME FOR PROMOTION OF RUPAY DEBIT CARDS AND LOW-
VALUE BHIM-UPI TRANSACTIONS (PERSON-TO-MERCHANT)  
 
The Committee note the massive Rs. 2000 crore budgetary allocation for 2026-27 
designed to offset ecosystem costs caused by the zero-MDR policy on RuPay and 
low-value UPI transactions. The Committee observe that while UPI is expected to 
process up to 150 billion transactions per month and add 600 million new users, the 
current government incentive covers merely 11% of the industry’s actual costs and 
14% of potential MDR collections, creating a structural funding gap impacting long-
term infrastructural investment. The Committee recommend that while the proposed 
3-year multi-year scheme and cashback components are necessary to democratize 

27 
 
digital payments in untapped Tier 3-6 cities, the Department of Financial Services must 
concurrently explore a self-reliant, tiered revenue model. The Committee would like to 
emphasize that establishing a viable revenue mechanism is critical to ensuring the UPI 
ecosystem achieves financial sustainability without perpetually straining the 
Government  exchequer. 
Reply of the Government 
Given the sustainability of the UPI ecosystem and the burden on the Government 
exchequer, the Department is currently exploring two options: (i) Examining the 
feasibility of restoring MDR for certain high threshold transactions/ merchants; and (ii) 
a tiered incentive structure to phase-out the Government support in the next few years. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
STATUS OF BANKING SECTOR 
The Committee note the unprecedented financial turnaround of the Indian banking 
sector, highlighted by Public Sector Banks (PSBs) achieving their highest ever 
aggregate net profit of Rs. 1.78 lakh crore in FY 2024-25, alongside a historic reduction 
in Gross NPAs to 2.05%. The Committee observe that to fuel the ambitious Viksit 
Bharat 2047 goals, the Government aims to dramatically increase the credit-to-GDP 
ratio from its current around 57% and has formed a High-Level Committee to strategize 
this transition while safeguarding financial stability, inclusion and consumer protection, 
alongside exploring an increase in the FDI limit for PSBs to 49% to boost stock 
valuation. 
The Committee recommend the accelerated deployment of Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learning (AI/ML) to optimize cash-flow-based lending, early warning 
systems, and real-time fraud detection. Concurrently, the Committee urge the 
Government to ensure that aggressive capital expansion, potential mega-mergers, 
and foreign investment drives do not dilute the PSBs' foundational mandate of driving 
Priority Sector Lending (PSL) and servicing unremunerative rural branches. 
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning (AI and ML) have gained prominence, 
especially with advancements in generative AI models based on large language 
models. The banking sector is integrating AI/ Gen-AI into its operations to enhance 
operational efficiency, accuracy, risk management, and customer experience, thereby 
transforming itself into a more innovative, inclusive and customer-centric financial 
ecosystem.  
AI/ML solutions have huge potential to enhance risk management capabilities, by 
undertaking analysis of massive datasets, finding solutions not available earlier and 
getting better perspectives on the real-time market conditions; thereby allowing for 
more accurate and timely business risk predictions, contributing to improved portfolio 
management, loan underwriting, and fraud detection.  
With regard to deployment of AI/ML for optimising early warning systems, banks are 
leveraging AI/ML by integrating multiple internal and external data sources to enable 
proactive risk identification, continuous monitoring and early detection of incipient 
stress.    
Banks are implementing AI/ML-driven analytics for assessing credit worthiness of 
borrowers using transaction history, repayment behaviour, and cash flows. It fosters 
dynamic assessment of creditworthiness through digital data like GST returns, ITR 
and banks statements, etc. Some PSBs have deployed AI/ML-led models for credit 
assessment of MSME borrowers viz., SLICE model by Indian Bank, Business Rule 
Engine (BRE) for Straight-Through Processing by Punjab & Sind Bank, BRE 
framework by State Bank of India, and AI/ML-driven analytics for assessment by Bank 
of Maharashtra.     
Banks are leveraging AI/ML to strengthen real time fraud detection. To accelerate 
deployment and maximise effectiveness, strategic and technological measures being 
implemented by the banks include, inter alia, the following- 
 
a. Investment in Advanced Data Infrastructure  
b. Deployment of Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI’s) Mule-Hunter. AI for identifying 
suspected mule accounts 

29 
 
c. Deployment of Machine learning models to identify risk patterns 
d. Integration of AI/ML solutions with big data lake and payment channels for 
seamless fraud detection 
e. Deployment of AI/ML powered decision engines to automate fraud response 
actions viz., transaction blocking, alert generation, customer intimation, etc.   
Going forward, it is proposed to expand the usage of AI/ML for improving customer 
service through multilingual chatbots and virtual sales assistants, process automation, 
document summarization, and internal reporting, alongside greater adoption in credit 
underwriting, fraud analytics, risk and compliance monitoring, predictive analytics, 
customer engagement, and operational efficiency. 
 
To ensure safe, secure and effective deployment of AI and ML, safeguard measures 
outlined by RBI, and implemented/adopted by the Indian banking sector, include, inter 
alia, the following: 
 
a. RBI has released guidelines and directions to ensure that AI/ML applications are 
used responsibly and consistent with regulatory requirements.  
b. RBI’s Regulatory Sandbox framework fosters responsible innovation in financial 
services, promote efficiency and bring benefit to consumers, and allows banks 
to test AI/ML applications before full-scale deployment, helping to identify 
potential risks and improve compliance. 
c. In order to encourage responsible and ethical adoption of AI in the financial 
sector, the FREE-AI Committee was constituted by RBI. Committee formulated 
7 Sutras that represent the core principles to guide AI adoption in the financial 
sector. These include Trust is the Foundation, People First, Innovation over 
Restraint, Fairness and Equity, Accountability, Understandable by Design, and 
Safety, Resilience and Sustainability. 
d. The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 establishes a legal framework for 
processing personal data, emphasizing individual privacy, consent, and data 
security.  

30 
 
e. Banks are required to implement robust cybersecurity measures to protect 
against risks such as algorithmic discrimination, financial fraud, and regulatory 
arbitrage.  
f. Banks are encouraged to self-govern and self-regulate their AI/ML applications 
to avoid non-compliance and to use emerging technologies prudently. 
With regards to PSBs’ foundational mandate of driving Priority Sector Lending 
(PSL), PSBs are committed by their governing Acts1 to serve economic development 
in conformity with national policy and objectives, expand banking facilities particularly 
in underserved areas, and fulfil other public purposes. In line with the legislative intent, 
PSBs have consistently played an important role in nation-building as the principal 
source of finance and financial inclusion.  
Further, in terms of RBI Master Direction on Priority Sector Lending-Targets and 
Classification, a target of 40 per cent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit or Credit Equivalent 
amount of Off-Balance Sheet Exposures (ANBC or CEOBSE), whichever is higher, 
has been set for lending to the priority sector by domestic commercial banks, including 
PSBs and foreign banks with 20 and above branches. PSBs extended 42.3 per cent 
of their ANBC/ CEOBSE to the priority sector at end-March 2025. Moreover, PSBs 
have exceeded PSL sub-segmental (Agriculture, Small and Marginal Farmers, Non-
corporate Individual Farmers, Micro Enterprises, and Weaker Sections) targets. 
PSBs have a key role in meeting national development priorities and have significantly 
contributed to extend lending towards priority sector and expand financial inclusion, 
expand of banking services in rural and semi-urban areas. In addition to these, PSBs 
are major contributor in Government’s flagship initiatives like the PMJDY, Mudra 
Yojana, PM Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, PM Suraksha Bima Yojana and Atal Pension 
Yojana. These initiatives are contributing significantly to empowering marginalised 
sections, fostering financial inclusion, and promoting economic resilience across the 
country, specially the rural and semi urban areas. 
 
1 The preambles to the State Bank of India Act, 1955 and the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970/1980 
 

31 
 
In order to prevent banks and financial system from being misused for ML / TF / PF 
purposes, RBI has issued RBI (Commercial Banks – KYC) Directions, 2025, dated 
November 28, 2025 (updated as on December 29, 2025), which are in alignment with 
FATF Recommendations. The relevant instructions on this action item are mentioned 
below. 
 In terms of paragraph 39 of the said Directions, the bank shall undertake 
ongoing due diligence of customers to ensure that their transactions are 
consistent with their knowledge about the customers, customers’ business and 
risk profile, the source of funds / wealth. 
 Paragraph 40 of the said Directions mentions that without prejudice to the 
generality of factors that call for close monitoring, the bank shall necessarily 
monitor the following types of transactions: 
i. Large and complex transactions including RTGS transactions, and those 
with unusual patterns, inconsistent with the normal and expected activity of 
the customer, which have no apparent economic rationale or legitimate 
purpose. 
ii. Transactions which exceed the thresholds prescribed for specific 
categories of accounts. 
iii. High account turnover inconsistent with the size of the balance maintained. 
iv. Deposit of third-party cheques, drafts, etc. in the existing and newly opened 
accounts followed by cash withdrawals for large amounts. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
DISTRICT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE / DISTRICT LEVEL REVIEW 
COMMITTEE 
The Committee note the pivotal role played by Public Representatives, including 
Members of Parliament and MLAs, in the quarterly District Consultative Committee 
(DCC) and District Level Review Committee (DLRC) meetings. These meetings, serve 

32 
 
as the primary oversight mechanism for monitoring the Lead Bank Scheme and 
ensuring that credit flow is prioritized toward the needs of the local community and the 
priority sector. The Committee observe that the active participation of elected 
representatives brings necessary legislative accountability to the implementation of 
financial schemes and ensures that credit distribution aligns with the immediate needs 
of rural and underserved populations. The Committee observe, however, that the 
effectiveness of these oversight bodies is frequently undermined by procedural lapses 
and a lack of seniority in representation. In many instances, meetings are scheduled 
without providing sufficient notice to Members of Parliament, hindering their ability to 
participate and provide legislative guidance. Furthermore, the Committee is concerned 
by the trend of banks deputing junior-level staff who lack the decision-making authority 
required to resolve systemic bottlenecks or commit to the district-wise credit targets 
discussed during these sessions. Such practices render the consultative process 
redundant and dilute the impact of the Lead Bank Scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Financial Services issue a comprehensive 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for holding State Level Bankers' Committees 
(SLBCs) meetings. To augment this oversight, the Committee further recommend the 
development of a structured, centralized digital dashboard—modeled after the DISHA 
platform—to streamline the tracking of DCC/DLRC and SLBC data. The DCC be 
presided over by the senior most MP of the district. The Committee emphasize that 
replacing fragmented, quarterly-updated SLBC websites with a real-time tracking 
mechanism will significantly empower stakeholders to monitor Annual Credit Plans, 
credit-deposit ratios, and systemic bottlenecks effectively, thereby ensuring that 
financial inclusion goals are met with transparency and precision. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the Lead Bank Scheme, District Consultative Committee (DCC) and District 
Level Review Committee (DLRC) are the important district level fora facilitating 
coordination among commercial banks, Government agencies and other stakeholders 
at the district level to review and find solutions to the problems hindering 
developmental activities. While the objective of the DCC is to serve as a coordination 
and implementation forum, the DLRC is expected to serve as a review forum. Both are 

33 
 
distinct fora and as per RBI guidelines both the meetings are required to held 
separately. 
The District Collector is the Chairman of the DCC meetings. RBI, NABARD, all 
commercial banks including Small Finance Banks, Wholly Owned Subsidiary of 
Foreign Banks, Regional Rural Banks, Payment Banks, State / District Central Co-
operative Banks, various State Government departments and allied agencies are the 
members of the DCC. The participants of the DLRC meetings include all the member 
of the DCC and Public Representative. Minutes of both DCC and DLRC meetings are 
recorded separately and conduct of these meeting is monitored by RBI. 
The DLRC, constituted under the Lead Bank Scheme, serves as a key district-level 
forum for reviewing credit plans and improving the flow of credit to priority sectors. It 
also provides a platform for public representatives, including Members of Parliament 
and MLAs, to offer feedback on credit requirements and banking services in the 
district. The DLRC is chaired by the District Collector/District Magistrate and comprises 
representatives from RBI, NABARD, commercial banks (including SFBs, RRBs, 
payments banks, and co-operative banks), as well as relevant State Government 
departments and allied agencies. 
Recognising the importance of public representatives in strengthening the 
effectiveness of DLRC meetings, Lead Banks have been instructed to schedule 
meetings in consultation with MPs/MLAs, circulate agenda papers well in advance, 
and prepare an annual calendar of DCC/DLRC meetings at the beginning of each 
year. This calendar is to be drawn in consultation with the Chairperson, RBI’s Lead 
District Officer, and public representatives, and circulated to all stakeholders to ensure 
advance blocking of dates and timely participation. 
To further strengthen coordination, the Reserve Bank of India has advised its Regional 
Offices (vide communication dated July 01, 2024) to ensure that DLRC meetings are 
scheduled strictly in line with the convenience of MPs/MLAs/Zilla Panchayat Chiefs, 
and that Lead Banks/LDMs make enhanced efforts to secure their participation. 
Further, a comprehensive review of the Lead Bank Scheme (LBS) has been 
undertaken. RBI vide its Circular No. RBI/2026-27/150 
FIDD.CO.LBS.BC.No.03/02.01.001/2026-27 dated 19.06.2026 (copy enclosed), has 

34 
 
issued revised guidelines on the Lead Bank Scheme. The revised guidelines, inter-
alia, provide for the standardisation of the functioning of SLBCs/DCCs including the 
preparation of annual meeting calendars and improved dissemination of information. 
Lead Banks are also required to maintain SLBC websites containing relevant data, 
schedules, and minutes of meetings for greater transparency and accessibility. In 
addition, a unified data reporting portal for the Lead Bank Scheme is being developed, 
as announced in the Monetary Policy Statement of February 06, 2026, to replace 
fragmented reporting systems and enhance data quality, consistency, and real-time 
monitoring of credit flow and related parameters. 
These measures collectively aim to improve stakeholder participation, strengthen 
coordination with public representatives, and enhance transparency, efficiency, and 
effectiveness in the implementation of the Lead Bank Scheme. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.14  of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
REGIONAL RURAL BANKS (RRBs) 
The Committee note the successful completion of the structural consolidation of RRBs, 
reducing their number from 43 to 28 highly viable entities across 11 States, eliminating 
the need for further capital infusion in 2026-27. The Committee observe that RRBs 
have achieved a historic consolidated net profit of Rs. 7,720 crore in just the first nine 
months of FY 2025-26, driving Gross NPAs down to a 13-year low of 5.4%, though 
vulnerabilities remain, particularly the 13.8% GNPA in priority sector education loans.  
The Committee recommend that RRBs actively mitigate these specific sectoral risks 
by fully leveraging their inclusion in the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Education 
Loans (CGFSEL) and aggressively deploying AI-driven automated Early Warning 
Signals (EWS). Furthermore, the Committee strongly urge the Government to proceed 
with guiding highly profitable RRBs toward Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) to attract 
market capital and enforce higher standards of corporate governance. 
  

35 
 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding Asset Quality Concerns in Priority Sector Education Loans: 
All 28 RRBs have been enrolled as Member Lending Institutions under Credit Guarantee 
Fund Scheme for Education Loans (CGFSEL), enabling credit risk mitigation in education 
loans. Further, initiatives such as proposed tie-ups with NIRF-ranked institutions and 
convergence with PM Vidyalaxmi Scheme are aimed at improving credit appraisal and 
ensuring better asset quality. 
 
Regarding Implementation of Early Warning Signals: 
DFS has initiated steps towards implementation of an Enhanced Access and Service 
Excellence (EASE) based reform framework for RRBs, which includes strengthening of 
risk monitoring systems. An AI/ML-based model for early identification of stress in loan 
accounts has been developed at Banker’s Institute for Rural Development (BIRD), 
Lucknow and is currently under pilot implementation, with provision for subsequent 
scaling across RRBs. 
Regarding IPOs of Profitable RRBs 
Government has already issued guidelines for capital raising by RRBs through IPOs. 
Based on prescribed eligibility criteria, three RRBs have been identified and are in the 
process of submitting their proposals for consideration, which will facilitate capital 
augmentation and improved governance standards. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-Parl. 
dated 17.07.2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (MSMEs) 
The Committee note the critical importance of the MSME sector—employing 33.34 
crore individuals across 7.55 crore registered enterprises—and commend initiatives 
like the Rs. 10,000 crore SME Growth Fund and the deployment of new digital credit 
assessment models. The Committee observe that despite a 21.8% year-on-year 

36 
 
growth in bank credit to MSMEs, structural deficits persist, forcing MSMEs to rely 
heavily on NBFCs, which borrow from PSBs but lend at higher risk-adjusted rates, 
resulting in a 36% CAGR in NBFC-MSME credit. The Committee urge the Government 
to further bridge this $530 billion formal credit gap by aggressively expanding 
structured co-lending arrangements between banks and NBFCs to reduce the overall 
cost of capital. Additionally, the Committee recommend the robust expansion of the 
Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) to resolve acute liquidity constraints 
caused by delayed receivables, thereby ensuring uninterrupted operational cash flow 
for the 'missing middle'. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Pradhan Mantri MUDRA Yojana (PMMY) provides access to institutional 
collateral free credit to micro enterprises upto Rs.20 lakh, which is expanding every 
year. 
As on 31.03.2026, more than 58.31 crore loans amounting to Rs. 40.56 lakh crore 
have been sanctioned since the launch of Scheme, where about 67% of loan 
beneficiaries were Women Entrepreneurs & 49% loans have been sanctioned to 
SC/ST/OBC category of borrowers. 
 Category-wise break-up: - 
Category Percentage as per 
No. of Loans 
Percentage as per 
Amount Sanctioned 
Shishu 74% 32% 
Kishor 24% 43% 
Tarun   2% 25% 
Tarun Plus 0% 0% 
Total 100% 100% 
  
 
 Year-wise sanction amount: - 
Financial 
Year 
No. of Loans Sanctioned  
(in Crore) 
Amount Sanctioned  
(Rs. in Lakh Crore) 
2015-16 3.49 1.37 

37 
 
2016-17 3.97 1.80 
2017-18 4.81 2.54 
2018-19 5.98 3.22 
2019-20 6.22 3.37 
2020-21 5.07 3.22 
2021-22  5.38 3.39 
2022-23 6.23 4.56 
2023-24 6.67 5.41 
2024-25 5.46 5.52 
2025-26* 5.00 6.14 
Total 58.31 40.56 
  *Provisional (as on 31.03.2026) 
  
2.         The Public Sector Banks (PSBs) launched Credit Assessment Model (CAM) 
for sanctioning of MSME loan based on digital footprints for Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) in the year 2025, which is being implemented in earnest. 
During 1st April 2025 to 31st March, 2026, over 5.95 lakh MSME loan applications 
amounting to more than ₹87,700 crore have been sanctioned by the Public Sector 
Banks (PSBs) under the digital credit underwriting programmes. 
3.         Major PSBs and Private Sector Banks (PVBs) in India actively maintain co-
lending partnerships under the Reserve Bank of India (Co-Lending Arrangements) 
Directions, 2025.  
4.  Also, to increase liquidity of TReDS, the following improvements are envisaged, 
as announced in the Union Budget 2026-27: 
 Mandate TReDS as the transaction settlement platform for all purchases from 
MSMEs by CPSEs, serving as a benchmark for other corporates. 
 Introduce a credit guarantee support mechanism through CGTMSE for invoice 
discounting on TReDS platform. 
 Linking of GeM with TReDS for sharing information with financiers about 
government purchases from MSMEs, encouraging cheaper and quicker 
financing. 
 Introduce TReDS receivables as asset-backed securities, helping develop a 
secondary market, enhancing liquidity and settlement of transactions. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. Dated 17.07.2026] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.17 of Chapter I) 
 

38 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
INSURANCE SECTOR 
The Committee note that the insurance sector is undergoing a significant legislative 
and structural transition, highlighted by the Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment 
of Insurance Laws) Act, 2025, which has increased the FDI limit to 100% and 
empowered IRDAI with enhanced regulatory tools, including the power to disgorge 
wrongful gains. The Committee further note the welcome fiscal intervention of GST 
exemptions on individual life and health insurance policies effective from September 
2025, and the turnaround of Public Sector General Insurance Companies (PSGICs) 
to an aggregate profit of ₹803 crore in FY 2024-25. However, the Committee observe 
that overall insurance penetration has structurally declined from 4.2% in FY 2020-21 
to 3.70% in FY 2024-25, indicating that the sector’s growth is failing to keep pace with 
national GDP expansion. Furthermore, the critical solvency crisis within PSGICs, 
specifically the negative solvency ratios of Oriental Insurance (-1.03) and National 
Insurance (-0.67), which remain far below the regulatory mandate of 1.5. In the private 
sector, the Committee observe that high claim repudiation rates and high rate of 
rejections continue to erode public trust in health insurance products. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Financial Services and IRDAI adopt a 
multi-pronged strategy to bridge the "protection gap" and restore the health of the 
public sector: 
(i) Regulatory Enforcement on Claims: IRDAI must strictly enforce the 30-day 
turnaround time for Ombudsman compliance and mandate the use of 
standardized Customer Information Sheets (CIS). There must be zero tolerance 
for claim repudiations during active hospitalizations in the private sector. 
(ii) PSGIC Revitalization: While the Committee support the temporary use of 
"regulatory forbearance" regarding unrealized gains for solvency calculations, 
they urge the Department to prepare a time-bound roadmap for these 
companies to achieve organic solvency without perpetual reliance on 
accounting adjustments or emergency capital infusions. 
(iii) Technological Integration: PSGICs must aggressively scale up AI-powered 
assessments and 360-degree digital inspections for motor and property 
insurance to curb the high loss ratios caused by fraudulent claims. 

39 
 
(iv) Expanding Reach: To counter the decline in penetration, the Department 
should mandate the development of parametric insurance products for climate-
related risks (NatCat) and leverage the 16.33 lakh Business Correspondent 
(BC) network to penetrate Tier 3-6 cities and rural heartlands. 
(v) Accounting Transparency: The Committee urge the timely implementation of 
Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) by April 2027 to ensure that the financial 
health and liabilities of insurers are reported with global transparency and 
accuracy. 
Reply of the Government 
Insurance Regulator IRDAI has informed that the recent decline in insurance 
penetration (measured as premium as a % of GDP) is largely attributable to the 
relatively higher growth trajectory of nominal GDP during the period under 
consideration, rather than a contraction in the insurance sector. During the period, the 
total premium collected by Indian Insurance market grew by 43.6% from Rs 
8,30,813.34 crore in FY 2020-21 to Rs 11,93,444 crore in FY 2024-25. The number of 
policies issued also rose by 52.2% from 2748.60 lakh to 4183.75 lakh. These trends 
indicate that the sector continues to grow steadily though, its growth has not kept pace 
with the relatively higher expansion in nominal GDP. 
 
The proposed reforms by the IRDAI and broader policy changes of the government 
are expected to bring more accelerated growth. Therefore, the decline in penetration 
may not be construed as a structural weakness of the sector, but rather as a 
transitional outcome in a phase of high economic growth and ongoing structural 
reforms. The current policy and regulatory initiatives are expected to improve 
penetration levels over the medium to long term, particularly as inclusion efforts 
mature and insurance adoption deepens across previously underserved segments. 
 
(i) Regulatory Enforcement on Claims: IRDAI must strictly enforce the 30-day 
turnaround time for Ombudsman compliance and mandate the use of 
standardized Customer Information Sheets (CIS). There must be zero tolerance 
for claim repudiations during active hospitalizations in the private sector. 
 
IRDAI has established a robust regulatory framework to ensure timely compliance with 
Insurance Ombudsman awards and to strengthen transparency at the point of sale 
through standardized disclosures. Insurers are mandatorily required to comply with 
the awards within a prescribed period of 30 days. IRDAI has introduced explicit 
enforcement provisions, including the imposition of a monetary penalty of ₹5,000 per 
day for any delay in compliance beyond the stipulated timeline, payable to the 
complainant. This measure is aimed at ensuring accountability, expediting grievance 
redressal, and reinforcing policyholder confidence in the Ombudsman mechanism. 
Further, compliance is subject to supervisory monitoring, and insurers are required to 
establish internal governance mechanisms to track and ensure timely implementation 

40 
 
of such awards. Additionally, Vide Regulation (12) of IRDAI Protection of Policyholders 
Interest Regulations, 2024, IRDAI has mandated Customer Information Sheets (CIS) 
across insurance products as part of its broader policyholder protection framework. 
The CIS is designed to present key features of insurance policies including benefits, 
exclusions, terms and conditions, and obligations of policyholders in a simple, clear, 
and standardized format. This provision is aimed at reducing information asymmetry, 
promotes transparency, and enables informed decision-making at the point of sale, 
thereby mitigating risks of mis-selling and disputes. 
With regard to the claim repudiation, the details of health insurance claim settlement 
performance of private insurance companies (General and SAHI) of FY 2023-24 and 
FY 2024-25.  
 
Sl.No Parameters Unit FY 2023-24 FY 2024-25 
1. Claims Processed* No. 1.30 crore 1.69 crore 
2. Claims Paid No. 1.12 crore 1.49 crore 
3. Claims Paid per 10,000 Claims 
processed 
No. 8,637 8,796 
4. Claims repudiated per 10,000 
Claims processed 
No. 901 790 
5. Claims carried forward (for 
processing to next FY) per 10,000 
Claims processed 
No. 462 414 
6. Total Health Insurance premiums 
collected by private insurance 
companies (General and SAHI) 
₹ 66,687.80 
crore 
75,084.03 
crore 
7. Total Claims Pay-outs by private 
insurance companies (General 
and SAHI) 
₹ 42,001.75 
crore 
52,414.47 
crore 
Note: Above relates to the health insurance claim settlement performance of private insurance 
companies (General and SAHI) 
* Claims Processed = Claims Outstanding at the beginning of the financial year + New claims 
registered during the period 
 
IRDAI has undertaken comprehensive measures to ensure efficient settlement of all 
legitimate health insurance claims. The regulatory framework has been significantly 
strengthened through the IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders’ Interests, Operations 
and Allied Matters of Insurers) Regulations, 2024 and Master Circulars issued 
thereunder, which mandate strict timelines for claim settlement, enhanced disclosure 
standards, and robust governance mechanisms. 
 

41 
 
 In order to ensure transparency in the settlement, repudiation, and partial payment 
of claims, particularly with regard to the application of policy terms and conditions 
at the claims stage, insurers are mandated that: - 
 
i. No claim shall be repudiated without the approval of the Insurer’s Product 
Management Committee (PMC) or a three-member sub-group of PMC called 
the Claims Review Committee (CRC). 
ii. In case, the claim is repudiated or rejected or disallowed partially, complete 
details shall be communicated to the claimant giving reference to the specific 
terms and conditions of the policy document. If a customer is not satisfied with 
decision of the insurer on the claim, he/she may lodge a complaint with 
grievance redressal officer of insurer. The insurer shall acknowledge the 
complaint immediately on receipt. Insurers should provide resolution to the 
complaint within 14 days along with the reasons for not accepting the complaint 
with specific reference to the relevant terms and conditions of the policy.  If the 
complainant is not satisfied with the resolution so provided by the insurer, 
he/she may approach insurance ombudsman who may conduct hearing and 
adjudicate the matter by passing an award. 
iii. The policyholder or the claimant also has the option to register the complaint 
online at IRDAI’s Bima Bharosa by visiting https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/, an 
integrated grievance portal to facilitate the registering/ tracking of grievance 
online by the policyholders. The insurer’s system must be equipped with a real-
time mirroring functionality that ensures their grievance database is consistently 
synchronized with the Bima Bharosa. 
iv. If any claim is repudiated/rejected, there shall be a system in place to ensure 
timely and efficient resolution of grievances. Measures are also put in place to 
ensure that the grievances are resolved with accountability in a time bound 
manner. 
v. No claim shall be rejected or closed for want of documents or for delayed 
intimation of claim.  
vi. Stringent turnaround times have been prescribed for both cashless and 
reimbursement claims, along with penal interest provisions for delays.  
 
 Some of the major reasons for Partial Settlement/Disallowance of claims:  
 
i. Claims exceeding Sum Insured: Insurers register the full billed amount but pay 
only up to the Sum Insured; the excess is disallowed. 
ii. Co-payment clauses: Where co-payment applies, as per policy conditions, 
insurers pay only their share and disallow the policyholder’s portion. 
iii. Sub-limits: For policies with defined sub-limits (e.g., cataract, maternity), 
insurers pay only up to the sub-limit and disallow the excess. 

42 
 
iv. Top-up policies with deductibles: In top-up policies, claim amounts up to the 
deductible are disallowed, and insurers pay only the amount above the 
deductible. 
v. Room rent capping: If the claimed room rent exceeds the eligible limit, the 
excess amount is disallowed. 
vi. Proportionate charges: When a patient stay in a higher-category room, 
insurers pay charges applicable to the eligible room category and disallow the 
differential amount. 
vii. Non-medical expenses: Items not covered under the policy (e.g., attendant 
charges, consumables, PPE kits) are disallowed as per policy terms 
 
 
(ii)  PSGIC Revitalization: While the Committee support the temporary use of 
"regulatory forbearance" regarding unrealized gains for solvency calculations, 
they urge the Department to prepare a time-bound roadmap for these 
companies to achieve organic solvency without perpetual reliance on 
accounting adjustments or emergency capital infusions. 
 
In order to ensure financial stability in the insurance sector and protection of 
policyholders, the Act further mandates every insurer to maintain at all times, an 
excess of assets over liabilities of not less than 50% of the minimum capital amount. 
IRDAI further mandates insurers to maintain the control level of solvency of 150% at 
all times.  Further, the regulatory oversight of the IRDAI ensures transparency and 
policyholder protection by promoting fair business practices, solvency monitoring, 
supervision and efficient grievance redressal. 
 
The solvency position of three PSGICs, namely, Oriental Insurance Company Ltd., 
United India Insurance Company Ltd., and National Insurance Company Ltd. has 
remained below the prescribed control level of solvency, and in some cases, negative 
over the past few years. DFS and IRDAI are continuously monitoring the issue and 
there have been multiple reviews and correspondences with the three PSGICs in this 
matter. 
 
(iii) Technological Integration: PSGICs must aggressively scale up AI powered 
assessments and 360-degree digital inspections for motor and property 
insurance to curb the high loss ratios caused by fraudulent claims. 
 
To scale up AI powered assessments and 360-degree digital inspections, IRDAI has 
informed that: 
 
i. As per the Master Circulars issued by IRDAI, Insurers are required to put in 
place end to end technology solutions so as to ensure effective, efficient and 
seamless on-boarding of policyholder, renewal of policy, policy servicing, 
grievance redressal and claim settlement process. Insurers shall also 
endeavour to establish appropriate technology based infrastructure to handle 


43 
 
all the claims processing facilitating registration of claims intimation, providing 
acknowledgements, submission of documents etc.   
ii. The use of photo/video-based surveys, telematics, and data analytics can 
strengthen insurers’ ability to detect anomalies, validate claims, and assess 
losses in a consistent and auditable manner. These measures have contributed 
to improved operational efficiency, reduced subjectivity in assessments, and 
better control over loss ratios. PSGICs may also actively adopt and scale up 
the use of such technologies to enhance efficiency and strengthen claims 
assessment. 
iii. In addition, insurers are being encouraged to leverage advanced analytics, 
external data integration, and risk-modelling tools to enhance underwriting 
quality, pricing accuracy, and fraud detection capabilities. IRDAI also supports 
continuous upgradation of IT infrastructure and adoption of emerging 
technologies, while prioritizing adequate safeguards relating to data protection, 
cyber security, and governance. 
iv. At the same time, it is recognised that large-scale deployment and continuous 
upgradation of advanced technologies involve significant investments in IT 
infrastructure, data systems and skilled human resources. In the case of 
PSGICs, such initiatives may require calibrated implementation, considering 
legacy systems, operational constraints and the need for adequate capital 
support to sustain technology transformation. 
 
(iv) Expanding Reach: To counter the decline in penetration, the Department 
should mandate the development of parametric insurance products for climate-
related risks (NatCat) and leverage the 16.33 lakh Business Correspondent (BC) 
network to penetrate Tier 3-6 cities and rural heartlands. 
 
It may be noted that IRDAI has de-notified tariff wordings and encouraged product 
innovation, thereby enabling insurers to design and offer parametric and index-based 
insurance products, where pay-outs are triggered by predefined parameters such as 
rainfall levels or wind speed rather than assessment of actual losses. Such products 
are particularly relevant in addressing climate-related risks including floods, droughts, 
and other natural catastrophes. General insurers are already developing and offering 
such parametric solutions, especially for vulnerable and underserved segments, 
although the segment is currently at a nascent stage and evolving rapidly. 
 
IRDAI’s approach emphasises enabling innovation and market-driven adoption, rather 
than mandating specific products or channels, while continuing to support increased 
insurance penetration and resilience against climate-related risks. Additionally, the 
regulatory framework provides for testing and scaling of innovative solutions through 
mechanisms such as the Regulatory Sandbox, which facilitates development of 
parametric and technology-driven insurance products in a controlled environment. 

44 
 
 
With respect to enhancing insurance penetration in Tier 3–6 cities and rural areas, 
IRDAI aims at improving last-mile accessibility and awareness. This includes 
strengthening rural and social sector obligations, promoting insurance coverage at the 
Gram Panchayat level, and implementing State Level Insurance Plan wherein specific 
insurers are designated to drive penetration and awareness in identified states. 
Further, IRDAI has been encouraging the use of multiple distribution channels, 
including intermediaries, digital platforms, to expand outreach in underserved 
geographies. In addition, focused efforts are being undertaken to enhance insurance 
literacy and consumer awareness, including collaboration with institutions such as the 
National Centre for Financial Education (NCFE) and the development of dedicated 
policyholder education platforms. While the Business Correspondent (BC) network 
represents a potential distribution channel, its operational aspects fall within the 
domain of the banking ecosystem, and currently BCs are allowed to sell only micro 
insurance products as per RBI guidelines.   
 
(v) Accounting Transparency: The Committee urge the timely implementation of 
Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) by April 2027 to ensure that the financial 
health and liabilities of insurers are reported with global transparency and 
accuracy. 
 
IRDAI issued the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Actuarial, 
Finance and Investment Functions of Insurers) (Amendment) Regulations, 2026, 
which came into effect from 1st April 2026.  These amendments mandate the 
preparation and presentation of financial statements by insurers in accordance with 
applicable Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS). These will be applicable to all 
categories of insurers, including Life, General, Stand Alone Health Insurers, and 
Reinsurers. To facilitate smooth transition, for insurers facing challenges in 
immediately shifting to Ind AS, a provision has been made to grant forbearance for 
one-year. Introduction of Ind AS aims to enhance consistency, transparency, and 
comparability in financial reporting across the insurance sector, in alignment with 
globally accepted standards. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
DEMAND NO.32 - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES  
The Committee note that the Department’s budget estimates for 2026-27 have seen a 
substantial increase, reaching Rs. 3,746.95 crore from the previous year’s budget 
estimate of Rs. 1,688.14 crore. The Committee observe that this surge is 
predominantly driven by gap funding requirements for social security schemes, 
including Rs. 596.40 crore for the Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY), 
Rs. 160 crore for the senior citizen pension plan, and Rs. 202 crore for the Atal Pension 
Yojana (APY). Additionally, the introduction of a Rs. 2000 crore allocation to 
incentivize low-value BHIM-UPI transactions significantly inflates the overall demand. 
The Committee recommend that the Department of Financial Services enforce 
stringent monitoring mechanisms to ensure these funds are released strictly based on 
utilization trends and the projections of implementing agencies to prevent the idle 
parking of funds. Furthermore, the Department must strategically balance these gap 
funding requirements by evaluating the long-term financial sustainability of defined-
benefit schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
4) Regarding Atal Pension Yojana (APY), the following is submitted: 
 
D. The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) has been 
conducting annual actuarial valuations of APY since 2020. Based on these actuarial 
findings, gap funding requirements are determined and placed before the EFC for 
approval for the relevant cycle period. 
 
E. In the previous EFC cycle, a gap funding of ₹271 crore per annum was 
approved annually from FY 2022 to FY 2025. Subsequently, under the new EFC cycle, 
the approved gap funding for FY 2026 onwards has been revised downward from ₹271 
crore to ₹202 crore per annum, valid up to the end of this cycle (i.e., 2031). 
 
F. Further, the gap funds released are invested by PFRDA in accordance with the 
approved guidelines. As on 31.03.2026, the APY Gap Fund has an AUM of ₹1,457 
crore. 

47 
 
 
5) Regarding BHIM-UPI transactions, the following is submitted: 
E. Till Dec 2019, MDR upto 0.30% of transaction value was applicable for UPI 
(P2M) transactions. From Jan 2020, Zero MDR was announced on all UPI (P2M) 
transactions to accelerate digital payment adoption and encourage a shift from cash to 
digital.  
 
F. The zero MDR policy had eliminated the core revenue streams for the UPI 
ecosystem. In order to mitigate this and also to encourage banks and other ecosystem 
participants to promote digital payments, Government has been implementing the 
Incentive Scheme. 
 
G. Accordingly, for FY 2026-27, a budget provisioning of ₹2,000 crore was made 
as part of BE 2026-27, against an estimated cost of ₹20,700 crore incurred by the 
industry (i.e., cost of ₹1.38 per transaction multiplied by total P2M transactions of 15,000 
crore recorded last year). Further, it is submitted that the incentive is paid on 
reimbursement mode only after the transactions have been completed and data is 
submitted by the banks. Since, the payout is on actual basis, incidents of parking of idle 
funds doesn’t arise.  
 
6) Regarding Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY), the following is 
submitted: 
 
Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY) was launched in 2017 to provide social 
security during old age and to protect elderly persons aged 60 and above against a 
future fall in their interest income due to uncertain market conditions. The scheme is 
being implemented through Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). The scheme 
enables old age income security for senior citizens through provision of assured 
pension/return of 7.40% per annum linked to the subscription amount based on 
government guarantee to Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). 
 
The funds are reimbursed to LIC as gap subsidy between the assured returns and the 
actual returns guaranteed by the investment under the schemes. 
At present, the portfolio is generating a yield of about 6.95% p.a., resulting in a negative 
carry vis-à-vis the assured return. 
 
The scheme's investments were mainly made in Central and State Government 
Securities during 2020 to 2023 ensuring high credit quality and safety of capital at the 
then prevailing yield below 7% p.a. The monies were invested in accordance with 
investment pattern for pension fund as outlined by IRDAI. 
Most investments are classified as Held to Maturity (HTM) and are intended to be held 
until maturity to avoid market volatility. 
 
Also, the rising interest rates have reduced the market value of these securities and any 
sale of such securities would result in realization of losses. The scheme is a closed-

48 
 
ended fund, limiting LIC's ability to reinvest in higher-yielding instruments. There is also 
limited secondary market liquidity, especially for State Government Securities. 
 
Given the above factors, the subsidy burden has grown from Rs. 27.58 crore in 2022-
23 to Rs. 597.33 crore in 2025-26. 
 
However, the fund continues to follow a prudent and conservative investment strategy, 
focused on capital preservation and accrual income, ensuring alignment with regulatory 
and fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-Parl. 
dated 17.07.2026] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.8 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
PRADHAN MANTRI VAYA VANDANA YOJANA (PMVVY) 
The Committee note the escalating gap funding requirement for PMVVY, which has 
reached Rs. 596.40 crore for the fiscal year 2026-27. The Committee observe that 
while the scheme effectively provides an assured 7.40% return to 8,25,967 senior 
citizen subscribers, the subsidy burden borne by the Government—covering the 
differential between LIC’s actual investment yields and the guaranteed payouts—has 
grown exponentially from Rs. 27.58 crore in 2022-23 to Rs. 597.33 crore in 2025-26 
due to market volatility. The Committee recommend that the Government closely 
monitor this widening differential and its sensitivity to fluctuating interest rate 
environments. The Department should devise structural mechanisms to insulate future 
social security initiatives from such unpredictable and heavy reliance on direct fiscal 
support. 
Reply of the Government 
Pradhan Mantri Vaya Vandana Yojana (PMVVY) was launched in 2017 to provide 
social security during old age and to protect elderly persons aged 60 and above 
against a future fall in their interest income due to uncertain market conditions. The 
scheme is being implemented through Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). The 
scheme enables old age income security for senior citizens through provision of 

49 
 
assured pension/return of 7.40% per annum linked to the subscription amount based 
on government guarantee to Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC). 
The funds are reimbursed to LIC as gap subsidy between the assured returns and the 
actual returns guaranteed by the investment under the schemes. 
At present, the portfolio is generating a yield of about 6.95% p.a., resulting in a 
negative carry vis-à-vis the assured return. 
The scheme's investments were mainly made in Central and State Government 
Securities during 2020 to 2023 ensuring high credit quality and safety of capital at the 
then prevailing yield below 7% p.a. The monies were invested in accordance with 
investment pattern for pension fund as outlined by IRDAI. 
 
Most investments are classified as Held to Maturity (HTM) and are intended to be held 
until maturity to avoid market volatility. 
Also, the rising interest rates have reduced the market value of these securities and 
any sale of such securities would result in realization of losses. The scheme is a 
closed-ended fund, limiting LIC's ability to reinvest in higher-yielding instruments. 
There is also limited secondary market liquidity, especially for State Government 
Securities. Given the above factors, the subsidy burden has grown exponentially from 
Rs. 27.58 crore in 2022-23 to Rs. 597.33 crore in 2025-26. 
However, the fund continues to follow a prudent and conservative investment strategy, 
focused on capital preservation and accrual income, ensuring alignment with 
regulatory and fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-
Parl. dated 17.07.2026] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
CYBER FRAUD 
The Committee note with grave concern the escalating sophistication of cyber-enabled 
financial crimes, which have evolved from simple greed-based inducements to 
complex "extraneous" threats such as digital arrest scams, phishing, and investment 
frauds. The Committee note that while the Chakshu portal and the Digital Intelligence 
Unit (DIU) under the Department of Telecommunications are operational, their 
success is entirely contingent upon real-time financial API integration and seamless 
data sharing managed by the Department of Financial Services and the banking 
sector. The Committee further acknowledge the submission of Department of 
Financial Services regarding a proposed compensation framework for small-value 
digital frauds (up to ₹25,000) to be funded via the Depositor Education and Awareness 
Fund (DEAF) and banks, which is expected to have a negligible impact on the record 
profits of Public Sector Banks. 
The Committee observe several critical systemic failures that facilitate the laundering 
of proceeds of crime within the formal banking system. Firstly, there is a glaring failure 
in KYC and real-time monitoring; despite large, high-velocity inflows and outflows of 
unaccounted money, bank systems often fail to trigger red flags, raising serious 
questions about technological obsolescence or potential complicity at the branch level. 
Secondly, the "Golden Hour"—the critical 3-to-4-hour window for freezing defrauded 
funds—is frequently lost because victims are often too ashamed to report crimes 
immediately, and local law enforcement (at the District SP level) lacks the 
technological wherewithal and specialized training to interface with banks to stop 
transactions in real-time. Finally, while criminals leverage government-enabled modes 
like IMPS for rapid fund siphoning, banking technology has not kept pace with 
distributed ledger solutions or advanced DDoS protection. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Financial Services and 
RBI implement a "Penal Framework for Negligent Branches," where banks hosting 
multiple "mule accounts" are strictly penalized and held accountable for KYC lapses. 
Further, the Committee urge the Department to mandate that all public and private 
sector banks provide a seamless, 24/7 digital interface with the DIU to ensure that 
"Freezing Orders" are executed within the golden hour. Furthermore, the Department 

51 
 
must evaluate the integration of Blockchain-based security and AI-driven Mule 
Account Detection (such as MuleHunter.AI) to proactively flag suspicious account 
activity. To bridge the enforcement gap, the Department must lead a "Knowledge 
Sharing Initiative" to equip district-level police with the technical knowledge needed to 
recover funds. Lastly, the Committee recommend exploring "Double-Check 
Verification" for high-velocity IMPS transactions and launching a massive, shame-
neutralizing awareness campaign to educate the public on the mechanics of non-
greed scams like "Digital Arrests." 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government has been constantly engaging with the financial sector regulators and 
other concerned stakeholders to review the issues related to threats such as digital 
arrest scams, phishing, and investment frauds in the country. Based on the review 
assessment, various regulatory and supervisory interventions have been taken from 
time to time. This inter-alia includes the following:  
 
i. Banks have been advised to ensure deployment and adoption of robust 
software for real-time transaction monitoring and use of AI / ML tools in detecting 
suspicious and fraudulent transaction patterns as well as use of network 
analytics in identifying mule networks. 
ii. Issuance of various Advisories delineating specific actions to be taken by the 
banks in mitigating the misuse of banking channel through robust systems and 
controls for the prevention and detection of cyber enabled frauds & suspected 
money mules. 
iii. Close monitoring of any misuse of the banking channels for proliferation of the 
cyber-enabled frauds and coordination with other stakeholders to arrest spread 
of money-mules in banking sector. 
iv. Focused thematic assessments carried out in major banks, with high number of 
money mule accounts, to assess any gaps in the systems and controls so as to 
prevent cyber-frauds / money mules. This was followed by meetings with the 
banks concerned and issuance of Supervisory Letters to these banks for 
rectification of the identified gaps. 
v. Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued Master Directions on Digital Payment 
Security Controls in February, 2021 to combat web and mobile app threats. 
These guidelines mandate the banks to implement a common minimum 
standards of security controls for various payment channels like internet, mobile 
banking, card payment etc.  

52 
 
vi. RBI has launched an Artificial Intelligence (AI) based tool ‘MuleHunter’ for 
identification of money mule and advised the banks and financial institutions for 
its uses.  
vii. Additionally, National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) provides a fraud 
monitoring solution to all the banks to generate alerts and decline transactions 
by using AI/ ML based models for UPI transactions.   
viii. In order to facilitate citizens to report all types of cyber fraud including financial 
fraud, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has launched the National Cyber Crime 
Reporting portal (https://cybercrime.gov.in) as well as a National Cybercrime 
Helpline Number ”1930. Department of Telecommunications has also launched 
Digital Intelligence Platform (DIP) and ‘Chakshu’ facility. ‘Chakshu’ facilitates 
citizens to report suspected fraud communication received over call, SMS or 
WhatsApp with the intention of defrauding like KYC expiry or update of bank 
account / etc.  
ix. Regular outreach programmes through seminars / workshops are being 
conducted to sensitise both Top Management and field functionaries in banks 
on the importance of adherence to the KYC AML / CFT regulations and 
consequences of non-compliance. This also includes participation of Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) including Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre 
(I4C), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and FIU-IND. 
 
Further, the existing instructions on ‘Limiting Liability of Customers in Unauthorised 
Electronic Banking Transactions’ were reviewed by the Reserve Bank and the draft 
revised instructions on ‘Customer Protection in Electronic Banking Transactions’ have 
been issued on March 6, 2026 for public consultation. The draft instructions propose 
to introduce a compensation mechanism for small value fraudulent electronic banking 
transactions. As per the proposed compensation mechanism, a bona fide victim, being 
an individual person and having lodged a complaint involving gross loss of an amount 
up to ₹50,000 on account of fraudulent electronic banking transaction(s) covered under 
paragraphs 76M and 76N of the draft instructions, shall be compensated 85 per cent 
of the net loss amount (calculated after reducing recoveries made, whether before or 
after paying the compensation, from the gross loss amount), or ₹25,000, whichever is 
less, once during his / her lifetime subject to conditions. Out of the 85 per cent 
compensated to the customer, 65 per cent shall be borne by the Reserve Bank, 10 per 
cent by the customer’s bank and the remaining 10 per cent by the beneficiary bank. 
 
RBI guidelines on the ‘Operation of Bank Accounts and Money Mules’, mandates that 
the bank shall strictly adhere to the instructions on opening of accounts and monitoring 
of transactions, to minimize the operations of ‘Money Mules’ that are used to launder 
the proceeds of fraud schemes (e.g., phishing and identity theft) by criminals who gain 
illegal access to deposit accounts by recruiting third parties that act as ‘money mules’. 
The bank shall undertake diligence measures and meticulous monitoring to identify 
accounts which are operated as Money Mules and take appropriate action, including 
reporting of suspicious transactions to FIU-IND. Further, if it is established that an 
account opened and operated is that of a Money Mule, but STR was not filed by the 

53 
 
concerned bank, it shall then be deemed that the bank has not complied with these 
directions.  
 
Further, it may be noted that RBI (Commercial Banks - KYC) Directions, 2025 dated 
November 28, 2025 (updated as on December 29, 2025) do not contain any 
instructions on imposition of lien or freezing of accounts, except for freezing of financial 
assets under Section 51A of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), 1967 and 
Section 12A of WMD Act, 2005. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services) O.M. No. 07/12/2026-Parl. 
dated 17.07.2026] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.20 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

54 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
11 August, 2026      
20 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
  

55 
 
  ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Forty-Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2025-
26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
5. Shri K. Gopinath 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Shri Kishori Lal 
8. Thiru Arun Nehru 
9. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
10. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
11. Prof. Sougata Ray 
12. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
13. Shri Manish Tewari 
14. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri P. Chidambaram 
16. Shri Narain Dass Gupta 
17. Shri Praful Patel 
18. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy 
19. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
20. Shri Sanjay Seth 
21. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 

56 
 
i) Forty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Twenty-Eighth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Review of working 
of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues’ of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs. 
 
ii) Forty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty-Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 
iii) Forty-Fifth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty-Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of 
the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, 
Public Enterprises and Investment & Public Asset Management). 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
PART II 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
* * * 

57 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SECOND REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
 
 
 
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
12  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(vide Recommendations at SI. Nos. 
2,3,5,6,7,8,9,10 and 11) 
 
9 75% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 
NIL  -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
(vide Recommendation at SI. No.1, 4 and 
12)  
 
03 25% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
**** 
 