 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
  (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)] 
  
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 15 

ii 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue)] 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 July, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 July, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
16 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
46 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
47 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
48 
                             ANNEXURE  
Annexure-I Report on Recommendations of Standing Committee on 
Finance(Review of Demands for grants, Para 9) and alignment 
with activities of NACIN 
 49 
                             APPENDICES  
Appendix-I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025 55 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan  Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Manish Kumar Committee Officer 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorised 
by the Committee, present this Fifteenth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department Revenue).  
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha 
on 06 December, 2024. The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
were received from the Ministry of Finance (Department Revenue) on 3 March, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July 
2025.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 6 th December, 2024. The Report contained 10 
Observations/Recommendations. 
 
1.2  Action taken replies in respect of all the 10 Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) on 3rd March, 2025. The replies have been analyzed and categorized as 
follows:  
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 
       Total -10 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No.  
       Total - Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No.  
       Total - Nil 
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No.       
Total - Nil 
(Chapter- V) 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of its presentation.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Tax Collection 
GST Evasion and Fraud 
 
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that GST evasion as well as fraudulent Input Tax Credit 
(ITC) cases are on the rise. There were 12,574 GST evasion cases in 2021-
22, which increased to 20,582 in 2023-24. Similarly, fraudulent ITC cases rose 
from 5,966 in 2021-22 to 9,190 in 2023-24. During the study visit of the 
Committee to Chennai and Mumbai, in Nov.2024, it emerged that fraudulent 
ITC cases are a significant challenge in GST, requiring urgent attention to 
curb it. This issue involves claiming ITC on the basis of fake invoices without 
actual supply of goods or services, leading to substantial revenue losses for 
the Government and distorting the tax system. The Committee understand 
that several steps, such as physical verification of suspicious taxpayers and 
the use of biometrics for GST registration, are being taken to address this 
issue. The Committee welcome these measures and believe they are steps 
in the right direction. However, they also desire that utmost efforts be made 
to ensure that genuine taxpayers, especially small vendors, do not face undue 
hardship. Additionally, it is important to emphasize that efforts should be made 
to raise awareness about various GST provisions in easy-to-understand 
language, ultimately resulting in better compliance and a hassle-free GST 
registration process.” 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
have submitted as follows: 
“Government has taken several major steps to streamline the process of 
registration (which is the beginning point of fake invoice racket) under GST 
and to curb the menace of the fake invoicing and passing on fake ITC. Few 
such steps are: 
a. Measures to streamline registration process to prevent registration 
of fake entities: 
i. Insertion of sub-rule (4A) in rule 8 of CGST Rules, 2017 to provide for 
risk based biometric-based Aadhaar authentication of registration 
applicants who appear to be risky based on data analytics. 
ii. Making provision for Geo-coding the address of the principal place of 
business of the registrants. {The functionality has been made active by 
GSTN}. 

 
3 
 
iii. Cleaning up the taxpayer base by strengthening verification of business 
entities through Aadhaar authentication for new registrations and 
physical verification of business premises, where Aadhaar is not 
authenticated. 
iv. Amendment in CGST Rules, 2017 to provide for physical verification in 
high-risk cases, even when Aadhaar has been authenticated. 
v. Provision for OTP based verification of PAN at time of registration on 
the mobile and email address linked with PAN to prevent GST 
registration using PAN of other persons, without their knowledge. 
vi. Detailed guidelines have been issued for processing of application for 
registration vide Instruction No. 03/2023-GST dated 14.06.2023 to 
tackle the menace of fake/bogus registrations. 
Strengthening of provisions for furnishing details of bank account of the 
registrant e.g. it should be in the name of the registered person and obtained 
on his Permanent Account Number (PAN) and also linked with Aadhaar in 
case of proprietorship firm. Time limit of 30 days is being provided for 
furnishing of valid bank account details. In case of non-adherence to this 
requirement, system-based suspension of the registration has been provided. 
B. Other Legal / Procedural measures:  
i. Beneficiary (master mind), who retains benefit or at whose instance a 
supply has been made without the issuance of an invoice, or invoice has 
been issued without supply, or excess ITC has been availed/distributed, 
has been made liable for penalty similar to that of actual 
supplier/recipient. 
ii. Aadhar authentication made mandatory for filing application for refunds 
under GST and to track refund proceeds, refund to be given in only 
those bank accounts which are in name and on PAN of the applicant. 
iii. Centralized suspension of registrations pertaining to registered persons 
who default in timely filing of returns.   
iv. With effect from 01.01.2022, restricting a ailment of Input tax credit to 
such invoices or debit notes which have been furnished by the supplier 
in the statement of outward supplies (Form GSTR-1) and details of 
which have been communicated to the registered person in auto-
populated FORM GSTR-2B. 
v. With effect from 01.01.2022, restriction on a registered person for filing 
GSTR-1 (the details of outward supplies) in case return in Form GSTR-
3B has not been furnished for the preceding tax period. This prevents 
transmission of credit to the recipient if the tax has not been paid by the 
supplier. 
vi. Filing of Form GSTR-I is made mandatory before filing of Form GSTR-
3B for a tax period w.e.f. 01.10.2022 and has been made mandatorily 
sequential w.e.f. 01.10.2022. 
vii. E-way bill has been integrated and tracking with RFID has been 
introduced to provide access to real time data of vehicle movements. 
viii. Provision has been made for blocking the generation of e-way bills by 
non-compliant taxpayers. [Rule 138E] 
ix. E-invoicing in respect of B2B supply of goods or services or both to a 
registered person has been made mandatory with effect from 1st 
October, 2020. Initial aggregate turnover limit of Rs. 500 Crore being 
reduced to Rs. 5 Crore w.e.f. 01.08.2023. Data from e-invoice is being 

 
4 
 
auto populated in Form GSTR-1 of the taxpayer, preventing instances 
of non-reporting.  
x. Restrictions on utilisation of ITC in cases where the proper officer has 
reasons to believe that such credit has been availed fraudulently. This 
is to prevent further passing on the credit down the stream. [Rule 86A] 
xi. Input tax credit can only be availed by a registered person in respect of 
such invoices or debit notes which have been furnished by the supplier 
in the statement of outward supplies in FORM GSTR-1 and details of 
which have been communicated to the registered person in FORM 
GSTR-2B. 
xii. Rule 8 of CGST Rules, 2017 has been amended to provide for OTP 
based verification of PAN at time of registration on the mobile and email 
address linked with PAN. This will help in preventing GST registration 
using PAN of other persons, without their knowledge. [Notification No. 
26/2022-CT dated 26.12.2022.] 
xiii. A registered person is not allowed to furnish the details of outward 
supplies under section 37 in FORM GSTR-I, if he has not furnished the 
return in FORM GSTR-3B for the preceding tax period. 
C. Extensive Use of technology:  
i. Project Anveshan-The Directorate General of Analytics and Risk 
Management (DGARM) generates various reports to assist field 
formations in identifying anomalies in taxpayer behaviour, such as 
potential tax evasion, fraudulent registration, and unusual e-way bill 
activity, among others. In order to safeguard the revenue and nabbing 
the evaders, "project Anveshan” has been initiated wherein Analytics, 
Verification, Shortlisting of Anomalies has deployed newer techniques 
with the objective of early identification of GSTINs with propensity for 
fake/ fraudulent activity which get shared with DGGI or field formations 
as pin-pointed actionable intelligence for investigations. 
ii. Facial Recognition System (FRS) is used to detect anomalies in digital 
information provided during registration, such as different photos on 
registrations with same PAN or having same photos across 
registrations on different PANs. 
iii. Analysis of EWB data in the time window between registration and 
kicking in of returns cycle identifies new risky registrations on the basis 
of skewed inward to outward supply ratio in e-way bill data. Identified 
GSTINs new registrants with propensity to generate fake ITC based 
on EWB have been forwarded for further verification and action. 
iv. Artificial intelligence (AI) tools such as NETRA (Networking Exploration 
Tools for Revenue Argumentation), GAIN (GST Analytics and 
Intelligence Network) & ADVAIT (Advanced Analytics in Indirect 
Taxation) based on network analysis have been implemented to identify 
risky taxpayers and the entire supply chain. It aims at targeting fake and 
fraudulent ITC by analysing ITC chains of new registrants with high 
amount of ITC claimed within a short time frame. Further, ITC of the 
ultimate beneficiary which appears to have flowed from ITC chains of 
fake ITC initiator firms without corresponding inward receipts or from 
circular transactions is also quantified.  
v. GST registration applications, filed on GST portal, are now being 
assigned risk rating by system based on various risk parameters, so that 

 
5 
 
detailed verification can be conducted by the tax officers while 
processing such registration applications. 
vi. With the use of data analytics and AI based tools, Red Flag reports are 
being generated by GSTN as well as Directorate General of Analysis 
and Risk Management (DGARM), CBIC in respect of defaulting 
taxpayers and risky taxpayers with deviant behaviour in form of 
discrepancies between returns and other database, like GSTR-1 and 
GSTR-3B, GSTR3B and GSTR 2B, GSTR 3B and e-way bills etc, which 
are being shared with the tax officers for verification on regular basis. 
Action on these Red Flag reports by field formation has resulted in 
considerable detection and recovery, and has led to improving overall 
compliance by the taxpayers. 
vii. Electronic invoicing has been made mandatory for all B2B transactions 
for businesses with turnover exceeding Rs. 5 crores. 
With Respect to hardship for the genuine taxpayer: - 
It is mentioned that the Government recognizes the importance of 
safeguarding the interests of honest and small taxpayers and has undertaken 
a series of targeted measures to filter out the fake taxpayer so that the 
genuine taxpayers do not face undue hardship due to investigations/ 
enquiries undertaken against such fake taxpayers. Such measures are 
broadly categorized as : 
  
(i)  Risk Rating of Registration Applications: 
To ensure that fraudulent elements are prevented from entering into 
GST system, registration process has been strengthened by use of data 
analytics and artificial intelligence to identify risky applicants so that their 
detailed verification, including physical verification can be conducted by the 
field officers before taking a decision on their application for registration.  
  
(ii)Special All-India Drive against fake registrations. 
From time to time, Special drives against fake registrations have been 
launched, involving Central and State GST formations, to weed out 
fake registrants and to take further remedial action to weed out these fake 
billers from the GST eco-system and to safeguard Government revenue and 
to protect genuine taxpayers from hardship. 
  
In this regard, a special All-India drive was launched by all Central and 
State Tax administrations during the period from 16th May 2023 
to 14th August 2023 for verification and detection of suspicious/ fake 
registrations and for taking timely remedial action to prevent any further 
revenue loss to the Government. A second Special All-India Drive was 
launched by Central and all State Tax administrations from 16th August 2024 
to 30th October 2024 also in this regard. 
  
Regular instructions are issued to tax officers to ensure that CGST 
field formations conduct investigations in a manner that strikes a balance 
between effective GST enforcement and fostering a business-friendly 
environment. Investigations are conducted only in high-risk cases, based on 
rigorous data analytics and specific risk indicators, to ensure that genuine and 
honest taxpayers, including small businesses, are not subjected to undue 
hardship.” 

 
6 
 
 
 
1.7 T he Committee note the extensive and holistic efforts undertaken by the 
Ministry to confront the burgeoning instances of GST evasion and fraudulent 
Input Tax Credit (ITC) claims. The Committee are of the opinion that the 
implementation of measures such as risk-based biometric Aadhaar 
authentication, geo-coding of business addresses, PAN-linked OTP verification, 
and mandatory e-invoicing is a decisive stride towards fortifying the GST 
registration framework and curbing fake invoicing practices sparing the genuine 
and honest taxpayers including small businesses from being subject to undue 
hardship. Furthermore, the deployment of cutting-edge technologies such as 
Artificial Intelligence, Facial Recognition Systems, and projects like Anveshan, 
NETRA (Networking Exploration Tools for Revenue Argumentation), GAIN (GST 
Analytics and Intelligence Network), and ADVAIT (Advanced Analytics in Indirect 
Taxation) exemplifies a forward-looking approach to leveraging data analytics 
for the timely discernment and proactive mitigation of suspicious activities. 
While acknowledging significance of these initiatives, the Committee 
concurrently underscore the importance of developing measurable   indicators 
to comprehensively gauge their long-time efficacy. This would help identify 
gaps, if any, and guide the Ministry in further refining and manoeuvring its 
enforcement and compliance strategies. The Committee, therefore, desire to be 
apprised of the positive effects of these steps at the time of submission of Action 
Taken Statement.    
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Broadening of Tax Base 
1.8  The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the Tax-to-GDP ratio of our country has been 
increasing in recent years, particularly with regard to Direct Taxes, which has 
grown from 5.2% in 2020-21 to 6.5% in 2023-24, the highest level in the past 
15 years. During the same period, the Indirect Tax to GDP ratio also increased 
from 4.7% to 5.2%. The Committee further note that the Tax-to-GDP ratio 
varies according to the level of development of a nation. While high-income 
countries have a higher Tax-to-GDP ratio, the same would not be applicable 
to middle-income and low-middle-income countries. Our country aspires to 
become a developed nation by 2047. This would mean graduating from a low-
middle-income to a high-income or middle-high-income country in the next 25 
years or so. As the Department has stated, in the next 25 years, India’s direct 

 
7 
 
tax-to-GDP ratio should double itself and reach approximately 12%. The 
Committee, however, are of the opinion that while the Government has 
implemented several commendable measures to enhance tax compliance 
and reduce evasion, a significant portion of the economy remains untaxed. 
Therefore, they desire that, to achieve the envisaged target of 12%, the 
government should focus more on broadening the tax base and including 
those who are still outside the tax net before resorting to deepening the tax 
base. The Committee believes that raising awareness and education about 
the importance of tax compliance, the benefits of a broader tax base, and 
simplifying tax laws to make compliance easier for individuals and businesses 
can go a long way in broadening the tax base. The Committee are also 
strongly in favor of leveraging technology to streamline tax administration, 
reduce compliance costs, and enhance transparency.” 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of (Department of Revenue)have submitted 
as follows: 
“CBDT 
CBDT is undertaking various initiatives and activities to enhance taxpayer 
awareness, educate the public about income tax-related matters, and 
emphasize the importance of taxes. These efforts aim to simplify tax 
compliance and improve voluntary participation among taxpayers. The 
following is a summary of actions taken: 
(i)  Publicity Campaigns across Media Platforms 
To disseminate critical information related to filing Income Tax Returns 
(ITRs), statutory timelines, and compliance, the Directorate conduct 
extensive publicity campaigns via television, radio, print, and digital media. 
Campaigns are conducted for filing of ITRs, advance tax due dates, TDS 
compliance, updated returns, and more. These campaigns are tailored in 
Hindi and 10 regional languages to ensure widespread outreach. 
(ii) Social Media Engagement 
CBDT actively uses social media platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, 
YouTube, and LinkedIn to create awareness among the taxpayer. Monthly 
quizzes, meme-based campaigns, and video content like the “Samvaad 
Sessions” are strategically posted to engage taxpayers. The innovative and 
interactive content garnered significant public attention, resulting in a notable 
increase in the department’s social media followers by 14-33% across 
platforms. 
(iii) Samvaad Sessions 
Interactive chat sessions, “Samvaad” featuring senior officers addressing 
crucial topics, such as faceless assessment, e-verification, and charitable 
trust provisions are recorded and made available on YouTube and Instagram, 
received widespread appreciation and high viewership. 
(iv)  Taxpayer Hubs 

 
8 
 
Taxpayer Hubs were established in seven cities across India, offering 
comprehensive assistance to taxpayers through kiosks, interactive 
brochures, educational activities, and grievance redressal systems. These 
hubs aimed to simplify tax compliance and educate taxpayers about the role 
of taxes in nation-building. 
(v) Outreach via Trade Fairs and Events 
CBDT has set up Taxpayer Lounges at events like the East Himalayan Trade 
Fair (EHTF) and the India International Trade Fair (IITF). These pavilions 
provided taxpayers with educational resources, interactive activities, and 
grievance handling services. The lounges received accolades, including a 
gold medal for excellence in display. 
(vi) Board Games and Educational Tools for Future Taxpayers 
As part of the “Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav” CBDT has developed and 
distributed board games like “Snakes, Ladders and Taxes,” “Building India,” 
and a 3D puzzle game. These tools are designed to educate schoolchildren 
on the importance of paying taxes and their role in national development. 
(vii)  Collaboration with ICAI for Tax Clinics 
CBDT has supported the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) in 
organizing “Tax Clinics” to resolve taxpayer queries on ITR filing. This 
included providing educational materials, brochures, and other resources. 
(viii) Digital Publications and Educational Content 
CBDT has updated and published various brochures, comic books, and e-
books such as the “Direct Tax Glossary” and digital calendars themed on 
“Taxes in Ancient India.” These publications aimed to simplify complex tax 
terms and educate taxpayers in an engaging manner. 
(ix)  Awareness Campaigns on Specific Tax Provisions 
Dedicated campaigns were conducted to inform taxpayers about updates in 
tax provisions, including charitable trusts, donor eligibility under Section 80G, 
and audit report filing deadlines. These campaigns were publicized through 
social media and print media to reach a broader audience. 
(x)  Innovative Projects and Media Campaigns 
CBDT has initiated projects such as hosting of quiz on the MyGov website. 
(xi)  Public Relation Efforts 
Public relations initiatives included publishing updated brochures, comic 
books, and planners. For example, 4000 comic books on eight tax-related 
topics were distributed, and the “Direct Taxes Glossary” was applauded for 
its utility in simplifying technical tax terminologies. 
(xii)  Data Collection and Application Development 
         CBDT has compiled data of the Aayakar Kutumb App, ensuring 
comprehensive information for taxpayers regarding departmental services, 

 
9 
 
officers, and regions. This app enhances accessibility and facilitates taxpayer 
interaction with the department. 
Various measures are being undertaken vide amendments to the Income-tax 
Act, 1961 on broadening the tax base.  
It is stated that tax reforms is an ongoing process. Hence, the 
recommendation of the Committee is noted for future course of action. 
CBIC 
The Government has taken following steps/ measures for the broadening of 
the tax base and to simplify the tax compliance (especially for individuals and 
MSMEs): - 
  
i.    MSMEs, engaged in the supply of goods, are exempted from taking GST 
registration upto a turnover of Rs. 40 lakhs (other than some special category 
States where the exemption from registration is upto turnover of Rs. 20 lakhs). 
MSMEs engaged in the supply of services are exempted from GST 
registration if their turnover is less than Rs. 20 lakhs. This ensures that no 
GST compliance is required by such small units below the above threshold 
turnover and no GST is required to be paid by such units upto the said 
threshold turnover. 
  
ii.    To ease the compliance burden on small tax payers, an optional 
composition scheme has been introduced in GST where taxpayers engaged 
in supply of goods with turnover below Rs. 1.5 crore can pay tax on lumpsum 
basis at the rate of 1% of their turnover on quarterly basis instead of, charging 
tax in each invoice. Such taxpayers under composition scheme are required 
to file a return on annual basis, thus reducing their compliance burden 
substantially. In the case of services, the threshold turnover for availing 
benefit of composition scheme has been fixed at Rs. 50 lakhs. 
  
iii.    Small taxpayers having an annual turnover less than Rs. 5 crore have 
also been given an option to file their GST returns on quarterly basis, under 
the Quarterly Returns Monthly Payment (QRMP) scheme where number of 
returns for such small units has been substantially reduced. 
  
iv.     Small taxpayers having turnover less than Rs. 2 crore have been 
exempted from filing annual returns under GST thus reducing their 
compliance burden. 
  
v.     Unregistered suppliers and composition taxpayers have been permitted 
to make intra-state supply of goods through E-Commerce Operators (ECOs). 
This has opened the huge e-commerce market for them to sell their goods 
without taking registration under GST and without payment of any tax upto 
threshold turnover of registration. 
  
vi.   Various technological initiatives have been taken for simplification of GST 
compliances for small taxpayers such as facility of filing of Nil returns through 
SMS, auto population of GST returns on the GST portal and facility of making 
GST payment through UPI, debit cards, credit cards, IMPS, RTGS etc. 
  

 
10 
 
vii.   For helping smaller taxpayers and to provide them relief, various amnesty 
schemes have been introduced from time to time in respect of extension in 
date of return filing, waiver/ reduction of late fee and interest, extension of 
time of filing of appeals with appellate authority, extension of time for filing 
application for revocation of cancellation of registration, etc. 
  
viii.   To incentivize timely payment by buyers to MSMEs, especially when 
supplies are made to large businesses, provisions of GST already provide 
that a registered person must pay to the supplier, the value of the goods 
and/or services along with the tax within 180 days from the date of issue of 
invoice.  
  
ix.    GSTN system has been integrated with RBI Public Tech Platform for 
frictionless Credit which has helped small taxpayers in easier access to bank 
loans based on their GST registration. 
  
x.   Considering the difficulties faced by the taxpayers during the initial years 
of implementation of GST, it has been decided to conditionally waive interest 
and penalty in respect of demand notices issued in cases where fraud, 
suppression, etc. are not involved, for the financial years 2017-18, 2018-19 
and 2019-20 by introduction of section 128A of the CGST Act, 2017, subject 
to payment of the tax dues upto a specified date. This measure will benefit a 
large number of taxpayers, especially smaller taxpayers, and will help them 
to settle their demand cases with payment of due tax liability for these initial 
years. 
  
xi.    To reduce government litigation, monetary limits have been fixed below 
which appeals will not be filed by the department before the GST Appellate 
Tribunal, High Court, and Supreme Court, subject to certain exclusions. 
  
xii.    It has also been decided to reduce the amount of pre-deposit for filing 
of appeals under GST to ease cash flow and working capital blockage for the 
taxpayers. 
  
xiii.  Department is also using data analytics, third party data sources and 
information technology system-based tools to identify potential taxpayers who 
remain outside the tax framework, thereby making efforts to broaden the tax 
base. 
  
xiv.  Besides, the Government undertakes extensive campaigns across 
various media platforms, including social media, to raise awareness about 
the benefits of tax compliance and to broaden the tax base and to include 
those who are still outside the tax net.” 
 
 
1.10 The Committee unequivocally affirm that broadening the tax base is 
pivotal for achieving sustained economic growth and realizing the ambitious 
vision of Vikshit Bharat by 2047. The Committee commend the Ministry’s 
multifaceted initiatives, designed to enhance fiscal literacy, simplify compliance, 
and encourage voluntary participation through creative and inclusive outreach 

 
11 
 
efforts. However, the sustained expansion of the revenue base especially those 
still outside the tax net into compliance, remains a critical imperative for robust 
public finance and national development. The Committee, therefore, 
emphatically urge the Ministry to undertake a rigorous, perpetual and granular 
assessment of current strategies. This ongoing scrutiny is essential for 
implementing corrective measures, thereby cultivating a more expansive, 
resilient, and equitable tax ecosystem, which is paramount for achieving 
national prosperity.  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Dispute Resolution  
 
1.11 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note with concern that the number of appeals pending at 
various fora in respect of Direct Taxes is increasing year after year despite 
various measures taken by the Department in this regard. The total number 
of appeals pending was 51,567 in 2021-22, which increased to 58,645 in 
2022-23 and to 64,311 in 2023-24. Similarly, the amount disputed in 2021-22 
was Rs. 6,64,067.86 crore, which rose to Rs. 7,18,030.94 crore in 2022-23 
and surged by 198% to Rs. 14,21,130.27 crore in 2023-24. The amount 
involved at the Income Tax Appellate Authority, which was Rs. 2,89,564.76 
crore in 2022-23, almost tripled to Rs. 8,56,576.01 crore in 2023-24. Likewise, 
in the case of Indirect Taxes, the number of cases increased from 113,508 in 
2021-22 to 126,615 in 2023-24, and the amount involved more than doubled 
from Rs. 3,67,249.78 crore to Rs. 7,40,665.05 crore during the same period. 
The Committee also note with concern the slow pace of disposal of cases 
related to the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), as since its 
inception, only 45 cases have been disposed of so far. 
Considering this data, it seems that the various measures taken by the 
Government to reduce tax litigation have not yielded the desired results so 
far. While the introduction of measures such as the Vivad se Vishwas 
Scheme, the establishment of the National Faceless Assessment Centre, and 
the adoption of technology-driven solutions have been commendable, there 
remains a critical need to address the backlog and complexities in tax dispute 
resolution. The Committee feel that it is imperative to further enhance the 
focus on tax dispute redressal mechanisms and take additional measures in 
this regard. The Committee observe that no assessment of the best practices 
by different countries for mitigating tax dispute burdens has been undertaken 
by CBDT. The Committee, therefore, recommend that for formulating 
alternative or additional measures, there should be a study and examination 
of the best practices followed by different countries for mitigating the tax 
dispute burden, for their impact, usefulness, and adoptability, particularly in 
the Indian context. This would be beneficial in reducing disputes and fostering 
a more cooperative relationship between taxpayers and tax authorities. 
Implementing these best practices can lead to faster resolution of disputes, 
reduced litigation costs, and improved taxpayer confidence in the system. The 

 
12 
 
Committee believe that aligning with global standards can also make our 
country a more attractive destination for foreign investment with predictable 
and efficient tax regimes.” 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) 
have submitted as follows: 
 
“(1) The CBDT has revised monetary limits for filing appeals/SLPs in various 
courts and ITAT through the Circulars mentioned in Column 4. The monetary 
limit of tax effect for filing SLPs in Supreme Court has been increased from 
Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 2 crores by CBDT Circular No. 05/2024 dated 15.03.2024. 
This was subsequently increased to Rs. 5 crores through Circular No. 09/2024 
dated 17.09.2024. As a result of these two Circulars, a total of 601 SLPs (total 
revenue involved Rs. 63.36 Crore) were dismissed by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court. The upward revision of monetary limits of tax effect for filing of 
SLPs/Appeals has also considerably reduced the number of cases, where the 
appeal/SLP is required to be filed in Courts/ITAT.  
(2) Efforts are made to get SLPs bunched so that there is a quick disposal. 
(3) Effective monitoring of pending SLPs is done. 
(4) No SLP is filed in cases/issues which have been decided finally by 
Supreme Court. 
Further, CBDT has noted the recommendations of the committee 
regarding study and examination of the best practices followed by different 
countries for mitigating the tax dispute burden, for their impact, usefulness 
and adoptability, particularly in the Indian context.” 
 
1.13 The Committee appreciate that the CBDT has taken cognizance of their 
recommendation regarding the study and examination of international best 
practices for mitigating tax dispute burdens. Nevertheless, the Committee, note 
with concern that a demonstrable lack of substantive progress has been 
observed in this regard. The Committee unequivocally reaffirm their conviction 
that identifying efficacious global paradigms and assessing their congruence 
within the Indian context is pivotal to fortifying and significantly enhancing the 
efficacy of the existing tax dispute resolution framework. The Committee, 
therefore, emphasize that this exercise should be taken up expeditiously, with 
clear timelines. The Committee desire that any developments in this regard, 
including the establishment of any study group, be communicated to the 
Committee at the time of submission of Action Taken Statement.  
 
 
 
 

 
13 
 
Recommendation No.10 
Vacancies 
 
1.14 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that there are considerable numbers of vacancies in 
both CBDT and CBIC. In some posts, there are 100% vacancies. Even for the 
crucial post of Inspector of Central Excise, there are 7,744 vacancies. Such 
vacancies may be hampering the smooth functioning of the organizations and 
providing optimum services to the taxpayers. The Committee believe that 
filling these vacancies promptly is essential to maintain the efficiency and 
effectiveness of our tax administration, ensuring it can meet its revenue 
targets and support the country's economic growth. The Department has 
attributed these vacancies to candidates leaving the department once they 
get better opportunities elsewhere. Nonetheless, the Committee feel that 
having such vacancies is not in the best interest of the Government or the 
taxpayers. Therefore, they recommend that the Department urgently take up 
this matter with the concerned authorities to recruit an adequate number of 
candidates.” 
 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have 
submitted as follows: 
“CBDT 
Recruitment in Group A 
The CBDT recruits IRS(IT) Group ‘A’ officers at entry level i.e. ACIT as per 
the ‘Indian Revenue Service Rules 2015’ through  fifty percent by direct 
recruitment on the basis of the results of the examination and remaining fifty 
percent by promotion of ITOs on the basis of selection. Steps to fill 
vacancies are taken in time. Recruitments are made through Civil Services 
Examination, conducted by UPSC and allocation made by DoP&T. The 
vacancies reported and filled since CSE 2019 year till 31st January, 2025 in 
respect of IRS(IT) Group ‘A’ posts are as under: 
 

 
14 
 
Direct Recruitment Quota Vacancies in Group B and C: 
The following no. of Direct Recruitment (Group B & C cadre) vacancies have 
been reported to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for Examination Year 
2024-25:  
ITI- 411 
TA- 2256 
Steno Gr. II- 283 
MTS- 2923 
Results are expected to be declared by SSC in Feb/March, 2025. 
Appointment letters to 3947 candidates in various cadres have been issued 
in Rozgar Melas conducted in Calendar year 2024.  
The Pr. Chief Commissioners of Income Tax (CCA) concerned, being Cadre 
Controlling Authorities, are regularly convening meeting of Departmental 
Promotion Committee (DPCs) to fill-up the vacancies occurred against 
Promotion Quota from the available eligible officials as per Recruitment 
Rules of respective cadres.  The names of all eligible officials as per 
Recruitment Rules of respective cadres are to be considered by the 
Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) for promotion to higher grades.  
Consequent upon recommendations of panels by the DPCs for promotion 
to various cadres, the concerned office of the Principal Chief Commissioner 
of Income Tax (CCA) issues promotion order to fill-up the Promotion Quota 
Vacancies. 
Remarks: Candidates in CBDT for various Group B & C posts are recruited 
though SSC. Vacancies as reported by Pr.CCIT (CCAs) are promptly 
communicated to recruiting agency i.e.  SSC as and when requisitioned by 
it. There is high attrition rate due to candidates getting better job opportunity. 
CBIC 
The latest Group wise staff position of CBIC, available as per Half Yearly 
Brochure of CBIC (as on 01.07.2024) is provided as below: 
 
Group of 
Post 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
Vacancy 
Position 
Gr. A 6397 4777 1620 
Gr. B 55040 38197 16843 
Gr. C 30305 11909 18396 
Total 91742 54883 36859 
 
Year of 
CSE 
Vacancy reported to 
DoPT 
Vacancies filled 
2019 75 (incl. backlog) 66 
2020 74 (incl. backlog) 69 
2021 59 (incl. backlog) 56 
2022 131 123 
2023 192 (incl. backlog) 181 
2024 180 Dossiers awaited from DoP&T. 

 
15 
 
          It is submitted that CBIC has taken sincere steps to overcome the 
shortage of staff by filling up the vacancies in Group A, B and C cadre. 
During year 2024, a total of 4653 officers in Gr. B and C cadre were recruited 
by way of Direct Recruitment (DR) through SSC and 418 officers were 
elevated by way of promotion form the feeder cadre. Further, 8912 DR 
vacancies in the Gr. B and C cadre of CBIC are also reported and proposed 
to SSC for which recruitment is under process.  
 
         Further, among the 8912 DR vacancies reported to SSC, 3184 
vacancies are reported for recruitment in Inspector grade (viz. 145 
vacancies for Examiner, 2699 vacancies for Inspector and 340 vacancies of 
Preventive Officer) to overcome the shortage of staff specifically in the 
Inspector grade in CBIC.” 
 
 
1.16 The Committee acknowledge the various initiatives undertaken by both 
CBDT and CBIC to fill vacancies through Direct Recruitment and Departmental 
Promotions. However, the Committee note with concern that the scale of 
recruitment is still not commensurate with the overall number of vacant posts. 
For instance, in CBIC, against a total of 36,859 vacancies, only 4,653 officers 
were recruited in 2024 and 8,912 vacancies have been reported to SSC for future 
recruitment. This still leaves a substantial gap in sanctioned versus working 
strength, particularly at the crucial Inspector level which perpetuates a 
substantial impediment to the efficacy of field enforcement and seamless 
delivery of taxpayer services. The Committee emphasise that this entrenched 
paucity of human resources stands poised to undermine the operational 
efficiency and overall effectiveness of tax administration, thereby, delaying 
service delivery to taxpayers. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for a 
more structured manpower planning framework to ensure timely and adequate 
recruitment. They further advocate for the diligent exploration of employee 
retention strategies to mitigate attrition rates. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 1) 
Budgetary Allocation  
 
Demand No.35 
In regard to Demand No. 35 pertaining to the Department of Revenue (HQ), the 
Committee, in their previous Report on the Demands for Grants, emphasized the need 
for expeditious work related to the setting up of the Goods and Services Appellate 
Tribunal (GSTAT). The Committee note that the Department of Revenue, in light of 
their recommendation, has notified the Constitution of State Benches of the Goods and 
Services Tax Appellate Tribunal via Notification No. S.O.4073 (E) dated 14.09.2023. 
Furthermore, the GST Council, in its 52nd Meeting held on 07.10.2023, recommended 
amendments to Section 110 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. 
Accordingly, the proposal for the introduction of the Central Goods and Services Tax 
(Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2023 has been sent to the Cabinet Secretariat. 
Additionally, the Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal (Appointment and 
Conditions of Service of President and Members) Rules, 2023, has also been notified 
vide No. G.S.R. 793(E) dated 25.10.2023. The work related to the constitution of the 
Principal Bench and the appointment of the President of the Principal Bench is in 
progress. The Committee further noted that a budgetary provision of Rs. 233.1 crore 
has been made in BE 2024-25 for the establishment of the Principal and State Benches 
of GSTAT under Demand No. 35. While expressing satisfaction over the work done so 
far, the Committee recommend that all the remaining work related to GSTAT should 
be completed expeditiously so that GSTAT can become fully functional at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
The work related to the constitution of the Principal Bench and State Benches 
of Goods and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (GSTAT) has been notified vide 
Notification No. S.O.3048(E) dated 31st July 2024. 
 The appointment of the President of the Principal Bench has been notified vide 
Notification No. 1/2024 (F. No. A-50050/99/2018-CESTAT-DOR-DOR) dated 20th May, 
2024. 
 Appointment of Members is under process. Interviews have been conducted. 

 
17 
 
 953 post of sub-ordinate staff has been created and appointment of the staff is 
under progress. 
 The Recruitment Rules (RR) of Group ‘C’ has been notified vide Notification No. 
G.S.R. 340(E) dated 21.06.2024 and Recruitment Rules (RR) of Group A & B is under 
process. 
 Jurisdiction of State Benches of Goods and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal 
(GSTAT) has been notified vide notification No. S.O. 5063 (E) dated 26th November 
2024. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 2) 
Demand No.36 
The Committee, in regard to Demand No. 36 pertaining to the Direct Taxes, note 
that there are no Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, and the 
entire budget is for salaries and administrative expenses pertaining to field offices of 
the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT). The Budget Estimates for 2024-25 have 
been proposed at Rs. 10,340.38 crore, out of which Rs. 9,025.42 crore is under the 
Revenue Head and Rs. 1,314.96 crore is under the Capital Head. In the Revenue 
section, the expenditure towards 'Salaries' (including Rewards, Allowances, and LTC) 
has been estimated at Rs. 6,269.25 crore, which is 69.46% of the Revenue Grant of 
Rs. 9,025.42 crore and 60.63% of the total Grant of Rs. 10,340.38 crore. The 
Committee, while scrutinizing the previous years’ financial performance in regard to 
Demand No. 36, have found that the utilization rate of the budgetary allocation has 
shown consistent improvement over the last three years. From 90.5% in 2021-22 and 
94.1% in 2022-23 to 98.1% in 2023-24, the utilization has steadily improved. However, 
the Committee also find that at the stage of RE, budgetary estimations have been 
revised upward during the last two fiscal years; yet, the actual utilization remained 
below the initial Budgetary Estimates. In regard to savings in the revenue section, the 
Department has stated that one of the main reasons is that the Directorate of 
Expenditure Budget, as well as the Budget Controlling Authorities (BCAs) and the Sub-
BCAs, did not have a proficient mechanism to monitor the requirement of funds or the 
expenditure incurred by the Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs), which more often 
than not resulted in surplus allocation of funds in some cases or shortage of funds in 
other charges. Moreover, funds under the various heads were surrendered by some 

 
18 
 
BCAs at the last moment, so the funds could not be diverted to other BCAs. While 
appreciating the improvement in the utilization of budgetary allocation, the Committee 
desire that the trend of improvement in budgetary utilization should continue and that 
the budgetary forecasting and project execution mechanism, particularly for the capital 
section, should be further strengthened for accurate prediction of fund requirements 
and their optimum utilization. 
Reply of the Government 
The Directorate of Expenditure Budget, CBDT has digitized the Budget related 
data using the Google Spreadsheet, which was earlier maintained in the Physical 
registers. CBDT has also developed the software using Apps Script (Apps Script is a 
cloud-based JavaScript platform powered by Google drive that lets you integrate with 
and automate tasks across Google products) to automate the generation of draft 
allocation/withdrawal orders as well as the updation of the database in the 
Spreadsheet. Subsequently the similar spreadsheet were deployed to standardize and 
digitize the Budget related data of the Budget Controlling Authorities (BCAs)/SUB-
BCAs and integrate them with the Spreadsheet maintained by the Directorate. 
Subsequently, the Department has devised the Spreadsheet in the specific format that 
DDOs use to enter the Object Head wise expenditure related data incurred by them 
and their Spreadsheet has been integrated with the Spreadsheet of respective BCAs/ 
BCAs which facilitated the monitoring of the Expenditure and funds available with all 
the DDOs by the respective SUB BCA/BCA as well as the Directorate.  
(a) The Department further strengthened the mechanism using the Google 
Workspace Accounts and Spreadsheets. 
(b) The Department is regularly monitoring the expenditure of the various BCAs vis-
à-vis the funds allocated to them in Capital head, so as to ensure optimum 
utilization of the grants and minimize large savings/surrender of the amount. 
(c) CBDT in consultation with the o/o Directorate of Income Tax (Infra) proposes to 
maintain the database if the Capital projects and the expenditure incurred on 
them, in the following format, and move the consolidated revalidation proposals 
directly in the April month of the F.Y. without waiting for the proposals from the 
field formations. This will ensure that the Revalidation process is completed 
early in the FY and funds can be allocated to the executing agencies in time. 
 

 
19 
 
S.No. Particulars of 
the Project 
Total 
estimated 
Cost 
Actual 
expenditure 
incurred till 
the preceding 
year 
Remaining 
amount to be 
revalidated 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 3) 
Demand No.37 
The Committee note that Demand No. 37, pertaining to Indirect Taxes, is for 
establishment-related expenditure for the field offices of the Central Board of Indirect 
Taxes & Customs (CBIC) and provision for Central Sector Schemes such as 
Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products (RoDTEP) and various other 
Scrips-Based Schemes. The Committee further note that the Budgetary Estimate for 
the year 2024-25 has been set at Rs. 41,098.48 crore, reflecting a 6.7% increase from 
the previous year’s Budgetary Estimate (BE). The Committee also note that for 2023-
24, the BE was set at Rs. 38,510.58 crore, which was reduced to Rs. 36,716.60 crore 
at Revised Estimate (RE), whereas the actual expenditure was Rs. 34,649.88 crore, 
representing 94.4% of the RE and 90% of the BE. The utilization rate against the RE 
for the years 2021-22 and 2022-23 was 76.8% and 92.6%, respectively. The 
Committee are pleased that the Department has sincerely worked on their 
recommendation and considerably improved their fund utilization. Nonetheless, the 
Committee believe there is still scope for further narrowing the gap and would like the 
Department to take further necessary measures in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendations of the committee have been duly noted for compliance. 
CBIC will take all necessary steps to further narrow the gap between allocation and 
utilization of budget. The field formations are being sensitized about the importance of 
sending accurate estimates of funds to ensure optimum utilization of the budget 
allocated. Further, the expenditure incurred by the field formations is being monitored 
on monthly basis through e- lekha portal. CBIC has already developed Budget, 
Estimation, Allocation &  Monitoring System (BEAMS) application which used for better 

 
20 
 
monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis funds. A team of officers from Expenditure 
management Cell (EMC) are visiting the field formations and the offices handling 
sizeable Revenue/Capital Expenditure for realistic Budget forecasting and better 
utilization of funds, and to help BCAs use BEAMS application to make budget 
allocation more effective. Follow-up with CPWD shall also be done regarding utilization 
of funds transferred to them. CBIC is conducting regular webinars for educating field 
formations about optimum utilization of budget and addressing any other issues being 
faced by them. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 4) 
Tax Collection 
GST Evasion and Fraud 
The Committee note that GST evasion as well as fraudulent Input Tax Credit 
(ITC) cases are on the rise. There were 12,574 GST evasion cases in 2021-22, which 
increased to 20,582 in 2023-24. Similarly, fraudulent ITC cases rose from 5,966 in 
2021-22 to 9,190 in 2023-24. During the study visit of the Committee to Chennai and 
Mumbai, in Nov.2024, it emerged that fraudulent ITC cases are a significant challenge 
in GST, requiring urgent attention to curb it. This issue involves claiming ITC on the 
basis of fake invoices without actual supply of goods or services, leading to substantial 
revenue losses for the Government and distorting the tax system. The Committee 
understand that several steps, such as physical verification of suspicious taxpayers 
and the use of biometrics for GST registration, are being taken to address this issue. 
The Committee welcome these measures and believe they are steps in the right 
direction. However, they also desire that utmost efforts be made to ensure that genuine 
taxpayers, especially small vendors, do not face undue hardship. Additionally, it is 
important to emphasize that efforts should be made to raise awareness about various 
GST provisions in easy-to-understand language, ultimately resulting in better 
compliance and a hassle-free GST registration process. 
Reply of the Government 
Government has taken several major steps to streamline the process of 
registration (which is the beginning point of fake invoice racket) under GST and to curb 
the menace of the fake invoicing and passing on fake ITC. Few such steps are: 

 
21 
 
a. Measures to streamline registration process to prevent registration of fake 
entities: 
i. Insertion of sub-rule (4A) in rule 8 of CGST Rules, 2017 to provide for risk based 
biometric-based Aadhaar authentication of registration applicants who appear to 
be risky based on data analytics. 
ii. Making provision for Geo-coding the address of the principal place of business of 
the registrants. {The functionality has been made active by GSTN}. 
iii. Cleaning up the taxpayer base by strengthening verification of business entities 
through Aadhaar authentication for new registrations and physical verification of 
business premises, where Aadhaar is not authenticated. 
iv. Amendment in CGST Rules, 2017 to provide for physical verification in high-risk 
cases, even when Aadhaar has been authenticated. 
v. Provision for OTP based verification of PAN at time of registration on the mobile 
and email address linked with PAN to prevent GST registration using PAN of other 
persons, without their knowledge. 
vi. Detailed guidelines have been issued for processing of application for registration 
vide Instruction No. 03/2023-GST dated 14.06.2023 to tackle the menace of 
fake/bogus registrations. 
Strengthening of provisions for furnishing details of bank account of the registrant 
e.g. it should be in the name of the registered person and obtained on his Permanent 
Account Number (PAN) and also linked with Aadhaar in case of proprietorship firm. 
Time limit of 30 days is being provided for furnishing of valid bank account details. In 
case of non-adherence to this requirement, system-based suspension of the 
registration has been provided. 
B. Other Legal / Procedural measures:  
i. Beneficiary (master mind), who retains benefit or at whose instance a supply has 
been made without the issuance of an invoice, or invoice has been issued without 
supply, or excess ITC has been availed/distributed, has been made liable for 
penalty similar to that of actual supplier/recipient. 
ii. Aadhar authentication made mandatory for filing application for refunds under 
GST and to track refund proceeds, refund to be given in only those bank accounts 
which are in name and on PAN of the applicant. 
iii. Centralized suspension of registrations pertaining to registered persons who 
default in timely filing of returns.   

 
22 
 
iv. With effect from 01.01.2022, restricting availment of Input tax credit to such 
invoices or debit notes which have been furnished by the supplier in the statement 
of outward supplies (Form GSTR-1) and details of which have been 
communicated to the registered person in auto-populated FORM GSTR-2B. 
v. With effect from 01.01.2022, restriction on a registered person for filing GSTR-1 
(the details of outward supplies) in case return in Form GSTR-3B has not been 
furnished for the preceding tax period. This prevents transmission of credit to the 
recipient if the tax has not been paid by the supplier. 
vi. Filing of Form GSTR-I is made mandatory before filing of Form GSTR-3B for a 
tax period w.e.f. 01.10.2022 and has been made mandatorily sequential w.e.f. 
01.10.2022. 
vii. E-way bill has been integrated and tracking with RFID has been introduced to 
provide access to real time data of vehicle movements. 
viii. Provision has been made for blocking the generation of e-way bills by non-
compliant taxpayers. [Rule 138E] 
ix. E-invoicing in respect of B2B supply of goods or services or both to a registered 
person has been made mandatory with effect from 1st October, 2020. Initial 
aggregate turnover limit of Rs. 500 Crore being reduced to Rs. 5 Crore w.e.f. 
01.08.2023. Data from e-invoice is being auto populated in Form GSTR-1 of the 
taxpayer, preventing instances of non-reporting.  
x. Restrictions on utilisation of ITC in cases where the proper officer has reasons to 
believe that such credit has been availed fraudulently. This is to prevent further 
passing on the credit down the stream. [Rule 86A] 
xi. Input tax credit can only be availed by a registered person in respect of such 
invoices or debit notes which have been furnished by the supplier in the statement 
of outward supplies in FORM GSTR-1 and details of which have been 
communicated to the registered person in FORM GSTR-2B. 
xii. Rule 8 of CGST Rules, 2017 has been amended to provide for OTP based 
verification of PAN at time of registration on the mobile and email address linked 
with PAN. This will help in preventing GST registration using PAN of other 
persons, without their knowledge. [Notification No. 26/2022-CT dated 
26.12.2022.] 
xiii. A registered person is not allowed to furnish the details of outward supplies under 
section 37 in FORM GSTR-I, if he has not furnished the return in FORM GSTR-
3B for the preceding tax period. 

 
23 
 
C. Extensive Use of technology:  
i. Project Anveshan-The Directorate General of Analytics and Risk Management 
(DGARM) generates various reports to assist field formations in identifying 
anomalies in taxpayer behaviour, such as potential tax evasion, fraudulent 
registration, and unusual e-way bill activity, among others. In order to safeguard 
the revenue and nabbing the evaders, "project Anveshan” has been initiated 
wherein Analytics, Verification, Shortlisting of Anomalies has deployed newer 
techniques with the objective of early identification of GSTINs with propensity 
for fake/ fraudulent activity which get shared with DGGI or field formations as 
pin-pointed actionable intelligence for investigations. 
ii. Facial Recognition System (FRS) is used to detect anomalies in digital 
information provided during registration, such as different photos on registrations 
with same PAN or having same photos across registrations on different PANs. 
iii. Analysis of EWB data in the time window between registration and kicking in of 
returns cycle identifies new risky registrations on the basis of skewed inward to 
outward supply ratio in e-way bill data. Identified GSTINs new registrants with 
propensity to generate fake ITC based on EWB have been forwarded for further 
verification and action. 
iv. Artificial intelligence (AI) tools such as NETRA (Networking Exploration Tools for 
Revenue Argumentation), GAIN (GST Analytics and Intelligence Network) & 
ADVAIT (Advanced Analytics in Indirect Taxation) based on network analysis 
have been implemented to identify risky taxpayers and the entire supply chain. It 
aims at targeting fake and fraudulent ITC by analysing ITC chains of new 
registrants with high amount of ITC claimed within a short time frame. Further, 
ITC of the ultimate beneficiary which appears to have flowed from ITC chains of 
fake ITC initiator firms without corresponding inward receipts or from circular 
transactions is also quantified.  
v. GST registration applications, filed on GST portal, are now being assigned risk 
rating by system based on various risk parameters, so that detailed verification 
can be conducted by the tax officers while processing such registration 
applications. 
vi. With the use of data analytics and AI based tools, Red Flag reports are being 
generated by GSTN as well as Directorate General of Analysis and Risk 
Management (DGARM), CBIC in respect of defaulting taxpayers and risky 
taxpayers with deviant behaviour in form of discrepancies between returns and 

 
24 
 
other database, like GSTR-1 and GSTR-3B, GSTR3B and GSTR 2B, GSTR 3B 
and e-way bills etc, which are being shared with the tax officers for verification on 
regular basis. Action on these Red Flag reports by field formation has resulted in 
considerable detection and recovery, and has led to improving overall compliance 
by the taxpayers. 
vii. Electronic invoicing has been made mandatory for all B2B transactions for 
businesses with turnover exceeding Rs. 5 crores. 
With Respect to hardship for the genuine taxpayer: - 
It is mentioned that the Government recognizes the importance of safeguarding 
the interests of honest and small taxpayers and has undertaken a series of targeted 
measures to filter out the fake taxpayer so that the genuine taxpayers do not face 
undue hardship due to investigations/ enquiries undertaken against such fake 
taxpayers. Such measures are broadly categorized as :  
(i) Risk Rating of Registration Applications: 
To ensure that fraudulent elements are prevented from entering into GST 
system, registration process has been strengthened by use of data analytics and 
artificial intelligence to identify risky applicants so that their detailed verification, 
including physical verification can be conducted by the field officers before taking a 
decision on their application for registration.  
 (ii) Special All-India Drive against fake registrations. 
From time to time, Special drives against fake registrations have been launched, 
involving Central and State GST formations, to weed out fake registrants and to 
take further remedial action to weed out these fake billers from the GST eco-system 
and to safeguard Government revenue and to protect genuine taxpayers from 
hardship. 
  In this regard, a special All-India drive was launched by all Central and State 
Tax administrations during the period from 16th May 2023 to 14th August 2023 for 
verification and detection of suspicious/ fake registrations and for taking timely 
remedial action to prevent any further revenue loss to the Government. A second 
Special All-India Drive was launched by Central and all State Tax administrations from 
16th August 2024 to 30th October 2024 also in this regard. 
  Regular instructions are issued to tax officers to ensure that CGST field 
formations conduct investigations in a manner that strikes a balance between effective 
GST enforcement and fostering a business-friendly environment. Investigations are 
conducted only in high-risk cases, based on rigorous data analytics and specific risk 

 
25 
 
indicators, to ensure that genuine and honest taxpayers, including small businesses, 
are not subjected to undue hardship. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 5) 
Campaign to nudge taxpayers 
The Committee note that the Income Tax Department undertakes electronic 
campaigns through SMS and email to reach out to individuals with significant 
transactions reported against them in Form 61A (Statement of Financial Transaction), 
as mandated by the Act under the Non-Filer Monitoring System (NMS). Every year, 
before the deadline for filing revised returns, certain taxpayers who have not filed 
income tax returns but have entered into taxable transactions are contacted through 
the e-campaign as part of the Risk Management Strategy, nudging them to file their 
income tax returns. The Committee further note that out of the 68,45,662 taxpayers 
selected for the Campaign in 2021-22, 83,21,305 in 2022-23, and 44,75,956 in 2023-
24, the number of taxpayers who filed their income tax returns were 7,20,592, 
10,33,979, and 8,81,996 respectively. The Committee find that there is a considerable 
gap between the taxpayers selected for the Campaign and those who actually filed 
their tax returns. The Committee endorse this Campaign as a useful tool to increase 
tax compliance and desire that it be made more specific with the help of technology 
and data tracking to increase its conversion rate. 
Reply of the Government 
A campaign was undertaken in December, 2024 to nudge taxpayers to file revised or 
belated Income Tax Returns (ITRs) pertaining to Assessment Year (AY) 2024-25 
before the due date of 31.12.2024. This campaign reached out to a far lesser number 
of taxpayers (470286) as compared to previous years, but the communications were 
far more specific, pointing out to the taxpayers as to what information is available with 
the Income Tax Department, what has been disclosed by taxpayer and the mismatch 
thereof. As a result of the campaign, 55,010 belated/revised ITRs have been filed by 
the taxpayers for AY 2024-25. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 

 
26 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 6) 
Tax Refunds and Tax Arrears  
The Committee note that the average time taken for processing returns has 
reduced significantly from 38 days in 2020-21 to 10 days in 2023-24. The amount of 
refund has also increased from Rs. 1,92,085.05 crore to Rs. 3,87,816.08 crore. 
However, on the other hand, tax arrears are accumulating rapidly. In regard to CBDT, 
the cumulative tax arrears, which were Rs. 10,95,938.06 crore in 2019-20, stood at Rs. 
42,29,640.82 crore in 2024-25 (up to 07.10.2024). In the case of CBIC, the arrear 
amount has risen from Rs. 3,02,157.23 crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 4,26,737.76 crore in 
2023-24. The Committee also note that the CBDT has issued an Annual Central Action 
Plan for fiscal 2024-25, wherein time-bound targets for recovery of arrear demand have 
been fixed. The progress on the above action plan is actively monitored by CBDT. 
Concerted efforts continue to be made to reverse the trend of increasing arrear 
demand and to initiate the process of reducing the figure to more manageable levels. 
The Committee appreciate such efforts and desire that the outcome of such exercise 
should be shared with the Committee at the time of furnishing action taken notes. The 
Committee also find that no such action plan has been drawn in regard to CBIC. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that CBIC should also prepare such an annual plan 
to recover arrear demand in a time-bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
CBDT 
Regarding Direct Taxes, CBDT has prepared an Annual Central Action Plan for F.Y . 
2024-25 (CAP), wherein time bound targets for recovery of arrear demand have been 
fixed.  The progress on above action plan is actively monitored by CBDT. In order to 
handle the task of resolution of the outstanding demands, a Demand Facilitation Centre 
(DFC) was set up in 2022. The DFC facilitates the Jurisdictional Assessing Officers 
(JAOs) to resolve outstanding demands by providing data pertaining to the quantum, 
category, reason for demand and also the way forward for its resolution, through issue 
of pending rectification and appeal giving effect orders. 
Demand amounting to Rs. 11,71,890 Crore involving 3,51,632 cases has been reduced 
since the time of inception of DFC in July 2022. Out of the above cited demand of Rs. 
11,71,890 Crore, demand of  Rs. 11,56,098 Crore pertains to 29,726 cases, each 
having demand greater than Rs. 1 Crore. 
 

 
27 
 
CBIC 
Regarding Indirect Taxes, with regard to the observation of the Committee, it 
is to inform that CBIC and its attached office DGPM is actively monitoring the 
collection of tax arrears.  The following steps have been taken in this regard: 
(i) DGPM has fixed timebound targets for recovery of arrears on yearly basis and 
the same have been communicated to each of the 32 Zones after approval of 
the CBIC for proper monitoring and to achieve the targets fixed.  The copy of 
annual targets fixed for the year 2024-25 in respect of each of the zones is 
attached herewith for kind perusal.  Every month a consolidated report of the 
total recovery arrears realized w.r.t. Central Excise/ Service Tax/ Customs is 
prepared and sent to the Board. 
(ii) Zonal Pr. Chief Commissioners/ CCs have been asked to initiate concrete 
plans to reduce the pending arrears. Letters was issued to all Pr. CCs/ CCs in 
this regard.  
(iii) Besides, DGPM is also periodically monitoring month-wise pro-rata target 
achieved by individual zones.  
(iv) It is also informed that Certificate action under Section 142 of Customs Act, 
and Section 11 of Central Excise Act has been initiated by the Zones with the 
concerned District Authorities to recover the arrears. Further, all Zonal Chief 
Commissioner are taking appropriate measures to recover the pending 
arrears and making efforts to identify properties of defaulters not traceable / 
unit closed with the help from Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU), and State administration etc. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 7) 
Broadening of Tax Base 
The Committee note that the Tax-to-GDP ratio of our country has been 
increasing in recent years, particularly with regard to Direct Taxes, which has grown 
from 5.2% in 2020-21 to 6.5% in 2023-24, the highest level in the past 15 years. During 
the same period, the Indirect Tax to GDP ratio also increased from 4.7% to 5.2%. The 
Committee further note that the Tax-to-GDP ratio varies according to the level of 
development of a nation. While high-income countries have a higher Tax-to-GDP ratio, 
the same would not be applicable to middle-income and low-middle-income countries. 

 
28 
 
Our country aspires to become a developed nation by 2047. This would mean 
graduating from a low-middle-income to a high-income or middle-high-income country 
in the next 25 years or so. As the Department has stated, in the next 25 years, India’s 
direct tax-to-GDP ratio should double itself and reach approximately 12%. The 
Committee, however, are of the opinion that while the Government has implemented 
several commendable measures to enhance tax compliance and reduce evasion, a 
significant portion of the economy remains untaxed. Therefore, they desire that, to 
achieve the envisaged target of 12%, the government should focus more on 
broadening the tax base and including those who are still outside the tax net before 
resorting to deepening the tax base. The Committee believes that raising awareness 
and education about the importance of tax compliance, the benefits of a broader tax 
base, and simplifying tax laws to make compliance easier for individuals and 
businesses can go a long way in broadening the tax base. The Committee are also 
strongly in favor of leveraging technology to streamline tax administration, reduce 
compliance costs, and enhance transparency. 
Reply of the Government 
         CBDT 
CBDT is undertaking various initiatives and activities to enhance taxpayer awareness, 
educate the public about income tax-related matters, and emphasize the importance 
of taxes. These efforts aim to simplify tax compliance and improve voluntary 
participation among taxpayers. The following is a summary of actions taken: 
 
(i)  Publicity Campaigns across Media Platforms 
To disseminate critical information related to filing Income Tax Returns (ITRs), 
statutory timelines, and compliance, the Directorate conduct extensive publicity 
campaigns via television, radio, print, and digital media. Campaigns are conducted 
for filing of ITRs, advance tax due dates, TDS compliance, updated returns, and more. 
These campaigns are tailored in Hindi and 10 regional languages to ensure 
widespread outreach. 
(ii) Social Media Engagement 

 
29 
 
CBDT actively uses social media platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, 
and LinkedIn to create awareness among the taxpayer. Monthly quizzes, meme-
based campaigns, and video content like the “Samvaad Sessions” are strategically 
posted to engage taxpayers. The innovative and interactive content garnered 
significant public attention, resulting in a notable increase in the department’s social 
media followers by 14-33% across platforms. 
(iii) Samvaad Sessions 
Interactive chat sessions, “Samvaad” featuring senior officers addressing crucial 
topics, such as faceless assessment, e-verification, and charitable trust provisions are 
recorded and made available on YouTube and Instagram, received widespread 
appreciation and high viewership. 
(iv)  Taxpayer Hubs 
Taxpayer Hubs were established in seven cities across India, offering comprehensive 
assistance to taxpayers through kiosks, interactive brochures, educational activities, 
and grievance redressal systems. These hubs aimed to simplify tax compliance and 
educate taxpayers about the role of taxes in nation-building. 
(v) Outreach via Trade Fairs and Events 
CBDT has set up Taxpayer Lounges at events like the East Himalayan Trade Fair 
(EHTF) and the India International Trade Fair (IITF). These pavilions provided 
taxpayers with educational resources, interactive activities, and grievance handling 
services. The lounges received accolades, including a gold medal for excellence in 
display. 
(vi) Board Games and Educational Tools for Future Taxpayers 
As part of the “Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav” CBDT has developed and distributed board 
games like “Snakes, Ladders and Taxes,” “Building India,” and a 3D puzzle game. 
These tools are designed to educate schoolchildren on the importance of paying taxes 
and their role in national development. 
(vii)  Collaboration with ICAI for Tax Clinics 

 
30 
 
CBDT has supported the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) in 
organizing “Tax Clinics” to resolve taxpayer queries on ITR filing. This included 
providing educational materials, brochures, and other resources. 
 
(viii) Digital Publications and Educational Content 
CBDT has updated and published various brochures, comic books, and e-books such 
as the “Direct Tax Glossary” and digital calendars themed on “Taxes in Ancient India.” 
These publications aimed to simplify complex tax terms and educate taxpayers in an 
engaging manner. 
(ix)  Awareness Campaigns on Specific Tax Provisions 
Dedicated campaigns were conducted to inform taxpayers about updates in tax 
provisions, including charitable trusts, donor eligibility under Section 80G, and audit 
report filing deadlines. These campaigns were publicized through social media and 
print media to reach a broader audience. 
(x)  Innovative Projects and Media Campaigns 
CBDT has initiated projects such as hosting of quiz on the MyGov website. 
(xi)  Public Relation Efforts 
Public relations initiatives included publishing updated brochures, comic books, and 
planners. For example, 4000 comic books on eight tax-related topics were distributed, 
and the “Direct Taxes Glossary” was applauded for its utility in simplifying technical 
tax terminologies. 
 
(xii)  Data Collection and Application Development 
CBDT has compiled data of the Aayakar Kutumb App, ensuring comprehensive 
information for taxpayers regarding departmental services, officers, and regions. This 
app enhances accessibility and facilitates taxpayer interaction with the department. 
Various measures are being undertaken vide amendments to the Income-tax Act, 
1961 on broadening the tax base.  

 
31 
 
It is stated that tax reforms is an ongoing process. Hence, the recommendation of the 
Committee is noted for future course of action. 
 
 
CBIC 
The Government has taken following steps/ measures for the broadening of the tax 
base and to simplify the tax compliance (especially for individuals and MSMEs): -  
i.    MSMEs, engaged in the supply of goods, are exempted from taking GST 
registration upto a turnover of Rs. 40 lakhs (other than some special category 
States where the exemption from registration is upto turnover of Rs. 20 lakhs). 
MSMEs engaged in the supply of services are exempted from GST registration 
if their turnover is less than Rs. 20 lakhs. This ensures that no GST compliance 
is required by such small units below the above threshold turnover and no GST 
is required to be paid by such units upto the said threshold turnover.  
ii.    To ease the compliance burden on small tax payers, an optional composition 
scheme has been introduced in GST where taxpayers engaged in supply of 
goods with turnover below Rs. 1.5 crore can pay tax on lumpsum basis at the 
rate of 1% of their turnover on quarterly basis instead of, charging tax in each 
invoice. Such taxpayers under composition scheme are required to file a return 
on annual basis, thus reducing their compliance burden substantially. In the 
case of services, the threshold turnover for availing benefit of composition 
scheme has been fixed at Rs. 50 lakhs.  
iii.    Small taxpayers having an annual turnover less than Rs. 5 crore have also been 
given an option to file their GST returns on quarterly basis, under the Quarterly 
Returns Monthly Payment (QRMP) scheme where number of returns for such 
small units has been substantially reduced.  
iv.     Small taxpayers having turnover less than Rs. 2 crore have been exempted 
from filing annual returns under GST thus reducing their compliance burden.  
v.     Unregistered suppliers and composition taxpayers have been permitted to make 
intra-state supply of goods through E-Commerce Operators (ECOs). This has 
opened the huge e-commerce market for them to sell their goods without taking 
registration under GST and without payment of any tax upto threshold turnover 
of registration.  

 
32 
 
vi.   Various technological initiatives have been taken for simplification of GST 
compliances for small taxpayers such as facility of filing of Nil returns through 
SMS, auto population of GST returns on the GST portal and facility of making 
GST payment through UPI, debit cards, credit cards, IMPS, RTGS etc.  
vii.   For helping smaller taxpayers and to provide them relief, various amnesty 
schemes have been introduced from time to time in respect of extension in 
date of return filing, waiver/ reduction of late fee and interest, extension of time 
of filing of appeals with appellate authority, extension of time for filing 
application for revocation of cancellation of registration, etc.  
viii.   To incentivize timely payment by buyers to MSMEs, especially when supplies 
are made to large businesses, provisions of GST already provide that a 
registered person must pay to the supplier, the value of the goods and/or 
services along with the tax within 180 days from the date of issue of invoice.   
ix.    GSTN system has been integrated with RBI Public Tech Platform for frictionless 
Credit which has helped small taxpayers in easier access to bank loans based 
on their GST registration.  
x.   Considering the difficulties faced by the taxpayers during the initial years of 
implementation of GST, it has been decided to conditionally waive interest and 
penalty in respect of demand notices issued in cases where fraud, 
suppression, etc. are not involved, for the financial years 2017-18, 2018-19 
and 2019-20 by introduction of section 128A of the CGST Act, 2017, subject to 
payment of the tax dues upto a specified date. This measure will benefit a large 
number of taxpayers, especially smaller taxpayers, and will help them to settle 
their demand cases with payment of due tax liability for these initial years.  
xi.    To reduce government litigation, monetary limits have been fixed below which 
appeals will not be filed by the department before the GST Appellate Tribunal, 
High Court, and Supreme Court, subject to certain exclusions.  
xii.    It has also been decided to reduce the amount of pre-deposit for filing of appeals 
under GST to ease cash flow and working capital blockage for the taxpayers.  
xiii.  Department is also using data analytics, third party data sources and information 
technology system-based tools to identify potential taxpayers who remain 
outside the tax framework, thereby making efforts to broaden the tax base.  
xiv. Besides, the Government undertakes extensive campaigns across various 
media platforms, including social media, to raise awareness about the benefits 

 
33 
 
of tax compliance and to broaden the tax base and to include those who are 
still outside the tax net. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 8) 
 
Dispute Resolution  
The Committee note with concern that the number of appeals pending at various 
fora in respect of Direct Taxes is increasing year after year despite various measures 
taken by the Department in this regard. The total number of appeals pending was 
51,567 in 2021-22, which increased to 58,645 in 2022-23 and to 64,311 in 2023-24. 
Similarly, the amount disputed in 2021-22 was Rs. 6,64,067.86 crore, which rose to 
Rs. 7,18,030.94 crore in 2022-23 and surged by 198% to Rs. 14,21,130.27 crore in 
2023-24. The amount involved at the Income Tax Appellate Authority, which was Rs. 
2,89,564.76 crore in 2022-23, almost tripled to Rs. 8,56,576.01 crore in 2023-24. 
Likewise, in the case of Indirect Taxes, the number of cases increased from 113,508 in 
2021-22 to 126,615 in 2023-24, and the amount involved more than doubled from Rs. 
3,67,249.78 crore to Rs. 7,40,665.05 crore during the same period. The Committee 
also note with concern the slow pace of disposal of cases related to the Prevention of 
Money Laundering Act (PMLA), as since its inception, only 45 cases have been 
disposed of so far. 
Considering this data, it seems that the various measures taken by the Government to 
reduce tax litigation have not yielded the desired results so far. While the introduction 
of measures such as the Vivad se Vishwas Scheme, the establishment of the National 
Faceless Assessment Centre, and the adoption of technology-driven solutions have 
been commendable, there remains a critical need to address the backlog and 
complexities in tax dispute resolution. The Committee feel that it is imperative to further 
enhance the focus on tax dispute redressal mechanisms and take additional measures 
in this regard. The Committee observe that no assessment of the best practices by 
different countries for mitigating tax dispute burdens has been undertaken by CBDT. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that for formulating alternative or additional 
measures, there should be a study and examination of the best practices followed by 

 
34 
 
different countries for mitigating the tax dispute burden, for their impact, usefulness, 
and adoptability, particularly in the Indian context. This would be beneficial in reducing 
disputes and fostering a more cooperative relationship between taxpayers and tax 
authorities. Implementing these best practices can lead to faster resolution of disputes, 
reduced litigation costs, and improved taxpayer confidence in the system. The 
Committee believe that aligning with global standards can also make our country a 
more attractive destination for foreign investment with predictable and efficient tax 
regimes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(1)  The CBDT has revised monetary limits for filing appeals/SLPs in various courts 
and ITAT through the Circulars mentioned in Column 4. The monetary limit of tax effect 
for filing SLPs in Supreme Court has been increased from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 2 crores 
by CBDT Circular No. 05/2024 dated 15.03.2024. This was subsequently increased to 
Rs. 5 crores through Circular No. 09/2024 dated 17.09.2024. As a result of these two 
Circulars, a total of 601 SLPs (total revenue involved Rs. 63.36 Crore) were dismissed 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The upward revision of monetary limits of tax effect for 
filing of SLPs/Appeals has also considerably reduced the number of cases, where the 
appeal/SLP is required to be filed in Courts/ITAT.  
(2) Efforts are made to get SLPs bunched so that there is a quick disposal. 
(3) Effective monitoring of pending SLPs is done. 
(4) No SLP is filed in cases/issues which have been decided finally by Supreme Court. 
Further, CBDT has noted the recommendations of the committee regarding 
study and examination of the best practices followed by different countries for 
mitigating the tax dispute burden, for their impact, usefulness and adoptability, 
particularly in the Indian context. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl No. 9) 
 
Strengthening of Tax Administration 

 
35 
 
Training 
The Committee note that there are emerging fields in which training is required 
or would be required for the tax personnel in the near future to become proactive rather 
than reactive in managing tax evasion and frauds, such as Cryptocurrency and 
Blockchain Analysis, Data Analytics and Forensic Accounting, Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learning in Taxation, White-Collar Crime and Regulatory Compliance, etc. 
The importance of a proactive approach in the emerging field of tax analytics and 
technology for tax personnel in India cannot be overstated. Traditionally, tax authorities 
have often been reactive, addressing tax evasion and fraud only after they occur. 
However, with the advent of advanced data analytics and technology, there is a 
significant opportunity for tax personnel to shift towards a more proactive stance. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary planning be done and arrangements 
made to impart training in such fields for the tax personnel. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the details of such planning; and estimation of funds at the time of 
furnishing action taken notes by the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
CBDT 
The suggestions made by the committee have duly been noted for necessary 
compliance. It is submitted that the CBDT has a robust and comprehensive capacity 
building eco-system the officers of CBDT are pro-actively trained in all the emerging 
fields including data analytics, digital currency, AI/ML Forensic accounting etc. Details 
of some of the trainings conducted during the current year are as under: 
(i) Course Conducted in Collaboration with OECD on Anti-Money 
Laundering: Current Trends, Prosecutions, and the Challenges around Crypto 
Assets” from 21st – 25th October, 2024- A 5-day Specialty Programme was 
organised on the theme “Anti-Money Laundering: Current Trends, Prosecutions, and 
the Challenges around Crypto Assets” from 21st  to 25th  October, 2024 at NADT 
Regional Campus, Saket, New Delhi. This 5-day specialty programme was targeted 
at investigators with experience in the investigation, and/or prosecution of money 
laundering cases. The course provided an overview of current trends in money 
laundering, the enablers who provide the means, the freezing and seizing of assets, 
and money laundering prosecutions. The course also explored the challenges posed 
by crypto assets and new and emerging money laundering/terrorist financing risks 
posed by crypto assets. The course saw a total of 38 participants including 10 

 
36 
 
international participants from Indonesia, Malaysia, Maldives, Qatar, Timor-Leste and 
United Arab Emirates besides participants from CBDT, FIU-IND, ED, NCB, RBI, 
DGGI, SFIO and CBI. The program was a huge success and received outstanding 
feedback.  
(ii) Workshop conducted in Collaboration with HMRC, UK on Risk 
assessment at NADT-RC Kolkata– A 5-day workshop was conducted for the 
officers of department in collaboration with His Majesty Revenue and Customs 
(HMRC) at regional training campus at Kolkata from 10.12.2024 to 13.12.2024. 
During the workshop various aspects of data exploitation, Compliance and risk 
management in HMRC. Key areas include the Tax Gap, strategic risk analysis, and 
tools like CONNECT, IDRS, and XBRL for detecting and preventing risks were taught 
to the participants.  
(iii) Course on ‘Managing Financial Investigation’ was conducted by Directorate 
of Training, CBDT in collaboration with OECD from 20th January 2025 to 31st January 
2025. In the above course, a total of 18 participants from India and 11 participants 
from foreign countries undertook the training on various aspects of Financial 
Investigation.  The topics covered in the training program entailed subjects like Insight 
into investigative Techniques of Crypto Assets, various aspects of money laundering, 
asset recovery, beneficial ownership and international cooperation, etc. Various case 
studies on the above topics were also covered in the Pilot course.  A specific mention 
may also be made here that participants were also made aware on the various 
aspects of internal corruption pertinent to financial investigation. 
(iv) The CBDT has also collaborated with Institutes like National Cyber Forensic 
University (NFSU) Gujarat and other similar Institutes to conduct specialised training 
courses for its employees. Details of some of the courses conducted are given below- 
 Introduction to Digital Evidence 
 File System and Digital Forensic Imaging 
 Mobile Forensics 
 Open-Source Forensic Tools and Usage of AI in Investigation 
 Crypto assets and Block chain Technology 
 Machine Learning and AI tools 
 Data Analytics 
 Cyber Security 
 Use of Technology in Investigation  

 
37 
 
 
(v) Training Programme in Digital Forensic in collaboration with NFSU, Goa is also 
conducted to equip the officers with latest techniques of digital forensic. 
(vi) Review of the training syllabus - National Academy of Direct Taxes (NADT) 
and other training institutes under CBDT have implemented measures to address 
this recommendation by organizing specialized training programs for officers in these 
critical areas. Recently, the comprehensive revision of syllabus prescribed for 
Induction training of IRS Officer Trainees has taken place where the focus on latest 
technology and methods has been increased. 
(vii) In the training syllabus dedicated sections are earmarked for topics such as 
Impact of Technology on Tax Administration and Overview of digital transformation. 
In these sessions the structured inputs are given about key advancements like big 
data analytics using Al and Machine learning and Block Chain Technology. 
 
(viii) Also, a dedicated module is earmarked for Digital Forensics wherein structured 
inputs are given on Tax evasion related data identification, retrieval, analysis and 
presentation. The hands-on training as Digital Forensics is given to the Officer 
Trainees in the dedicated Digital Forensic Lab in NADT.  
 
(ix) Inputs are provided to the Officers in the strengthening international cooperation 
through agreements like the OECD Common Reporting Standard (CRS), and 
information sharing with tax authorities in other countries which helps in curbing 
international tax evasion. 
 
(x)  Further, the IRS Officer Trainees are sent on attachment to Bureau of Police 
Research and Development, and National Forensic Science University wherein they 
are given inputs on use of modern technology in investigation of cyber-crime. 
 
(xi) At present provisions of section 115BBH (Tax on Income from Virtual Digital 
Asset) and section 194S (Payment on transfer of virtual digital asset) are duly 
being dealt in the orientation training courses for the Income Tax officers and 
suggestions for including such sessions in the training of Income Tax officers and 
Inspectors of Income Tax has already been made to committee looking into revising 
the syllabus for their trainings. 
 

 
38 
 
(xii) Establishment of Centre of Taxation and Finance (CTF)  by CBDT for 
specialised and complex issues relating to tax and finance - In line with India’s 
commitment during the G20 Presidency for a multilateral capacity building centre, a 
Centre of Excellence by the name Centre for Taxation and Finance (CTF) at NADT-
RC, Delhi has been set up , which has started conducting programmes from January 
2025. This centre has been developed as an specialise training centre in India to 
build the capacity of the officers to deal with complex tax related issues including 
Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Analysis, Data Analytics and Forensics Accounting, 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Taxation, White Collar Crime. 
 
(xiii) During the current year the training syllabus of Mid-Career training programmes 
(MCTP) for middle level and senior IRS officers have been revised and subjects like 
Forensic Accounting, Block chain technology, AI/ML have been incorporated. 
 
(xiv) The department collaborates with several reputed agencies, organisations and 
institutions in the country and abroad. The aim of such collaborations is to equip the 
employees to address the ever-growing challenges involved in interpretation of 
complex international & domestic tax laws, investigation involving cross border 
transactions, complex matrix of digital payments, layering, hawala, crypto and 
money-laundering issues etc. At the same time these enable the Department to 
showcase and offer its own expertise in areas such as Risk Assessment, real estate 
taxation, International Taxation etc. and create avenues for knowledge osmosis 
where our officers can contribute to other tax regimes. Foreign Collaborations include 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, His Majesty’s Revenue & Customs (HMRC), 
Commonwealth Association of Tax Administrators (CATA) etc. 
Over and above the CBDT through its mandatory and refresher course programmes 
conduct regular training courses for all the employees. The Details of Training 
programmes already conducted are summarised below: - 
i) Induction Training (Directly recruited cadre)-Induction courses cater to newly 
recruited IRS officers and other staff, providing foundation training at NADT, RCs, and 
MSTUs. 
Cadre Conducting Institute Duration 
Direct Recruit IRS NADT Nagpur 16 months 

 
39 
 
Inspectors of Income-tax Jurisdictional NADT RC 60 days 
Tax Assistants Jurisdictional MSTUs 35 days 
Stenographers-Gr-II Jurisdictional MSTUs 05 days 
Multi-Tasking Staff Jurisdictional MSTUs 10 days 
 
ii) Orientation Training (Promotion cadre): Orientation courses support officers and 
staff transitioning to new roles, including promotions, helping them develop skills 
specific to their new responsibilities 
 
Cadre Conducting Institute Duration 
ACsIT NADT Nagpur 07 weeks 
Income Tax Officers Jurisdictional RC 40 days 
AO Grade- II/III Jurisdictional RC 15 days 
Inspectors of Income-tax Jurisdictional RC 10 days 
Office Superintendent Jurisdictional MSTUs  
Sr Tax Assistants Jurisdictional MSTUs 15 days 
Tax Assistants Jurisdictional MSTUs 10 days 
 
iii) Mandatory Mid-Career Training Program for Group-A officers 
Presently MCTP-Phase I after completion of 7 - 9 years of service & Phase-II after 
completing 14 - 16 years of service are being conducted in Collaboration with XLRI 
and MCTP-Phase-III is being conducted at IIM, Indore. These are designed to develop 
necessary competencies for more senior positions in future. 
Phase Eligible Service Seniority (in years) Duration 
I 7-9 4 weeks 
II 14-16 3 weeks 
III 26-28 2 weeks 
 
iv) In-service courses-These courses are designed to enhance the skills, knowledge, 
and competencies of serving officers, enabling knowledge, them to perform their roles 
more effectively, stay updated with the latest developments in their respective fields, 
and address emerging challenges. These courses are conducted on topics like 
Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Analysis, Data Analytics and Forensics Accounting, 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Taxation, White Collar Crime and 

 
40 
 
Regulatory Compliance. NADT and Regional campuses also conducts training 
programme on Digital Forensics for the serving Officer of the department and also for 
other organisations like SEBI, CEIB and so on. 
v) Specialized courses- Specialized courses are tailored to the Department’s needs 
in technical areas like Tax Deducted at Source (TDS), Collection and Recovery, Search 
and Seizure, Prosecution, International Taxation, Transfer Pricing, and roles related to 
financial systems such as the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) and 
Government e-Marketplace (GeM). As well as on emerging technologies, digital 
forensic etc. Additional programs offered including computer skills and software 
applications training, with a focus on departmental platforms particularly ITBA. Official 
language training sessions are conducted regularly. The course on Behavioural skills 
is also conducted by all the training Institutes. Emphasis is also given on developing 
citizen centric approach and better management skills. Specialised courses in stress 
management, negotiations, time management, work-life balance etc. are also 
conducted.  
vi) Collaborations with External and domestic organisations - The department 
collaborates with several reputed agencies, organisations and institutions in the 
country and abroad. The aim of such collaborations is to equip the employees to 
address the ever-growing challenges involved in interpretation of complex international 
& domestic tax laws, investigation involving cross border transactions, complex matrix 
of digital payments, layering, hawala, crypto and money-laundering issues etc. At the 
same time these enable the Department to showcase and offer its own expertise in 
areas such as Risk Assessment, real estate taxation, International Taxation etc. and 
create avenues for knowledge osmosis where our officers can contribute to other tax 
regimes. Foreign Collaborations include Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, His Majesty’s 
Revenue & Customs (HMRC), Commonwealth Association of Tax Administrators 
(CATA), LKY University, Singapore, JISPA, GRIPS Tokyo, SIPA Columbia, Fulbright 
fellowship program by USIEF etc. Domestic collaborations include those with premier 
Institutes like Indian Institute of Management (IIM)(B), Indian School of Business (ISB) 
Hyderabad, MDI Gurugram, NDC, DSSC Wellington, LBSNAA, NIFM, IGNFA, IICA, 
ISTM etc. 
 
Estimation of funds-   

 
41 
 
All the budget proposals i.e. Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Final 
Requirements are submitted through the Directorate of Expenditure Budget, who is the 
nodal agency of CBDT for the allocation of funds to different Budget Controlling 
Authorities (BCA).  Budgetary requirement of funds for training institutes shows gradual 
upward trend primarily on account of the incremental quality and quantity of training 
inputs and focused capacity building interventions conducted for entire cadre. This 
involves adopting better and contemporary teaching methodologies, tools and 
equipment and providing modern hostel facilities and infrastructure to trainees and 
faculty.   
The training institutes under Directorate of Training, CBDT, therefore, require adequate 
funds under various heads including DTE (Domestic Travel Expenses), OE (Office 
Expenses), Rent, ICT/IT (Information, Computer & Telecommunication/Information 
Technology), Rent for others as well as for maintenance of its numerous buildings.  
For effectively conducting these training programs proposals for infrastructure 
upgradation such as modern facilities, technological tools, and other resources 
essential for high-quality training are being received from its training institutes including 
NADT.  
Higher Fund requirement under Training Expenses head- It is estimated that the 
fund under the training head will be increased by 20% in comparison to the RE 24-25. 
The reason for this increase is mentioned below:    
(i) During the current years many specialized programmes in collaboration with OECD 
(Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), IMF (International 
Monetary Fund) and similar other organizations, have been conducted to equip the 
officers to address the challenges involved in complex international & domestic tax 
laws and also to handle the investigation involving cross border transactions, 
complex matrix. Therefore, the requirement of fund under the training has 
increased. 
 
(ii) Increased number of officers and batches for Mid-Career training 
programmes (MCTP) for all the cadres: Presently MCTP Phase-I is conducted 
for Group A officers with experience of 7-9 years, Phase-II for officers with 
experience of 14-16 years and Phase III is conducted for officers with 26-28 years 
of experience. This year already the number of batches trained under MCTP is 
much higher in comparison to F.Y . 23-24. Moreover, CBDT is under the process of 
launching similar mandatory training programmes for the following cadres: 

 
42 
 
(a) Chief Commissioners of Income Tax 
(b) Income Tax Officer (Group B)  
(c) Income Tax Inspectors 
(iii) Mandatory Training Hours - CBDT has fixed a target of minimum 50 hours of 
mandatory annual learning/training for every employee of the department from 
Reporting Period 2024-25. Currently the working strength of employees in CBDT is 
approximately 50,000.  In order to provide sufficient opportunities of training 
programmes through offline as well as online mode to all the employees, the 
Directorate of training as well as other verticals of the CBDT are making special 
efforts to conduct regular training courses on a variety of topics and also encourage 
them to participate in these training programmes. This necessitates massive 
upgrade on info-tech infrastructure, networking solutions, customised software and 
delivery mechanisms. All these will require adequate budgetary resources. 
 
(iv) Conducting Faculty Development Programmes- NADT and 10 Regional Campuses 
do not have the permanent faculty and the officers of the department serve as faculty 
for a fixed tenure of 2-3 years in the NADT and RCs. The Directorate of training, 
CBDT is working towards making the training institutes as centres of excellence in the 
areas of Finance, Investigation and Taxation. Enabling faculty members of the training 
institutes is a prerequisite to creating centres of excellence. To ensure that the faculty 
members are well-equipped with the latest teaching methodologies, industry trends, 
and updates on capacity building techniques, it is imperative that Faculty Development 
programmes are conducted on regular basis. 
 
 
CBIC 
As per Annexure-I. 
 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
 
Recommendation (Sl No. 10) 
 
Vacancies 

 
43 
 
The Committee note that there are considerable numbers of vacancies in both 
CBDT and CBIC. In some posts, there are 100% vacancies. Even for the crucial post 
of Inspector of Central Excise, there are 7,744 vacancies. Such vacancies may be 
hampering the smooth functioning of the organizations and providing optimum services 
to the taxpayers. The Committee believe that filling these vacancies promptly is 
essential to maintain the efficiency and effectiveness of our tax administration, 
ensuring it can meet its revenue targets and support the country's economic growth. 
The Department has attributed these vacancies to candidates leaving the department 
once they get better opportunities elsewhere. Nonetheless, the Committee feel that 
having such vacancies is not in the best interest of the Government or the taxpayers. 
Therefore, they recommend that the Department urgently take up this matter with the 
concerned authorities to recruit an adequate number of candidates. 
 
Reply of the Government 
CBDT 
Recruitment in Group A 
The CBDT recruits IRS(IT) Group ‘A’ officers at entry level i.e. ACIT as per the ‘Indian 
Revenue Service Rules 2015’ through fifty percent by direct recruitment on the basis 
of the results of the examination and remaining fifty percent by promotion of ITOs on 
the basis of selection. Steps to fill vacancies are taken in time. Recruitments are made 
through Civil Services Examination, conducted by UPSC and allocation made by 
DoP&T. The vacancies reported and filled since CSE 2019 year till 31st January, 2025 
in respect of IRS(IT) Group ‘A’ posts are as under: 
 
Direct Recruitment Quota Vacancies in Group B and C: 
Year of CSE Vacancy reported to DoPT Vacancies filled 
2019 75 (incl. backlog) 66 
2020 74 (incl. backlog) 69 
2021 59 (incl. backlog) 56 
2022 131 123 
2023 192 (incl. backlog) 181 
2024 180 Dossiers awaited from DoP&T. 

 
44 
 
The following no. of Direct Recruitment (Group B & C cadre) vacancies have been 
reported to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) for Examination Year 2024-25:  
ITI- 411 
TA- 2256 
Steno Gr. II- 283 
MTS- 2923 
Results are expected to be declared by SSC in Feb/March, 2025. 
Appointment letters to 3947 candidates in various cadres have been issued in Rozgar 
Melas conducted in Calendar year 2024.  
The Pr. Chief Commissioners of Income Tax (CCA) concerned, being Cadre Controlling 
Authorities, are regularly convening meeting of Departmental Promotion Committee 
(DPCs) to fill-up the vacancies occurred against Promotion Quota from the available 
eligible officials as per Recruitment Rules of respective cadres.  The names of all 
eligible officials as per Recruitment Rules of respective cadres are to be considered by 
the Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) for promotion to higher grades.  
Consequent upon recommendations of panels by the DPCs for promotion to various 
cadres, the concerned office of the Principal Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (CCA) 
issues promotion order to fill-up the Promotion Quota Vacancies. 
Remarks: Candidates in CBDT for various Group B & C posts are recruited though 
SSC. Vacancies as reported by Pr.CCIT (CCAs) are promptly communicated to 
recruiting agency i.e.  SSC as and when requisitioned by it. There is high attrition rate 
due to candidates getting better job opportunity. 
 
CBIC 
The latest Group wise staff position of CBIC, available as per Half Yearly 
Brochure of CBIC (as on 01.07.2024) is provided as below: 
 
Group of Post Sanctioned Strength Working Strength Vacancy Position 
Gr. A 6397 4777 1620 
Gr. B 55040 38197 16843 
Gr. C 30305 11909 18396 
Total 91742 54883 36859 
 
          It is submitted that CBIC has taken sincere steps to overcome the shortage of 
staff by filling up the vacancies in Group A, B and C cadre. During year 2024, a total 

 
45 
 
of 4653 officers in Gr. B and C cadre were recruited by way of Direct Recruitment 
(DR) through SSC and 418 officers were elevated by way of promotion form the 
feeder cadre. Further, 8912 DR vacancies in the Gr. B and C cadre of CBIC are also 
reported and proposed to SSC for which recruitment is under process.  
 
         Further, among the 8912 DR vacancies reported to SSC, 3184 vacancies are 
reported for recruitment in Inspector grade (viz. 145 vacancies for Examiner, 2699 
vacancies for Inspector and 340 vacancies of Preventive Officer) to overcome the 
shortage of staff specifically in the Inspector grade in CBIC. 
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), 
O.M. No. H-11015/6/2024-Parl. dated 03.03.2025] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I) 

 
46 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

 
47 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
48 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025      
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
49 
 
Annexure 
 
Report on Recommendations of Standing Committee on 
Finance(Review of Demands for grants, Para 9) and alignment with 
activities of NACIN 
1. Background and Context 
The Standing Committee on Finance, in its review of the Demands for Grants for the 
Department of Revenue, has identified the need for significant investment in capacity building 
and training for tax personnel. The Committee, in its recommendation (Para No. 9), emphasizes 
the importance of equipping tax personnel with advanced training to address emerging 
challenges in tax evasion and fraud. It highlights the need for a proactive approach in 
managing frauds through skill development in fields such as Cryptocurrency and Blockchain 
Analysis, Data Analytics and Forensic Accounting, Artificial Intelligence and Machine 
Learning, and Regulatory Compliance. The Committee underscores the shift from a reactive 
to a proactive stance, leveraging advanced technologies and data analytics to detect tax 
violations efficiently. It further recommends that necessary planning be undertaken, including 
detailed arrangements for imparting such training, with an estimation of required funds to be 
provided while furnishing action taken notes by the Department. 
 
This note aims to provide a brief on the activities undertaken by leveraging the infrastructure 
of the Cyber Innovation Centre at NACIN1 Palasamudram, with the objective of capacity 
building in these emerging areas. 
NACIN Palasamudram has established a state-of-the-art Cyber Innovation Centre in 
collaboration with IIT Madras, equipped with world-class forensic tools and software to tackle 
growing challenges in digital investigations. 
 The Centre offers advanced capabilities in Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT), Dark 
Net Intelligence, Cryptocurrency Investigations, and Cyber Forensic Analysis, 
including Audio, Video, and Drone Forensics. 
 
 It has the potential to be certified or notified as a forensic examination lab under the 
IT Act by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY). 
 
 As part of its initiatives, NACIN, in collaboration with IIT Madras Pravartak 
Foundation, has conducted trainings for various target groups to enhance digital 
investigation capabilities. 
 
1 The National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes and Narcotics (NACIN) is the apex civil service training institute of 
Government of India for capacity building of civil servants in the field of indirect taxation, particularly the areas of customs, GST, 
central excise, service tax and narcotics control administration. Located at Palasamudram in Andhra Pradesh, the Academy is 
operated under the aegis of the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs,[ Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India 


 
50 
 
2. Standing Committee Recommendations Vis-à-Vis Activities of 
NACIN 
The following matrix maps the current activities and the plan forward for the Cyber 
Innovation Centre at NACIN Palasamudram in alignment with the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee on Finance. The matrix highlights the progress made so far through 
trainings and discussions and outlines the strategic roadmap for capacity building in critical 
areas. This mapping ensures a structured approach toward leveraging the Cyber Innovation 
Centre’s infrastructure to strengthen enforcement capabilities and equip tax personnel with 
emerging technological skills. 
 
 
Emerging Areas Trainings Given/Way forward 
Cryptocurrency and 
Blockchain Analysis 
Trainings on Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Analysis have 
been conducted and are detailed in the following sections. The 
roadmap for future trainings is also outlined below. 
Data Analytics and 
Forensic Accounting 
The existing faculty engaged with the Cyber Innovation Center 
are equipped with Data Analytics tools. Trainings have been 
conducted on tools capable of analyzing financial transaction  
data  and  Mobile  data,  with  further  details 
presented in the sections below. 
Artificial Intelligence 
and Machine Learning 
in Taxation 
Discussions with the IIT Madras team and NCTC2 focused on 
leveraging AI/ML tools for predictive analysis, risk profiling, 
and intelligence generation in tax administration. Key areas 
explored included AI-based solutions. These discussions will be 
elaborated in subsequent sections, along with plans for trainings 
organized by IIT Madras. 
 
3. Infrastructure and Capabilities of NACIN Cyber Innovation centre 
 
The Centre is designed to serve as a center for capacity building and operational support, 
aligning with the need for proactive technological solutions. The lab is equipped to train 
personnel and support investigations in areas such as Computer Forensics (data acquisition, 
disk imaging, and incident response), Network Forensics (log and packet data acquisition for 
cybercrime analysis), Mobile Forensics (logical and physical data extraction and file system 
acquisition), and Advanced Analytics (OSINT, Darkweb Analytics, Blockchain Analytics, 
and social media data analysis). Additionally, Media Forensics capabilities include video, 
 
2 The National Customs Targeting Centre (NCTC), under CBIC, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, 
plays a pivotal role in enhancing risk-based targeting and enforcement capabilities for effective customs 
operations. 

 
51 
 
image, audio, and drone forensics for advanced operational needs. Significant milestones have 
been achieved in the lab's setup, with the installation of specialized tools like Belkasoft 
Evidence Centre, Magnet Axiom, TRM Labs for blockchain analytics, and OSINT (Open- 
Source Intelligence) tools, along with forensic hardware such as Black widow and Ant 
analyzer workstations to ensure advanced forensic-capabilities. 
 
4. Trainings Conducted 
 
The specialized training programs conducted, focuses on enhancing officers' skills in digital 
forensics, including securing and analyzing digital evidence, OSINT (Open-Source 
Intelligence) and Dark Web Investigations for gathering actionable intelligence, 
cryptocurrency investigations to trace digital asset flows, and mobile and computer 
forensics for data extraction and recovery. It also covers financial analysis and Call Data 
Records analysis to identify suspicious transactions and communication patterns, as well as 
advanced techniques like password cracking, data recovery, and forensic imaging to ensure 
the integrity of digital evidence. These hands-on programs are designed to equip officers with 
practical knowledge and cutting-edge tools to address sophisticated cyber- investigations
 effectively. 
NACIN has successfully conducted multiple training programs for various formations: 
 
Target Group Topic Participants Duration 
IRS Officer 
Trainees 
Cyber Forensics& 
Intelligence 
generation tools 
40 5 Days 
Induction Training 
for Officers 
Promoted to Group 
‘A’ 
Cyber Forensics& 
Intelligence 
generation tools 
30 2 days 
Customs & GST 
Preventive Officers 
Cyber Forensic & 
Intelligence tools 
22 5 Days 
DRI Officers Cyber Forensic 
Training tools 
17 5 Days 
DRI and NCTC 
Officers 
Intelligence 
Generation Tools 
28 4 Days 
DGGI Officers Cyber Forensics & 
Intelligence 
Generation Tools 
27 5 Days 
 
 
 
Cyber tools to support efficient Interdiction of Narcotics and Wild life Contraband 

 
52 
 
In addition to the above-mentioned dedicated training programs, individual sessions on Open-
Source Intelligence (OSINT), Cryptocurrency Investigations, and Dark Net Technologies 
were incorporated into various Wildlife and Narcotics Workshops. These sessions were 
tailored to align with the themes of the workshops, focusing on equipping participants with 
specialized skills to detect and investigate illicit activities such as wildlife trafficking and 
narcotics smuggling through advanced digital tools and techniques. 
 
5. Planned Way Forward 
The Cyber Innovation Centre at NACIN Palasamudram envisions a structured roadmap to 
strengthen the capabilities of departmental officers through targeted capacity-building 
initiatives and operational support. Key focus areas include: 
 
 
1. Train-the-Trainer (ToT) Program: Introduce a structured ToT program for 
departmental officers to develop a pool of in-house trainers capable of delivering cyber 
forensic and intelligence training effectively across formations. 
2. Monthly Training Programs: Conduct regular monthly programs for departmental 
officers, following a set pattern focused on Cyber Forensic tools and Intelligence 
Generation tools to ensure continuous skill development and knowledge enhancement. 
3. Emerging Technologies Program: Develop and deliver specialized programs on 
emerging technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning 
(ML) in coordination with IIT Madras and NCTC. These programs will focus on 
enhancing officers' expertise in AI/ML applications for predictive analysis, risk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Technologies  
 AI/ML Tools 
 Forensic  
 Programs 
Train-the- Trainer  

 
53 
 
profiling, and intelligence generation to address evolving operational challenges. 
4. Development of In-House AI/ML Tools: Collaborate with IIT Madras to develop 
custom AI/ML tools tailored to the Department's needs, enabling advanced data 
analytics, intelligence generation, and risk-based decision-making. 
5. Hiring of Forensic Experts: Facilitate the hiring of dedicated forensic experts to 
provide continued support for operations, investigations, and intelligence 
development, ensuring sustained technical expertise for departmental officers. 
 
This comprehensive approach will ensure that the Department remains proactive, 
technologically advanced, and equipped to handle the complexities of modern digital - 
investigations,effectively. 
 
 
6. Proposed Budget 
The proposed budget is divided into two components: i) Infrastructure Development 
/Maintenance Costs ii) Hiring of Human Resources, both aimed at ensuring the sustained 
operational efficiency and capacity-building of departmental officers. 
 
Training Programs 
 
Each 5-day training program is estimated to cost approximately ₹5 Lakhs, covering 
faculty costs, travel expenses, and accommodation. This estimation is based on the training 
programs conducted so far at the Cyber Innovation Center. 
 
 Yearly Cost: Considering one training program every month, the annual cost works 
out to ₹60 Lakhs (₹5 Lakhs x 12 programs). 
 Capacity Utilization: The lab's capacity of 24 participants per program ensures that 
288 officers (24 x 12) are trained annually. 
 Cost Optimization: The costs will be significantly reduced if some trainers are drawn 
from the participants of the Train-the-Trainer (ToT) workshops, creating a 
sustainable pool of in-house faculty. 
For AI/ML and Emerging Technologies programs, the cost per program will remain the same 
at ₹5 Lakhs. Assuming one program every month, this can be accounted for in the annual 
budget, ensuring structured capacity building in advanced technological domains. 
 
Infrastructure Development/Maintenance Costs 
 
The infrastructure and maintenance costs associated with the Cyber Innovation Centre are as 
follows: 
 
 Software Licenses: The forensic tools and software procured for the Centre come with 
a three-year license validity. Post this period, the licenses will need to be renewed to 
ensure continued functionality and up-to-date features. 

 
54 
 
 Hardware Upgrades: Given the rapid advancements in technology, the high-end 
workstations and associated hardware will require periodic upgrades to maintain 
optimal performance and compatibility with evolving software requirements. 
 Maintenance and AMC: The current MoU with IIT Madras has a tenure of five years. 
Post the completion of this period, a separate Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) 
will be necessary to ensure the continued upkeep and smooth functioning of both the 
hardware and software infrastructure. 
 Total Estimated Expenditure: Taking into account the software renewals, hardware 
upgrades, and AMC requirements, the total expenditure over the specified period is 
estimated to be ₹5 Crores. 
 
 
 
Hiring of Resources for the functioning of the Lab 
 
To ensure continued operational support and capacity building, the proposal includes hiring 4 
resources (Including Forensic Experts and Lab Assistants) at market rates. An estimation 
provided by IIT Madras pegs the total cost at ₹78 Lakhs per annum for the said staff. 
 
 Role of Experts: 
o The hired experts will provide technical assistance in
 operations, investigations, and intelligence development. 
o They can also act as faculty for training programs, thereby reducing 
future training costs significantly. 
 
This dual approach of organizing regular training programs and hiring dedicated experts will 
create a sustainable ecosystem for capacity building while ensuring cost optimization over 
time. 
 
  

 
55 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-
25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 
hrs in Committee Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
PART I 
 
 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 

 
56 
 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and 
Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 

 
57 
 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken 
Reports and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to 
the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * 
 
  

 
58 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 2ND 
REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25) OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF 
REVENUE) 
   
Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of 
Recommendations 
10  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide 
Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 
3,4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10) 
10 100% 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies  
Nil 0.00 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations 
in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
Nil 0.00 
(v) Observations / Recommendations 
in respect of which final reply of 
the Government are still awaited 
Nil 0.00 
 
 
* * * 