 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME 
IMPLEMENTATION  
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation] 
 
 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
                                          
                                               
                                                     
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
42 

ii 
 
                                     FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation] 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 August, 2026 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 August, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                           iv 
Introduction                                                                                                                         v 
 
Page No. 
Chapter-I Report  1 
Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
11 
Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
36 
Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
37 
Chapter-V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
reply of the Government is still awaited  
42 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06 August, 
2026 
43 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations Contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation  
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde*  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai#  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Manish Kumar Under Secretary 
5.  Smt. Mradula Dubey Assistant Committee Officer 
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee vice Smt. Darshana Singh w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 02 April 2026 and re-nominated as Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 

v 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-Second Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth 
Report of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 17 March, 2026.  The Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations were 
received from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on 10 June, 
2026.  
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 06 
August, 2026.        
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
06 August, 2026      
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty-Fifth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2026.  
 
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the eight recommendations contained in the Report. These have been analyzed and 
categorized as follows: 
 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5, 7 and 8 
       (Total: 07) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Recommendation No. NIL 
                  (Total: NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
 
Recommendation No.  6 
       (Total : 01)  
(Chapter -IV) 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. NIL          (Total: NIL)  
(Chapter- V) 
1.3  The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 

 
 
2 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comment. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
 
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee note that the Ministry have been allocated only Rs. 4,522.25 
crore against their projected Budgetary demand of Rs. 5826.11crore. The 
Ministry itself has admitted that reduced funding poses risks to the Scheme’s 
viability and will have strategic implications such as the inability to fund front-
loaded costs for IT infrastructure (tablets, laptops), mobilize manpower for 
fieldwork, and conduct training/workshops for field staff and Directorate of 
Economics and Statistics (DES) staff in the first two quarters of Financial Year 
2026–27. It has been further stated that this could lead to a loss of sub-national 
data granularity and hinder the digital transformation of statistical systems. The 
Committee have also been informed that the Projected Budgetary Demands was 
higher due to the revamp and redesign of the Support for Statistical 
Strengthening (SSS) Scheme, activities such as training and awareness creation 
for the upcoming 8th Economic Census, the conduct of multiple surveys including 
Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS), Household Income Surveys, CMS 
(Comprehensive Modular Surveys) modules, All India Debt and Investment 
Survey (AIDIS), Annual Survey of Incorporated Services Sector Enterprises 
(ASISSE) under the Capacity Development (CD) Scheme, and the engagement 
of contract staff to carry out new demand-based surveys. The Committee 
observe that the increased projected outlay was also required to support Digital 
Transformation initiatives, the Data Innovation (DI) Lab initiative, and other 
miscellaneous expenditures. Considering the importance of the Ministry's diverse 
programmes, the Committee recommend that the Ministry proceed with its 
planned initiatives as per the projected trajectory and ensure optimal utilization of 
the currently allocated funds. If further financial requirements emerge to meet the 
physical targets, the Ministry may seek additional fund through Supplementary 
Demands for Grants.” 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has submitted as follows:  
 
“The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted by 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI).  
 

 
 
3 
 
Efforts are being made to implement the Ministry’s envisaged activities and 
initiatives in a timely and effective manner in accordance with the allocated BE 
2026-27 of Rs. 570 crore under Capacity Development (CD) scheme. The 
expenditure is also being closely monitored in the Senior Officers’ Meeting held 
under the chairmanship of Secretary(S&PI) on a weekly basis to ensure optimal 
utilization of the funds allocated under the Scheme during the Financial Year. 
 
In this regard, it may also be submitted that the revised draft Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) Memo for continuation of CD Scheme during 2026-27 to 2030-
31 has been sent to D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance on 10.04.2026 for comments. 
Meanwhile, M/o Finance has provided interim extension of the Scheme till 
30.09.2026 or approval of the Scheme whichever is earlier. Further, the proposal 
for conduct of the 8th Economic Census (EC) is also under submission as part of 
EFC proposal of continuation of EC sub-scheme under CD scheme for the 16th 
Finance Commission cycle (2026–31). The proposal of conduct of 8th EC is under 
submission to CCEA. Under BE 2026-27, tentatively, an amount of Rs. 3 crore has 
been allocated under EC sub-scheme for undertaking preparatory activities of 8th 
EC like development of end-to-end digital solution for conduct of EC and conduct 
of All India training of master trainers on 8th EC. As recommended by the 
Committee, the Ministry has initiated the development of IT solution 8th EC. In the 
event of approval of the 8th EC proposal by the EFC / CCEA, additional fund 
requirement for undertaking preparatory activities like training, awareness creation, 
etc. would be sought under Supplementary Demand for Grants. 
 
As regards Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) sub-scheme, during BE 
2026-27 a total budgeted outlay of only Rs. 15.00 crore has been earmarked, 
however, the initiation of various activities will require sufficient kick-start funding 
support. For additional financial requirement, as recommended, the Ministry shall 
explore the possibility of seeking additional funds through Supplementary 
Demands for Grants, as per extant procedures and subject to approval of the 
competent authority.” 
 
1.7  In their recommendation, the Committee had raised concerns over the 
shortfall in budgetary allocation compared to the Ministry’s projected 
requirement, risks posed to scheme’s viability due to reduced funding especially 
for front-loaded expenditures like IT infrastructure, manpower mobilisation, and 
training, adverse impact on implementation including delays in fieldwork and 
capacity building, loss of sub-national data granularity and hindrance to digital 
transformation initiatives, including modernisation of statistical systems and the 
Data Innovation Lab.  

 
 
4 
 
The Ministry, in its action-taken reply has submitted about the efforts to 
implement the activities effectively within the allocated Budget Estimate (BE) 
2026–27 of ₹570 crore under the Capacity Development (CD) Scheme, with regular 
monitoring at senior level meetings.  The Committee note that the proposals for 
continuation of the Capacity Development (CD) Scheme and conduct of the 8th 
Economic Census are under consideration. The Committee also note that 
preparatory activities for the 8th Economic Census, including development of the 
end-to-end digital solution and training of master trainers, have already been 
initiated within the available budgetary allocation. 
 The Committee further note the assurance of the Ministry that, if additional 
financial requirements arise for implementation of the approved activities under 
the Capacity Development Scheme, including the 8th Economic Census and the 
Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) sub-scheme, the possibility of 
seeking additional funds through Supplementary Demands for Grants would be 
explored, as per the extant procedure and subject to approval of the competent 
authority. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry continue to 
implement the envisaged activities in a timely manner, ensure optimal utilization 
of the funds available under the Scheme, and keep the Committee apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Survey on Child Labour 
 
1.8 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  
“The Committee have been very often emphasizing the dire and non-negotiable 
need for timely and reliable statistics to safeguard child rights and monitor 
programs concerning their survival, protection, participation, and development. 
This evidence base is fundamental for effective policy formulation. Consequently, 
the Committee note that, as per their 18th Report on Action Taken by the 
Government (presented in Parliament on 31 July 2025) regarding the Demands 
for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI), discussions have initiated to conduct a National Child Survey in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD). This 
initiative aims to map the needs of children under Mission Vatsalya, specifically 

 
 
5 
 
focusing on children in need of care and protection and juveniles requiring legal 
and social rehabilitation. 
 
While a robust legal framework exists—comprising the Juvenile Justice Act 2015, 
POCSO Act 2012, and the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986—the Committee observe that the abolition of child labour 
remains a complex challenge. Recent initiatives like Beti Bachao - Beti Padhao 
and the integration of the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) into Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) have sought to bolster these efforts, alongside the 
PENCIL (Platform for Effective Enforcement for No Child Labour) portal for 
complaint tracking. However, despite these efforts and the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Rules, 1988 providing for District Nodal 
Officers (DNO) and Task Forces, coordination gaps and the lack of updated data 
continue to hinder State Action Plans. The Committee further observe that since 
Labour is under the Concurrent List, there is an imperative need for coordinated 
efforts across all stakeholders, including Central Ministries and State/UT 
Governments. In this regard, it is also essential that District Nodal Officers under 
District Magistrates are empowered to facilitate inter-departmental action 
between the police, social welfare, and labour departments. 
 
The Committee, therefore, urge MoSPI to expedite the process of conducting the 
National Child Survey in coordination with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development to move beyond the discussion stage, establishing a clear and 
time-bound schedule for the commencement and completion of the survey 
activities as the cornerstone of a comprehensive National Child Well-Being 
Statistical Framework. To address the core issues of child rights, this framework 
must specifically capture statistics for children working in the informal sector, 
street children, and out-of-school children. In this regard, the Committee suggest 
that MoSPI tie up with State Governments to engage Panchayats and Municipal 
bodies to facilitate localized data collection. These datasets should be used to 
develop a periodic child well-being statistical dashboard and a National Child 
Index in synergy with MWCD to evaluate the performance of Districts and States. 
The Committee may be apprised of the latest developments at the time of 
submitting the Action Taken Statement.” 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has submitted as follows:  
“Following the suggestion of Standing Committee in its Thirty Fifth Report, it is 
submitted that a meeting under the chairpersonship of DG(NSS), MoSPI was 
held with officers from MoWCD on 12 May 2026 wherein it has been decided that 
MoWCD may consider constitution of a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) at the 
earliest to examine the objective, scope, coverage, methodology, feasibility of 
data collection, convergence with existing surveys and administrative databases 
and other operational and financial implications for conducting the proposed 
National Child Survey under the chairmanship of a domain expert in child welfare 

 
 
6 
 
and include members from various concerned Ministries/fields. A suitable 
member from National Sample Survey (NSS) may also be nominated by MoSPI. 
The Technical Advisory Group (TAG) may submit its report/recommendations 
within three months from the date of issuance of its constitution.” 
 
1.10 The Committee had raised concerns over the absence of a comprehensive, 
updated and disaggregated national database on children for effective monitoring 
of child-centric programmes. They were of the view that in the absence of such a 
robust statistical foundation, gaps persist in identifying vulnerable groups and 
assessing the real impact of existing welfare measures.  
 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry, wherein it has submitted 
that a meeting between Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI) and Ministry of Women & Child Development (MoWCD) was held on 12 
May 2026, and it was decided that MoWCD would constitute a Technical Advisory 
Group (TAG) to examine all aspects of the proposed National Child Survey. The 
Ministry has also informed that the TAG under the Chairmanship of a domain 
expert will have Members from concerned Ministries/fields including a nominated 
representative from MOSPI, may submit its recommendations within three 
months of its constitution. 
 
The Committee while emphasizing the requirement to map the needs of 
children under Mission Vatsalya, specifically focusing on children in need of care 
and protection and juveniles requiring legal and social rehabilitation through the 
proposed National Child Survey, would desire to be apprised of the 
recommendations submitted by Technical Advisory Group (TAG).  The Committee 
also expect that as soon as the TAG submit its Report, the Ministry should 
expeditiously examine them and prepare a clear road map to implement them.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Statutory Status for National Statistical Commission 
 
1.11 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under:  

 
 
7 
 
 
“The Committee observe that the Rangarajan Commission (which submitted its 
report to the Government in 2001), has made one of its key recommendation or 
establishment of a Statutory National Commission on Statistics to function as a 
nodal and empowered body for overseeing core statistical activities of the 
country. While the Commission had recommended the creation of a permanent 
statutory framework for official statistics, the National Statistical Commission 
(NSC), which was established in 2005, has so far not been accorded statutory 
status. The Committee further note that the Government has taken a proactive 
initiative to strengthen the institutional framework of the statistical system by 
proposing to grant statutory status to the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) through 
the proposed Indian Statistical Institute Bill, 2025. The Committee appreciate this 
step aimed at enhancing the stature and functioning of a premier national 
institution in the field of statistics. However, the Committee express concern that 
there has been no significant progress regarding the grant of statutory status to 
the National Statistical Commission despite their categorical recommendation in 
the 27th Report (18th Lok Sabha). During the course of evidence, the 
representatives of the Ministry informed the Committee that most of the over 600 
recommendations of the Rangarajan Commission have been implemented. A few 
were found infeasible, and about 12 strategic recommendations require broader 
inter-governmental consensus. The Committee were further informed that the 
status report will be submitted shortly, including separately to Parliament, in 
fulfilment of the assurance. He also assured that a detailed note would also be 
provided to the Committee. The Committee are of the view that the National 
Statistical Commission (NSC), which was originally envisaged as the apex body 
for guiding and coordinating statistical activities in the country, could play a more 
effective role if supported by an appropriate statutory framework. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation and desire the Ministry to 
examine the feasibility of granting statutory status to the National Statistical 
Commission (NSC) in a time-bound manner so that it may function as an 
empowered and autonomous body for overseeing core statistical activities in the 
country. Also, the Committee expects that as assured by the Ministry, a detailed 
note on the status of implementation of the recommendation of Rangarajan 
Commission will be provided at the earliest.” 
 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation has submitted as follows:  
 
 
“1. The National Statistical Commission (NSC) is chaired by an eminent 
statistician and its four members have specialization and experience in 
specified statistical and allied fields. The Chairman and Members of the 
National Statistical Commission are selected on the basis of the 
recommendations of a Search Committee duly constituted by the Government 
of India for the purpose, from time to time. 
2. As per provisions of Resolution dated 1 June 2005, the Commission has 

 
 
8 
 
the requisite autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. The 
Commission also has the authority to formulate its short- and long-term 
programmes. The NSC has evolved necessary measures and mechanism by 
constituting professional committees, expert committees and working groups to 
assist the Commission on various technical issues. 
3. The Steering Committee for National Sample Surveys, which is chaired by 
the Chairperson of the NSC, comprises of subject-matter experts as well as the 
representatives from Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
Department of Economic Affairs, Reserve Bank of India, NITI Aayog and State 
Governments. The Steering Committee of NSC, inter alia, reviews the extant 
framework and addresses the issue from time to time on the subject results, 
methodology, questionnaire, sampling frame, sampling design, concepts and 
definitions, surveys instruments etc. related to all National Sample Surveys.  
4. Ministries/ Departments of the Central Government may submit their 
proposal or apprise to the Commission regarding statistical activity envisaged or 
being undertaken by them. The Commission from time to time holds interactive 
sessions with State Governments on their statistical systems and activities.  
5. In addition, the NSC functions as the Oversight Body and periodically 
review the progress of the roadmap on ‘Strengthening the Indian National 
Statistical System’. The representatives of Reserve Bank of India and 
Department of Economic Affairs participate in these reviews.  
6. The National Statistical Commission performs various functions including-  
i.Identifying the core statistics, which are of national importance and are critical to 
the development of the economy;  
ii. Constituting professional committees or working groups to assist the 
Commission on various technical issues; 
iii. Evolving standard statistical concepts, definitions, classifications and 
methodologies in different areas in statistics and lay down national quality 
standards on core statistics;  
iv.Evolving national strategies for the collection, tabulation and dissemination of 
core statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets;  
v.Evolving national strategies for human resource development on official 
statistics including information technology and communication needs of the 
statistical system;  
vi.Evolving measures for effective co-ordination with State Governments, Union 
Territory Administrations and between Ministries, Departments and other 
agencies of the Central Government on statistical activities;  
vii. Exercising statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and 
integrity of the statistical products, making recommendations to the Central 
Government or any State Government regarding measures to effectively 
implement the standards, strategies and other measures; and  
viii. Reviewing the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down 
policies, standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced 
performance. 
7. The Commission has power to require production of any document before 
it which serve statistical purposes, require statistical agencies and institutions to 

 
 
9 
 
provide details of statistical activities, including concepts and definitions used, 
methodologies followed, quality standards adopted, sampling and non-sampling 
errors, etc., in respect of core statistics, and require attendance of any person 
including any public servant on matters connected with core statistics and 
issuing notices for the examination of witnesses and documents or any matters 
connected with core statistics. 
8. The Commission prepares its Annual Report for each financial year giving 
a full account of its activities during the financial year and forwards the same to 
the Central Government. The Annual Report and the Action Taken Report on 
the recommendations of the Commission are laid before each House of 
Parliament. 
9. The NSC provides guidance and prescribe and coordinate statistical 
standards and methodologies for the statistical system through the mechanism 
of regular reviews and also through technical Committees such as the Steering 
Committee and other expert Committees. The data harmonization initiatives 
undertaken by the MoSPI which mark a decisive shift toward a more coherent, 
transparent, and integrated national data ecosystem are reviewed and guided 
by the NSC. Institutionalizing these mechanisms would enable seamless data 
flows across the entire data lifecycle, from collection to dissemination, and 
foster greater coherence, reliability, and policy relevance among diverse 
statistical outputs. 
10. It is further stated that the report submitted by the Rangarajan 
Commission had made several wide-ranging recommendations for 
strengthening the Statistical System of the Country. This report contains 623 
recommendations pertaining to the different sectors of the official statistics 
concerning to various Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies, and MoSPI 
coordinated implementation of the said recommendations.  
11. Subsequently, recommendations were reviewed by a committee which 
found 478 recommendations as implemented, 17 were not accepted/dropped, 
12 were referred to National Statistical Commission (NSC) and 116 were 
pending. The implementation of these recommendations essentially falls under 
the domain of the respective Central Government Ministries/ Departments/ 
Agencies and State Governments. Accordingly, various meetings were held 
with the Central Ministries/ Departments and States/UTs and the matter was 
pursued with the line Ministries for implementation of 128 recommendations 
(116 pending + 12 referred to NSC). After reviewing the status received from 
stakeholders, information available on their websites/portal and as per advice of 
National Statistical Commission in its various meetings, 98 recommendations 
are being treated as implemented, and the remaining 30 as closed/dropped due 
to feasibility considerations. Hence, no recommendation of Rangarajan 
Commission is pending for action. 
12. Given the autonomous character and spectrum of functions of the National 
Statistical Commission as outlined above, at present there is no proposal under 
consideration for granting statutory status to the Commission.” 
 

 
 
10 
 
1.13 The Committee observing that the establishment of a Statutory National 
Commission on Statistics was one of the key recommendations of Rangarajan 
Commission, had expressed concern that there had been no significant progress 
regarding the grant of statutory status to the National Statistical Commission.  
 
The Ministry in their reply has apprised the Committee about the status of 
action taken on recommendations of Rangarajan Commission. The Ministry has 
stated that all recommendations of the Rangarajan Commission have been 
addressed, either implemented or closed. The Ministry has further informed that 
given the autonomous character and spectrum of functions of the National 
Statistical Commission, at present there is no proposal under consideration for 
granting statutory status to the Commission.  
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry has not furnished any convincing 
justification for not examining the issue of granting statutory status to the 
National Statistical Commission. While taking note of the existing functions and 
autonomy of the Commission, the Committee are of the view that these do not 
obviate the need for providing statutory backing to an institution entrusted with 
guiding and coordinating the country's statistical system. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the feasibility of granting statutory 
status to the National Statistical Commission be examined by the Ministry and the 
Committee be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
 The Committee note that the Ministry have been allocated only Rs. 4,522.25 
crore against their projected Budgetary demand of Rs. 5826.11crore. The Ministry itself 
has admitted that reduced funding poses risks to the Scheme’s viability and will have 
strategic implications such as the inability to fund front-loaded costs for IT infrastructure 
(tablets, laptops), mobilize manpower for fieldwork, and conduct training/workshops for 
field staff and Directorate of Economics and Statistics (DES) staff in the first two 
quarters of Financial Year 2026–27. It has been further stated that this could lead to a 
loss of sub-national data granularity and hinder the digital transformation of statistical 
systems. The Committee have also been informed that the Projected Budgetary 
Demands was higher due to the revamp and redesign of the Support for Statistical 
Strengthening (SSS) Scheme, activities such as training and awareness creation for the 
upcoming 8th Economic Census, the conduct of multiple surveys including Periodic 
Labour Force Survey (PLFS), Household Income Surveys, CMS (Comprehensive 
Modular Surveys) modules, All India Debt and Investment Survey (AIDIS), Annual 
Survey of Incorporated Services Sector Enterprises (ASISSE) under the Capacity 
Development (CD) Scheme, and the engagement of contract staff to carry out new 
demand-based surveys. The Committee observe that the increased projected outlay 
was also required to support Digital Transformation initiatives, the Data Innovation (DI) 
Lab initiative, and other miscellaneous expenditures. Considering the importance of the 
Ministry's diverse programmes, the Committee recommend that the Ministry proceed 
with its planned initiatives as per the projected trajectory and ensure optimal utilization 
of the currently allocated funds. If further financial requirements emerge to meet the 
physical targets, the Ministry may seek additional fund through Supplementary 
Demands for Grants. 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted by 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI).  
(i) Efforts are being made to implement the Ministry’s envisaged activities and 
initiatives in a timely and effective manner in accordance with the allocated BE 2026-27 
of Rs. 570 crore under Capacity Development (CD) scheme. The expenditure is also 
being closely monitored in the Senior Officers’ Meeting held under the chairmanship of 
Secretary(S&PI) on a weekly basis to ensure optimal utilization of the funds allocated 
under the Scheme during the Financial Year. 
(ii) In this regard, it may also be submitted that the revised draft Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) Memo for continuation of CD Scheme during 2026-27 to 
2030-31 has been sent to D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance on 10.04.2026 for comments. 
Meanwhile, M/o Finance has provided interim extension of the Scheme till 30.09.2026 
or approval of the Scheme whichever is earlier. Further, the proposal for conduct of the 
8th Economic Census (EC) is also under submission as part of EFC proposal of 
continuation of EC sub-scheme under CD scheme for the 16th Finance Commission 
cycle (2026–31). The proposal of conduct of 8th EC is under submission to CCEA. 
Under BE 2026-27, tentatively, an amount of Rs. 3 crore has been allocated under EC 
sub-scheme for undertaking preparatory activities of 8th EC like development of end-to-
end digital solution for conduct of EC and conduct of All India training of master trainers 
on 8th EC. As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has initiated the 
development of IT solution 8th EC. In the event of approval of the 8th EC proposal by the 
EFC / CCEA, additional fund requirement for undertaking preparatory activities like 
training, awareness creation, etc. would be sought under Supplementary Demand for 
Grants. 
(iii)  As regards Support for Statistical Strengthening (SSS) sub-scheme, during BE 
2026-27 a total budgeted outlay of only Rs. 15.00 crore has been earmarked, however, 
the initiation of various activities will require sufficient kick-start funding support. For 
additional financial requirement, as recommended, the Ministry shall explore the 
possibility of seeking additional funds through Supplementary Demands for Grants, as 
per extant procedures and subject to approval of the competent authority. 

 
 
13 
 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Integrated Government Data Dashboard 
 
 The Committee observe that data across various Ministries, Departments, and 
Agencies (MDAs) presently exists in multiple formats and is updated at varying 
intervals. In many cases, the absence of standardized formats and seamless 
interoperability limits the availability of consolidated and timely data across sectors. This 
fragmented approach makes it difficult to combine, compare, and analyze data in a 
meaningful manner which may constrain its full potential for evidence-based 
policymaking and coordinated governance. While platforms such as data.gov.in provide 
access to several government datasets, the Committee observe that sectoral data is still 
dispersed across multiple portals and formats, limiting its integration and real-time 
usability. The Committee further note that the absence of a unified and accessible data 
framework also affects transparency and effective public access to information. When 
data is dispersed across multiple platforms and presented in different formats, it 
becomes difficult for researchers, institutions and citizens to access, interpret and utilise 
it effectively. This not only constrains academic research but also limits the ability of 
citizens to engage constructively with public policy and assess government 
performance. The Committee, considering the pivotal role of data in policy formulation, 
implementation, monitoring and research, recommend that the Ministry may explore the 
development and operationalisation of an integrated digital dashboard that consolidates 
key sectoral data from various Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs). Such a 
platform should aim to provide authentic, verified and periodically updated standardized 
data in a user-friendly format accessible to all. 
 
 

 
 
14 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has launched eSankhyiki portal on 29 June 2024, which serves as a 
unified digital platform with the objective to establish a comprehensive data 
management and sharing system for ease of dissemination of official statistics in the 
country. The portal is designed as a user-centric and interactive portal. It aims to 
simplify access to statistical data, ensuring its effective use and reuse by policymakers, 
researchers, academia, industry, and the public at large. The portal is structured around 
two key modules: the Data Catalogue module, which provides a centralized repository 
of 4,200 datasets with metadata for easy navigation; the Macro Indicators module, 
which offers time-series data on key socio-economic indicators. The portal currently 
hosts more than 880 Indicators across 22 statistical products, encompassing more than 
137 million records drawn from official statistical datasets related to MoSPI, DPIIT, 
MoLE, MoE, RBI and MoH&FW thereby making it one of the most comprehensive 
sources of official statistics in the country. 
2. Further, the portal emphasizes interoperability through APIs and ensures that 
datasets from various Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAS) can be accessed 
through a single interface. This directly addresses the issue of data being dispersed 
across multiple platforms and formats.  
3. MOSPI ensures timely and periodic updation of the data on the portal improving 
the availability of current and reliable data for policy formulation, monitoring, and 
research purposes through user-friendly interface.  
4. In addition to data access, the eSankhyiki Portal offers advanced features that 
enhance usability and interactivity. Users can filter and download customized datasets 
and create dynamic visualizations that cater to their specific needs. The portal supports 
data integration and sharing through APIs, thus promoting reusability and 
interoperability. Its intuitive design, responsive interface, and robust search functionality 
further ensure ease of access for diverse user groups. It hosts a number of intuitive 
infographics which are added on a weekly basis, to bring out insightful features of 
official statistics in a pictorial way. 
5.  The eSankhyiki platform is enriched with metadata—such as indicator names 
and multiple dimensions, which are made accessible through dedicated APIs and JSON 

 
 
15 
 
formats. This foundation supports two active AI use cases on the platform. First, it 
enables semantic search, allowing users to discover relevant indicators based on 
meaning rather than exact keyword matches. Second, it powers the MCP Server, which 
integrates eSankhyiki data with AI assistants like Claude and ChatGPT. When a user 
submits a query, the AI leverages the metadata to accurately identify the appropriate 
indicator, apply relevant filters, and deliver a precise, well-structured response—making 
official statistics more accessible and conversational. 
6. In alignment with national and international best practices, MoSPI has 
undertaken the following initiatives, amongst others, to advance data harmonization 
across government systems: 
i. Adoption of National Metadata Structure (NMDS 2.0): To ensure that 
information about datasets in public domain is uniformly represented, with clarity 
on its various aspects viz. coverage, concepts, collection methods, quality etc. a 
National Metadata Structure (August 2021) was introduced as a referential 
metadata standard. Based on implementation feedback, in October 2024, the 
National Metadata Structure was revised/updated to refine metadata elements 
for different data types and to classify them as mandatory or optional. The 
revised National Metadata Structure (NMDS 2.0) provides a uniform framework 
for metadata documentation, ensuring minimum quality standards, improved 
discoverability, and ease of data sharing. A Metadata Web Portal (MWP) has 
also been launched and is operational now. The Portal serves as a centralized 
platform for cataloguing and updating NMDS 2.0-compliant metadata of statistical 
products compiled and disseminated by various Ministries and Departments of 
the Government of India. So far, metadata of 214 datasets have been uploaded 
on MWP by 30 M/D/Os, including MoSPI. 
ii. Implementation of Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF): In 
order to ensure effective quality management in the National Statistical System 
by laying down quality parameters and corresponding good practices and aligned 
with the UN’s National Quality Assurance Framework (NQAF) 2019, MoSPI has 
laid down a Statistical Quality Assessment Framework (SQAF). SQAF 
establishes quality parameters for official statistics. It comprises 19 principles and 

 
 
16 
 
85 requirements covering the possible aspect of the legal support and provisions, 
the institutional arrangements and mechanisms. Ministries/Departments and 
States/UTs are required to assess the quality of the statistical products and 
improve their statistical outputs using this framework. 
iii. Implementation of National and International Standards/Classification: 
MoSPI has compiled and circulated a consolidated list of 88 international 
standards/classifications pertaining to official statistics using classifications 
published by UNSD under its custodianship and other agencies across 
Demographic and Social Statistics, Economic Statistics, Environmental Statistics, 
and Other Classifications. Additionally, 9 national classifications adapted from 
relevant international standards to suit the Indian context have been issued for 
compliance to ensure uniformity and comparability in official statistics. 
iv. Integration of Common Unique Identifiers: Unique identifiers play a vital role 
in strengthening the statistical and administrative systems of the Government. A 
list of 38 Unique Identifiers consisting Unique numbers assigned to Individuals, 
Enterprises, Location or Vehicles and are being currently used in the country (as 
they distinguish one Individual/Company from another across systems) has been 
circulated to all the Central Ministries/Departments and States/UTs for ensuring 
that the datasets generated by them contain at least one of these identifiers for 
integration with other datasets. The list is periodically revised based on the inputs 
received from the Ministries/Departments or States/UTs.  
v. Establishment of Data Reconciliation Mechanisms: To address discrepancies 
between survey and administrative data arising from differences in concepts and 
definitions, MoSPI has established a formal mechanism for reconciling divergent 
datasets and escalation protocols. This will enhance transparency, reduce 
discrepancies, and increase confidence in statistical outputs. The 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs can now reach out to the MoSPI for 
resolving the definitional divergences arising from various datasets. 
vi. Circulation of Operational Guidelines for Management of Official Statistics 
across the Data Lifecycle: MoSPI has issued the Operational Guidelines for 
Management of Official Statistics across the Data Lifecycle that provides a 

 
 
17 
 
structured, lifecycle-based framework to enhance the quality, reliability, and 
coherence of official statistics. These guidelines promote data quality, 
interoperability, transparency, data privacy, and responsible use of emerging 
technologies to strengthen the credibility and responsiveness of the national 
statistical system, while supporting capacity building and innovation. 
vii. Publishing of Advance Release Calendar (ARC): MoSPI brings out data, 
reports and publications, schedule of which has been laid down in an Advance 
Release Calendar published by MoSPI. Ministries/Departments and States/UTs 
have been requested to publish their own ARCs for the statistical products 
including that of the surveys and release them on their respective websites to 
ensure timeliness and transparency in dissemination. 
viii. Quarterly Progress Report (QPR): In order to monitor progress, the Quarterly 
Progress Report (QPR) with a QPR format was circulated to Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs regarding the implementation of data 
harmonization and quality assessment initiatives. 
ix. Timelines for various data harmonization activities: For internalization of 
these data harmonization initiatives in State/UTs, timelines for various 
harmonization activities have been drawn and the States/ UTs are requested to 
follow these timelines. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Survey on Child Labour 
 
 The Committee have been very often emphasizing the dire and non-negotiable 
need for timely and reliable statistics to safeguard child rights and monitor programs 
concerning their survival, protection, participation, and development. This evidence 
base is fundamental for effective policy formulation. Consequently, the Committee note 
that, as per their 18th Report on Action Taken by the Government (presented in 
Parliament on 31 July 2025) regarding the Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the 

 
 
18 
 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), discussions have 
initiated to conduct a National Child Survey in collaboration with the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development (MWCD). This initiative aims to map the needs of children 
under Mission Vatsalya, specifically focusing on children in need of care and protection 
and juveniles requiring legal and social rehabilitation. 
While a robust legal framework exists—comprising the Juvenile Justice Act 2015, 
POCSO Act 2012, and the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986—the Committee observe that the abolition of child labour remains a complex 
challenge. Recent initiatives like Beti Bachao - Beti Padhao and the integration of the 
National Child Labour Project (NCLP) into Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) have 
sought to bolster these efforts, alongside the PENCIL (Platform for Effective 
Enforcement for No Child Labour) portal for complaint tracking. However, despite these 
efforts and the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Rules, 1988 
providing for District Nodal Officers (DNO) and Task Forces, coordination gaps and the 
lack of updated data continue to hinder State Action Plans. The Committee further 
observe that since Labour is under the Concurrent List, there is an imperative need for 
coordinated efforts across all stakeholders, including Central Ministries and State/UT 
Governments. In this regard, it is also essential that District Nodal Officers under District 
Magistrates are empowered to facilitate inter-departmental action between the police, 
social welfare, and labour departments. 
The Committee, therefore, urge MoSPI to expedite the process of conducting the 
National Child Survey in coordination with the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development to move beyond the discussion stage, establishing a clear and time-bound 
schedule for the commencement and completion of the survey activities as the 
cornerstone of a comprehensive National Child Well-Being Statistical Framework. To 
address the core issues of child rights, this framework must specifically capture 
statistics for children working in the informal sector, street children, and out-of-school 
children. In this regard, the Committee suggest that MoSPI tie up with State 
Governments to engage Panchayats and Municipal bodies to facilitate localized data 
collection. These datasets should be used to develop a periodic child well-being 
statistical dashboard and a National Child Index in synergy with MWCD to evaluate the 

 
 
19 
 
performance of Districts and States. The Committee may be apprised of the latest 
developments at the time of submitting the Action Taken Statement. 
Reply of the Government 
Following the suggestion of Standing Committee in its Thirty Fifth Report, it is 
submitted that a meeting under the chairpersonship of DG(NSS), MoSPI was held with 
officers from MoWCD on 12 May 2026 wherein it has been decided that MoWCD may 
consider constitution of a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) at the earliest to examine the 
objective, scope, coverage, methodology, feasibility of data collection, convergence with 
existing surveys and administrative databases and other operational and financial 
implications for conducting the proposed National Child Survey under the chairmanship 
of a domain expert in child welfare and include members from various concerned 
Ministries/fields. A suitable member from National Sample Survey (NSS) may also be 
nominated by MoSPI. The Technical Advisory Group (TAG) may submit its 
report/recommendations within three months from the date of issuance of its 
constitution. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
MPLAD Scheme 
The Committee note that the Members of Parliament Local Area Development 
(MPLAD) Scheme is an ongoing Central Sector Scheme implemented by the MPLADS 
Division under the Programme Implementation Wing of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI), with the primary objective of enabling Members of 
Parliament (MP) to recommend the creation of durable community assets of national 
priority in the interest of the public. Under the scheme, each MP is allocated Rs 5.00 
crore annually. With a view to make the scheme more flexible, efficient, and effective, 
and to align it with the evolving development needs of communities, revised Guidelines 
came into effect on 1st April 2023. The Committee, appreciate that in line with these 
revisions, the Ministry, in collaboration with the State Bank of India and Tata 

 
 
20 
 
Consultancy Service (TCS), has developed the e-SAKSHI portal to implement the 
revised fund flow procedure, streamline processes, and enhance transparency. 
However, the Committee observe that certain operational issues and technical glitches 
persist in the functioning of the e-SAKSHI portal and its integration with the Public 
Financial Management System (PFMS) which require prompt rectification. The 
Committee also note challenges at the ground level relating to the efficiency of 
implementing agencies, including inadequate monitoring mechanisms and 
discrepancies between reported figures and actual expenditure.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry further strengthen the 
digital portal to enable accurate and real-time tracking of the status of projects whether 
completed or under implementation. The Committee also recommend that the process 
of onboarding new implementing agencies, which currently poses significant challenges, 
be made seamless and that procedures for disengaging incompatible agencies and 
engaging new ones be simplified to improve the effectiveness of the scheme and 
achieve its intended outcomes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has developed a web-based solution the eSAKSHI portal in 
collaboration with the State Bank of India (SBI) to facilitate the implementation of the 
revised fund flow procedure in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure, effective from 1 April 2023. For this purpose, the 
MPLADS Division entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with SBI, which 
was valid up to 31 March 2026. 
2. With effect from 1 April 2026, the Ministry has initiated the process of migrating 
the eSAKSHI portal from the existing SBI Cloud infrastructure to MoSPI’s cloud 
environment, which will improve efficiency in management of the portal and also 
improve the timeliness in introduction of new functionalities, which will facilitate better 
monitoring of the status of works under implementation. A number of new functionalities 
have already been implemented on the portal to provide reports on real-time status of 
works to different stakeholders under their respective login. Progress monitoring reports 
are also made available to States and Districts Authorities with regard to status of 

 
 
21 
 
pending sanction and completion of recommended works. The public dashboard on the 
portal has also been revamped to ensure transparency and correctness of information 
disseminated. In consultation with the stakeholders, a number of additional 
functionalities have also been identified for implementation on the portal on a phased 
manner. 
3. Further, the Ministry is strengthening the monitoring mechanism under the 
Scheme to ensure effective utilization of MPLADS funds through quality, timeliness, and 
compliance with guidelines, by incorporating the following changes in MPLADS 
guidelines: 
a. Under the existing Scheme framework, monitoring roles and mandates have 
been fixed for each stakeholder including the Ministry, Central Nodal Agency, 
State/UT Governments, State Nodal Authority, District Authority and the 
Implementing Agencies. The eSAKSHI portal is being updated to integrate all the 
inspections and reviews with MPLADS eSAKSHI portal to enable real-time 
tracking, improved transparency and effective monitoring.  
b. A system of joint inspections by various stakeholders is being introduced to 
enhance coordination, consistency and accountability.  
c. Inspections to assess the quality of assets created, check compliance with 
approved technical specifications and scheme guidelines, verify operational 
status and usability and beneficiary feedback would be done through third party 
evaluation agencies.  
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
Indian Statistical Institute 
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) is an autonomous 
institution devoted to research and teaching in Statistics and its applications across 
natural and social sciences, and that its contributions to theoretical and applied work are 
acknowledged globally. The Committee recognize that the proposed Indian Statistical 

 
 
22 
 
Institute Bill, 2025 introduces comprehensive legislation aimed at upgrading the existing 
Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959, bringing it on par with governing legislations of 
other Institutions of National Importance (INIs) such as Indian Institute of Technology 
(IITs) and Indian Institute of Management (IIMs), with the objective of modernizing the 
Institute’s governance framework, enhancing its autonomy and accountability, and 
enabling ISI to emerge as a globally recognized centre of excellence in statistical and 
allied disciplines. The Committee have been apprised that the Bill was prepared after 
preliminary consultations with stakeholders and underwent multi-level scrutiny to refine 
the draft legislation. However, the Committee observe that certain concerns have been 
expressed regarding the implications of some provisions for the institutional autonomy 
of ISI and the extent of involvement of the Institute’s academic and administrative 
leadership in the legislative process. In view of the unique academic character and long-
standing institutional traditions of ISI, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, 
before finalising the legislative process, should undertake wider and more structured 
consultations with the relevant stakeholders including Institute’s management and 
faculty so that due deliberation is ensured and the core academic autonomy and 
independent functioning of the Institute are fully preserved. The Committee further 
recommend that an implementation roadmap be prepared to address the concerns 
raised by them and to facilitate a smooth transition to the proposed framework. Further, 
sustained and timely Grants-in-Aid from the Ministry be ensured to support 
infrastructure modernization, faculty recruitment and advanced research in national 
statistical systems thereby strengthening ISI’s capacity to deliver world-class education 
and research. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Consultation with the Institute’s academic and administrative leadership in the 
legislative process 
 
The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee. In this context, it is 
mentioned that the draft Indian Statistical Institute (ISI) Bill, 2025 [later renamed as ISI 
Bill, 2026] was prepared by the Ministry (MoSPI) by following two rounds each of pre-
legislative and inter-ministerial consultations. Extensive and structured consultations 

 
 
23 
 
were held with the pertinent stakeholders including Institute’s management and faculty 
while drafting of the proposed ISI Bill and revision thereof.  
2. Four previous Review Committees have examined functioning and progress of 
ISI. It has emerged from these reviews that the governance of ISI is characterized by 
legacy issues such as large size of ISI’s Governing Council and excessive internal 
representation in it, institutional inefficiencies, lack of accountability, and resistance to 
reform. Any fundamental reforms (including some suggested by the four Review 
Committees) have so far proved difficult to implement by ISI due to structural rigidity 
and complex governance structure. In order to address legacy issues and to enable 
deeper institutional reform, the Indian Statistical Institute Bill is proposed for bringing 
governance reform in ISI in line with legal framework of peer other Institutes of National 
Importance (INIs). The draft Bill seeks to provide incorporation of ISI as a body 
corporate and codify an empowered and modernised governance framework with 
statutory bodies by replacing and repealing the ISI Act, 1959.  
3. A brainstorming session was organized by the Ministry (MoSPI) in collaboration 
with the ISI on 5 July 2025 under the Chairpersonship of Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, 
Chairman, ISI Governing Council to deliberate on pathways that can transform ISI into a 
world-class centre of learning and research, as it completes 100 years in 2031. Eminent 
persons and academicians including President of the ISI Society, Chairman, National 
Statistical Commission, Vice-Chairman, Niti Aayog, Principal Scientific Advisor, 
Government of India, former Director of ISI, former Directors of IIT/IIM, Director of IISc, 
ISI Alumni, Director, ISI and Centre-heads of the all the centres of ISI deliberated on the 
matter. Inter alia, the issues raised by past Review Committees including 
recommendations on restructuring of ISI’s Governing Council and the roadmap 
ISI@100 were shared with stakeholders. Most of the participants accepted the view that 
reforms, inter alia, require a new legislation to align ISI’s legal governance framework 
with that of other Institutes of National Importance (INIs). 
4. As per the pre-legislative consultation policy, the public/ stakeholder consultation 
on the draft ISI Bill, 2025 was done during the period from 25 Sep 2025 to 03 Nov 2025. 
Comments were received from diverse stakeholders including Members of Parliament, 
current and former faculty members, employees, students and alumni of ISI, members 

 
 
24 
 
of the General Body of ISI Society, members of ISI Council, and the ISI Workers 
Organisation (ISIWO). After receipt of these comments, a revised draft of Bill was 
placed in public domain for second round of pre-legislative consultations during 28 Nov 
2025 till 05 Jan 2026. In light of continued pre-legislative consultation, further revisions 
were made in the revised draft Bill. 
5. The public/ stakeholders’ comments received during pre-legislative consultation 
were, inter alia, related to necessity of bringing new legislation and incorporation of the 
Institute by repealing the existing ISI Act, 1959, autonomy of the Institute, increasing 
internal representation in the Board of Governors, appointment of Director, increasing 
the size of the Academic Council, providing more clarity on the relationship between the 
governance structure of Institute and its Centres and also on the role of Management 
Councils. The discussions with faculty members and heads of various Divisions were 
held on the Bill and their suggestions including faculty representation in the proposed 
Board and Academic Council have been suitably incorporated by the Ministry in the 
revised Bill. The comments of ISI Workers' Organisation (ISIWO) on the draft Bill 
including employees’ interest were also received and point-wise reply thereto have been 
provided by the Ministry. The stakeholders’ suggestions, wherever found feasible, have 
been addressed/ incorporated through revisions of the Bill.  
6. Furthermore, a press release was issued on 24 Dec 2025 whereby Frequently 
Asked Questions-Answers on revised draft Bill were placed in public domain to extend 
clarity on the proposed legislation. (available at https://www.mospi.gov.in/ 
uploads/announcements/announcements_1766569183756_57ee3fdd-d5ef-4067-a779-
15028689a6ac_FAQs_on_draft_ISI_Bill.pdf) 
7. In view of the above, the extensive, transparent and multi-layered pre-legislative 
public/ stakeholders’ consultation and inter-ministerial consultation on the draft ISI Bill 
has been concluded. 
8. The proposed Indian Statistical Institute Bill has been prepared with a view to 
providing a contemporary statutory framework for the Institute while retaining its status 
as an Institution of National Importance (INI), and preserving its academic character and 
institutional traditions. The draft Indian Statistical Institute Bill is based on best practices, 
well-established and proven model of peer Institutions of National Importance (INIs) 

 
 
25 
 
such as IITs/ IIMs and it has been customized, wherever necessary, considering the 
specialized nature of the ISI. The proposed legislation is founded upon four guiding 
principles – Excellence, Effective Governance, Autonomy and Accountability.  
9. The draft ISI Bill provides more robust and contemporary governance framework 
which enables ISI to emerge as a globally recognised centre of excellence in statistical 
and allied disciplines. The public-interest mandate of ISI will remain fully safeguarded as 
the Institute will continue to be an Institution of National Importance. The statutory 
authorities of the Institute namely the Visitor, the Board of Governors, an Academic 
Council, the Director, Management Councils and Centre-Directors, and their roles and 
responsibilities have been incorporated in the proposed Bill.  
10. The Board of Governors will be an empowered and leaner body consisting of 11 
members and having a balanced representation of internal and external members –also 
including two members of the Academic Council. This would provide governance and 
academic autonomy of the Institute. 
11. All full time Professors and other full-time faculty (as may be determined by the 
Board) are proposed to be included in the Academic Council. This will make the 
Academic Council broader and more representative, and entrenches the participation of 
senior faculty in academic governance, thereby strengthening the academic autonomy 
of the Institute. The proposed statutory Academic Council is given mandatory as well as 
recommendatory powers, while the existing Academic Council can only make 
recommendations to ISI Council. 
12. The Bill provides for recognition of the Centres of the Institute (which will be 
approved by the Board) and grant them a degree of autonomy. The Centres of the 
Institute will be given adequate financial, administrative and academic powers, so as to 
enable them to attain autonomy in their decision making and functioning through their 
respective Management Councils. 
Funding to the Institute 
Presently the Institute receives funds from the Central Government under the provisions 
of the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959 and the proposed Bill seeks to continue the 
existing funding mechanism by the Central Government. For the purpose of enabling 
the Institute to discharge its functions efficiently under the proposed Act, the Central 

 
 
26 
 
Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay 
to the Institute such sums of money in such manner as it may think fit. This provision 
continues to support sustained and timely grants-in-aid. Furthermore, the Institute shall 
have the authority to generate revenue through means as may be specified by 
regulations. The Bill also provides for a Finance Committee of the Institute for financial 
scrutiny and adequate mechanism for audit of the Institute. 
2. Under the proposed Bill, the Board will have power to make regulations on wide-
ranging institutional matters including creation of infrastructure and maintenance of 
buildings, while also providing for necessary Central Government oversight in specified 
matters such as creation of posts. The proposed Bill also provides for recruitment 
framework of faculty and employees of the Institute to be appointed by Board and 
Director, as the case may be. 
3. The effect of incorporation of the Institute as well as exhaustive transitional 
provisions have been provided in the Bill itself to ensure continuity and smooth 
transition into new institutional governance. 
4. Collectively, the abovementioned provisions will strengthen the academic 
autonomy and independent functioning of the Institute. The Bill introduces and 
streamlines the channels of accountability at various level. It provides provisions for 
review and inquiry by the Visitor, review of medium-term and long-term plan by the 
Board, and submission of annual performance report and annual financial report by the 
Director. By aligning ISI with the legal and governance framework of other peer INIs, the 
ISI Bill intends to enhance institutional autonomy and accountability and also strengthen 
its capacity to deliver world-class education, research, and policy support. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
  

 
 
27 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
Infrastructure and Project Monitoring 
 The Committee note that as of 31 January 2026, out of 1,702 ongoing Central 
Sector infrastructure projects monitored on the PAIMANA (Project Assessment 
Infrastructure Monitoring and Analytics for Nation-Building) portal, 1,105 projects are 
reported as delayed, indicating an overall delay incidence of approximately 64.92 per 
cent. The Committee view this level of delay as a matter of serious concern, particularly 
in view of the cascading impact of time overruns on cost escalation, asset productivity 
and public resource efficiency. While the Committee appreciate the transition from 
Online Computerized Monitoring System (OCMS) to the PAIMANA portal and its 
integration with Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade’s (DPIIT) IPMP 
(Integrated Project Monitoring Portal) under the ‘One Data One Entry’ principle, it 
emphasize that digital monitoring must translate into measurable reduction in delays.  
The Committee, therefore, emphasise that digital monitoring infrastructure, 
however sophisticated, has limited value unless it drives a measurable and sustained 
reduction in actual project delays. Therefore, they desire that the portal serves as a 
foundation for decisive administrative action, not merely a reporting mechanism. 
Recognising that MoSPI's mandate is primarily observational rather than executive, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry systematically leverage its monitoring data to 
operationalise a structured escalation matrix. Rather than a static threshold, this matrix 
should be calibrated on a dynamic basis. Ministries and Departments whose project 
delay rate either exceeds 50 per cent within a financial year and shows no year-on-year 
improvement or whose delay rate deteriorates significantly relative to the previous year, 
may be flagged by MoSPI to the Cabinet Secretariat/PMO for review under apex forums 
such as PRAGATI (Pro-Active Governance And Timely Implementation). The 
Committee further recommend that PAIMANA's analytical capabilities be further 
enhanced to generate sector-wise risk dashboards and early warning signals on a 
rolling basis to the Secretaries of the concerned executing Ministries at defined 
intervals. These outputs should be designed not merely as status summaries but as 

 
 
28 
 
forward-looking alerts that identify projects approaching critical delay thresholds before 
overruns become irreversible. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) is undertaking 
the mandated monitoring of Central Sector Projects costing ₹150 crore & above through 
the project related data of Central Ministries/Departments captured through the new 
portal called PAIMANA. A range of parameters are captured through PAIMANA (Project 
Assessment Infrastructure Monitoring and Analytics for Nation-Building) in respect of 
the progress of the projects, financial parameters (cost and expenditure related), 
reasons/ issues accounting for slippages in the projects with respect to the planned 
schedule and original cost. Based on the aforementioned project data, MoSPI analyses 
the time and cost overrun of the projects and releases a monthly Flash Report. 
MoSPI continues to strengthen monitoring of Central Sector infrastructure 
projects through its PAIMANA platform, enabling improved tracking, periodic reviews, 
and data-driven decision-making across Ministries. Further, enhancements to PAIMANA 
are underway to improve user experience in data entry and reporting/dashboards. Over 
60% of projects are monthly updated through APIs, and continuous efforts are 
underway to onboard newly sanctioned projects and additional stakeholders. 
2. As of March 2026, 1,941 ongoing infrastructure projects, with a total revised cost 
of ₹41.50 lakh crore, are being monitored across 17 Central Ministries/Departments. 
The cumulative expenditure incurred on these projects stands at ₹19.93 lakh crore, 
accounting for approximately 48.02 per cent of the revised project cost. 
3. In addition to the timely publish of web-generated monthly Flash Reports along 
with the PIB releases by 25th of every subsequent month, IPMD has developed or is 
working on the following initiatives to aid in improving implementation efficiency of 
Central sector Infrastructure projects: 
(i) Customized Dashboards  
Login-based access on PAIMANA is provided to PMO/ NITI Aayog and to all Project 
Implementing Ministries/Departments, enabling access of the customised dashboards, 
compendium/ reports, and a query module (project explorer) for multi-criteria analysis of 

 
 
29 
 
project execution status. The interface also includes a dedicated module highlighting 
likely cases of data gaps for review and necessary action to improve data consistency. 
Further, regular meetings are convened with all stakeholders for periodic review, to 
ensure data integrity and to apprise stakeholders of project execution status. 
(ii)  Project Execution Assessment using Earned Value Analysis (EVA) and Predictive 
Analytics 
Based on Earned Value Analysis (EVA), a globally accepted project monitoring 
methodology, project execution assessment to be strengthened through the standard 
metrics of Cost Performance Index (CPI) and Schedule Performance Index (SPI). 
Incorporation of CPI into the existing Project Monitoring framework of PAIMANA may be 
achieved by end-June 2026, alongside existing cost and time overrun metrics, as it can 
be derived from parameters already captured during monthly updates. 
Further, to augment the existing login-based access provided to Ministries/Departments, 
MoSPI is developing a predictive analytics module in PAIMANA to generate early 
warning signals for Project Implementing Ministries/Departments. The project execution 
efficiency of Ministries/Departments would be evaluated based on the rate of fund 
disbursement and physical progress relative to the project age, and to enable prediction 
of completion timelines. These outputs will act as forward-looking alerts that identify 
projects approaching critical delay thresholds before overruns become irreversible. 
(iii) D.O. Letters to Secretaries of Line Ministries/ Departments 
In addition to above, Periodic D.O. letter communications to Secretaries of 
Ministries/Departments have been planned, containing key highlights and performance 
metrics on project execution, along with Ministry/Department-specific reports, with a 
view to apprise them of project status to apprise of the project status and enabling 
timely remedial action. 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
 O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
Initiatives to Strengthen Statistical Capacity 
The Committee commend the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation for undertaking significant initiatives to modernise the national statistical 

 
 
30 
 
system, including the revision of the National Accounts base year to 2022–23, the 
updating of the Consumer Price Index, the proposed chain-based Index of Industrial 
Production, the introduction of monthly estimates under the Periodic Labour Force 
Survey, and the quarterly results of the Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector 
Enterprises. The Committee also note the Ministry’s plans to undertake new surveys on 
the service sector, income, and debt and investment, which would further strengthen the 
availability of granular and high-frequency economic data. Building upon these 
initiatives, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry establish a dedicated 
Economic Nowcasting and Data Analytics Unit to utilise high-frequency datasets such 
as Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) and Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector 
Enterprises (ASUSE) for the early assessment of macroeconomic trends. The 
Committee note that several advanced statistical and monetary institutions use similar 
analytical models to generate near real-time economic insights and support policy 
decision-making.   
The Committee further recommend that, while the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation already employs satellite accounts in selected areas, it 
expands similar supplementary statistical frameworks to better capture informal 
economic activity and emerging service-sector dynamics. In particular, the Committee 
suggest leveraging datasets from the Annual Survey of Unincorporated Sector 
Enterprises (ASUSE), the proposed service-sector survey, and household income 
surveys to improve the measurement of complex and under-represented economic 
activities.  The Committee also encourage the Ministry to expand the use of 
administrative datasets and work closely with State Governments to develop district-
level statistical estimates, which would strengthen evidence-based policymaking and 
support more localised economic analysis. 
 The Committee also recommend strengthening secure and timely access to 
anonymised microdata for research purposes so as to enable deeper policy analysis 
and greater academic collaboration. In this regard, the Committee note that statistical 
agencies such as Statistics Canada in Canada and the Office for National Statistics in 
the United Kingdom operate structured systems that allow controlled access to survey 

 
 
31 
 
microdata while maintaining strict confidentiality safeguards. The Committee believe 
that strengthening analytical capabilities and research access around these ongoing 
initiatives would significantly enhance the policy relevance, timeliness, and global 
credibility of India’s official statistics. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) has taken 
note of the recommendations of the Committee towards modernisation of the national 
statistical system and enhancement of analytical capabilities. 
2. Some of the important initiatives that MoSPI has taken in the direction are as 
follows:  
i. Setting up of Research and Analysis Division: With an aim to set up in-house 
capacity for research and data analytics, MoSPI has created Research and 
Analysis Unit (RAU) in February, 2024 which has further been restructured as 
Research and Analysis Division (RAD) in May, 2025. As part of the mandate to 
analyze publicly available datasets and share the findings of the analysis with 
government stakeholders as research and policy inputs, a number of working 
papers on various subjects has been prepared and research and policy inputs 
shared with the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
ii. Base Year Revision of GDP, CPI and IIP: MoSPI has released the new series 
of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) with base year 2022-23 on 27 Feb 2026 by 
integrating new datasets to ensure greater relevance and accuracy of estimates.  
Further, the Ministry has improved the estimation of GDP for the informal sector 
by using National Statistics Office (NSO) surveys, such as, the Annual Survey of 
Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) in the new GDP series. Moreover, 
the Ministry provides technical support to various Ministries/Departments for the 
preparation of sector-specific satellite accounts, as and when required. 
Further, the revised Consumer Price Index (CPI) series with base 2024 was 
released on 12 Feb 2026. The base year exercise has been done for enhancing 
the coverage and representativeness of the inflation measure. It provides more 

 
 
32 
 
granular data enabling policymakers, financial institutions, businesses and 
citizens for improved data analysis and data-driven decisions. 
The Ministry has recently revised the base year of the Index of Industrial 
Production (IIP) from 2011–12 to 2022–23 on 1 June 2026. To complement IIP, 
the MoSPI has also firmed up the methodological framework for compilation of 
Index of Service Production, which leverages dataset obtained from GST. 
iii. Strengthening Administrative Data for governance: The Ministry is adopting a 
coherent and coordinating approach to enhance the effective use of 
administrative data in governance in Ministries/ Departments/ States/ UTs. For 
this purpose, MoSPI has taken various initiatives like the National Metadata 
Structure (NMDS) 2.0, the Metadata Web Portal (MWP), Statistical Quality 
Assessment Framework (SQAF), Operational Guidelines for Management of 
Official Statistics Across the Data Lifecycle, adoption of standard classifications 
and unique identifiers, establishment of mechanism for reconciliation of divergent 
datasets, etc. towards harmonization of datasets across the national statistical 
ecosystem. These initiatives will strengthen consistency, comparability, 
interoperability and credibility of official statistics, enabling effective use of 
administrative data for the policy making. 
iv. Generation of district level estimates: Sampling designs of National Sample 
Surveys (NSS) have been strengthened to enable district-level estimates, 
enhancing the relevance of NSS data for local planning. States/UTs have been 
requested for their participation to generate district-level estimates, in order to 
significantly aid local policy formulation and planning.  
v. Enhanced Microdata Portal and GoIStats mobile application: Enhanced 
Microdata Portal has also been launched in collaboration with the World Bank for 
improved data accessibility for researchers and policymakers. In addition, tutorial 
videos are available on You Tube to facilitate the process of accessing the 
microdata by the users. In Sep 2025, MoSPI also launched its revamped website 
equipped with improved design, accessibility, thematic and interactive 
dashboards, improved search facility, and user experience with an AI enabled 
chatbot. MoSPI also launched the GOIStats mobile app in June 2025, which 

 
 
33 
 
represents NSO's vision of creating an all-encompassing data ecosystem where 
every stakeholder can seamlessly access official data on the go. GoIStats 
empowers every Indian to meaningfully engage with government data, 
strengthening citizen participation in building a Viksit Bharat.  
vi. Launch of eSankhyiki Portal for data dissemination: The Ministry has 
launched eSankhyiki portal on 29 Jun 2024, which serves as a unified digital 
platform with the objective to establish a comprehensive data management and 
sharing system for ease of dissemination of official statistics in the country. The 
portal is designed as a user-centric and interactive portal.  It aims to simplify 
access to statistical data, ensuring its effective use and reuse by policymakers, 
researchers, academia, industry, and the public at large.  Further, the portal 
emphasizes interoperability through APIs and ensures that statistical datasets 
from various Ministries/Departments such as, MoSPI, DPIIT, MoLE, MoE, RBI 
and MoH&FW, etc. and Agencies (MDAS) can be accessed through a single 
interface, thereby making it one of the most comprehensive sources of official 
statistics in the country.  MoSPI ensures timely and periodic updation of the data 
on the portal improving the availability of current and reliable data for policy 
formulation, monitoring, and research purposes through user-friendly interface. 
3. MoSPI has institutionalized sharing of various data releases/communications 
through group mails to data-users like policy-makers, researchers, industry-bodies, 
journalists, etc. on data releases, discussion papers, etc. and also engage with 
academic and research institutes for easy access to MoSPI’s data and promote analysis 
of data for informed policy interventions. Moreover, keeping in view technological 
advancements and the evolving practices of data dissemination, MoSPI has revised its 
Guidelines for Statistical Data Dissemination (GSDD) 2019 with an aim to provide 
seamless access to official statistics to all stakeholders including government, semi-
government, and private users while protecting data privacy as per existing legal 
provisions in India.  
4. NSS, MoSPI has undertaken several initiatives to enhance the availability, 
timeliness and granularity of official statistics. The Annual Survey of Unincorporated 
Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) has been conducted annually since 2021-22 covering the 

 
 
34 
 
unincorporated manufacturing, trade and services sectors and is a regular survey. 
Further, to provide more frequent insights into the performance of the unincorporated 
sector, the Quarterly Bulletin of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (QBUSE) has been 
introduced from the January–March 2025 quarter using the same conceptual framework 
as ASUSE. 
5. Further, the Annual Survey of Incorporated Service Sector Enterprises (ASISSE), 
covering the incorporated service sector with the GSTN database as the sampling 
frame, has been launched from April 2026 and will continue as an annual exercise. 
These initiatives, along with the proposed service sector survey and household income 
surveys, are expected to further strengthen the availability of granular and high-
frequency economic data for policy analysis and evidence-based decision making. 
6. Regarding the recommendation on leveraging datasets from ASUSE, the 
proposed service-sector survey and household income surveys to improve the 
measurement of complex and under-represented economic activities, it is submitted that 
ASUSE represents a significant step forward in capturing the complexity and diversity of 
India’s informal economy, which has historically remained under-measured in 
conventional statistical systems. ASUSE comprehensively covers the unincorporated 
non-agricultural sector (excluding construction) across manufacturing, trade and 
services, including very small and dispersed establishments. The latest results of 
ASUSE indicate that more than 86 per cent of the establishments covered are own-
account enterprises managed by the owners themselves. Further, a sizeable proportion 
of establishments covered under ASUSE are headed by women, thereby reflecting the 
inclusiveness and diversity of the sector. 
7. One of the key strengths of ASUSE lies in its ability to capture granular activity-
level information relating to output, value added, employment, assets, access to 
finance, registration status, use of digital technologies and other institutional 
characteristics. The survey thus provides a multidimensional understanding of 
enterprise functioning and strengthens the measurement of complex and under-
represented economic activities by combining breadth of coverage with depth of 
information, thereby providing a more accurate and policy-relevant picture of the 
unincorporated non-agricultural sector. 

 
 
35 
 
8. On the recommendation relating to development of district-level statistical 
estimates for strengthening evidence-based policymaking and supporting localised 
economic analysis, it is submitted that the sampling design of ASUSE has been suitably 
modified beginning with ASUSE 2025 to enable participating State Governments to 
generate statistically reliable district-level estimates from the survey. 
9. NSS, MoSPI has undertaken several initiatives to strengthen the statistical 
capacity of States/UTs in the conduct of NSS household surveys. Participating 
States/UTs are being provided end-to-end support for survey operations, including 
Computer Assisted Personal Interview (CAPI) applications integrated with the e-Sigma 
platform, requisite cloud infrastructure and storage space for data management, training 
of officials, survey manuals, operational guidelines, as well as data processing and 
related technical support. These initiatives are expected to facilitate timely processing 
and analysis of survey data and enable participating States/UTs to generate statistically 
reliable district-level estimates for evidence-based planning and localised policy 
formulation. 
10. With regard to the recommendation on strengthening secure and timely access 
to anonymised microdata for research purposes, anonymised unit-level data of NSS 
household surveys are being made available free of cost on the Ministry’s microdata 
portal along with survey reports, generally within about three months from the 
completion of fieldwork. MoSPI continues to strengthen mechanisms for secure, timely 
and user-friendly access to microdata for researchers and other stakeholders while 
ensuring confidentiality and privacy safeguards as per prescribed protocols. 
 
11. NSS, MoSPI remains committed to continuously modernising the national 
statistical system through adoption of advanced statistical methodologies, use of 
administrative datasets, improved dissemination practices and enhanced collaboration 
with States/UTs, researchers and other stakeholders. 
 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 

 
 
36 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
  

 
 
37 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Statutory Status for National Statistical Commission 
 
The Committee observe that the Rangarajan Commission (which submitted its 
report to the Government in 2001), has made one of its key recommendation or 
establishment of a Statutory National Commission on Statistics to function as a nodal 
and empowered body for overseeing core statistical activities of the country. While the 
Commission had recommended the creation of a permanent statutory framework for 
official statistics, the National Statistical Commission (NSC), which was established in 
2005, has so far not been accorded statutory status. The Committee further note that 
the Government has taken a proactive initiative to strengthen the institutional framework 
of the statistical system by proposing to grant statutory status to the Indian Statistical 
Institute (ISI) through the proposed Indian Statistical Institute Bill, 2025. The Committee 
appreciate this step aimed at enhancing the stature and functioning of a premier 
national institution in the field of statistics. However, the Committee express concern 
that there has been no significant progress regarding the grant of statutory status to the 
National Statistical Commission despite their categorical recommendation in the 27th 
Report (18th Lok Sabha). During the course of evidence, the representatives of the 
Ministry informed the Committee that most of the over 600 recommendations of the 
Rangarajan Commission have been implemented. A few were found infeasible, and 
about 12 strategic recommendations require broader inter-governmental consensus. 
The Committee were further informed that the status report will be submitted shortly, 
including separately to Parliament, in fulfilment of the assurance. He also assured that a 
detailed note would also be provided to the Committee. The Committee are of the view 
that the National Statistical Commission (NSC), which was originally envisaged as the 
apex body for guiding and coordinating statistical activities in the country, could play a 

 
 
38 
 
more effective role if supported by an appropriate statutory framework. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation and desire the Ministry to 
examine the feasibility of granting statutory status to the National Statistical Commission 
(NSC) in a time-bound manner so that it may function as an empowered and 
autonomous body for overseeing core statistical activities in the country. Also, the 
Committee expects that as assured by the Ministry, a detailed note on the status of 
implementation of the recommendation of Rangarajan Commission will be provided at 
the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
1. The National Statistical Commission (NSC) is chaired by an eminent statistician 
and its four members have specialization and experience in specified statistical and 
allied fields. The Chairman and Members of the National Statistical Commission are 
selected on the basis of the recommendations of a Search Committee duly constituted 
by the Government of India for the purpose, from time to time. 
2. As per provisions of Resolution dated 1 June 2005, the Commission has the 
requisite autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. The Commission 
also has the authority to formulate its short- and long-term programmes. The NSC has 
evolved necessary measures and mechanism by constituting professional committees, 
expert committees and working groups to assist the Commission on various technical 
issues. 
3. The Steering Committee for National Sample Surveys, which is chaired by the 
Chairperson of the NSC, comprises of subject-matter experts as well as the 
representatives from Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Department 
of Economic Affairs, Reserve Bank of India, NITI Aayog and State Governments. The 
Steering Committee of NSC, inter alia, reviews the extant framework and addresses the 
issue from time to time on the subject results, methodology, questionnaire, sampling 
frame, sampling design, concepts and definitions, surveys instruments etc. related to all 
National Sample Surveys.  
4. Ministries/ Departments of the Central Government may submit their proposal or 
apprise to the Commission regarding statistical activity envisaged or being undertaken 
by them. The Commission from time to time holds interactive sessions with State 

 
 
39 
 
Governments on their statistical systems and activities.  
5. In addition, the NSC functions as the Oversight Body and periodically review the 
progress of the roadmap on ‘Strengthening the Indian National Statistical System’. The 
representatives of Reserve Bank of India and Department of Economic Affairs 
participate in these reviews.  
6. The National Statistical Commission performs various functions including-  
(i) Identifying the core statistics, which are of national importance and are critical to the 
development of the economy;  
(ii) Constituting professional committees or working groups to assist the Commission 
on various technical issues; 
(iii) Evolving standard statistical concepts, definitions, classifications and 
methodologies in different areas in statistics and lay down national quality 
standards on core statistics;  
(iv) Evolving national strategies for the collection, tabulation and dissemination of core 
statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets;  
(v) Evolving national strategies for human resource development on official statistics 
including information technology and communication needs of the statistical 
system;  
(vi) Evolving measures for effective co-ordination with State Governments, Union 
Territory Administrations and between Ministries, Departments and other agencies 
of the Central Government on statistical activities;  
(vii) Exercising statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and 
integrity of the statistical products, making recommendations to the Central 
Government or any State Government regarding measures to effectively 
implement the standards, strategies and other measures; and  
(viii) Reviewing the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down 
policies, standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced 
performance. 
7. The Commission has power to require production of any document before it 
which serve statistical purposes, require statistical agencies and institutions to provide 
details of statistical activities, including concepts and definitions used, methodologies 

 
 
40 
 
followed, quality standards adopted, sampling and non-sampling errors, etc., in respect 
of core statistics, and require attendance of any person including any public servant on 
matters connected with core statistics and issuing notices for the examination of 
witnesses and documents or any matters connected with core statistics. 
8. The Commission prepares its Annual Report for each financial year giving a full 
account of its activities during the financial year and forwards the same to the Central 
Government. The Annual Report and the Action Taken Report on the recommendations 
of the Commission are laid before each House of Parliament. 
9. The NSC provides guidance and prescribe and coordinate statistical standards 
and methodologies for the statistical system through the mechanism of regular reviews 
and also through technical Committees such as the Steering Committee and other 
expert Committees. The data harmonization initiatives undertaken by the MoSPI which 
mark a decisive shift toward a more coherent, transparent, and integrated national data 
ecosystem are reviewed and guided by the NSC. Institutionalizing these mechanisms 
would enable seamless data flows across the entire data lifecycle, from collection to 
dissemination, and foster greater coherence, reliability, and policy relevance among 
diverse statistical outputs. 
10. It is further stated that the report submitted by the Rangarajan Commission had 
made several wide-ranging recommendations for strengthening the Statistical System of 
the Country. This report contains 623 recommendations pertaining to the different 
sectors of the official statistics concerning to various Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies, 
and MoSPI coordinated implementation of the said recommendations.  
11. Subsequently, recommendations were reviewed by a committee which found 478 
recommendations as implemented, 17 were not accepted/dropped, 12 were referred to 
National Statistical Commission (NSC) and 116 were pending. The implementation of 
these recommendations essentially falls under the domain of the respective Central 
Government Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies and State Governments. Accordingly, 
various meetings were held with the Central Ministries/ Departments and States/UTs 
and the matter was pursued with the line Ministries for implementation of 128 
recommendations (116 pending + 12 referred to NSC). After reviewing the status 
received from stakeholders, information available on their websites/portal and as per 

 
 
41 
 
advice of National Statistical Commission in its various meetings, 98 recommendations 
are being treated as implemented, and the remaining 30 as closed/dropped due to 
feasibility considerations. Hence, no recommendation of Rangarajan Commission is 
pending for action. 
12. Given the autonomous character and spectrum of functions of the National 
Statistical Commission as outlined above, at present there is no proposal under 
consideration for granting statutory status to the Commission. 
 
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  
O.M. No. H- 11011/03/2021- Parl. Cell dated 10-06-2026] 
 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I)  
 
 
 
  

 
 
42 
 
CHAPTER- V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWATED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;               BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB 
06 August  2026                                                                                         Chairperson                                                           
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Finance 
 
  

 
 
43 
 
ANNEXURE  
Minutes of the Forty-Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance  
(2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 06th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1710 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘62’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Thiru Arun Nehru  
10. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
11. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
12. Prof. Sougata Ray  
13. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
14. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
15. Shri Manish Tewari  
16. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri P. Chidambaram  
18. Shri Praful Patel  
19. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
20. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
21. Shri Sanjay Seth  
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
23. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal     - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rathore  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
44 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
i) Thirty-Eighth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report 
of the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject ‘Performance 
Review of National Statistical Commission’ of the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation. 
 
ii) Thirty-Nineth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
iii) Fortieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 
iv) Forty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of 
the Ministry of Planning. 
 
v) Forty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports without 
any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
 
PART II 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 
 
45 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS     
(2026-27) OF THE MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 
  
 
  Total % of total 
    
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
08  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 
been accepted by the Government (vide 
Recommendations at SI. Nos.1,2,3,4,5,7 and 
8) 
 
07 87.5% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies 
 
NIL -- 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee (vide 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 6) 
 
01 12.5% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
 
 