 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs] 
 
  
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
40 

ii 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 August, 202603.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 August, 2026 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 

iii 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
13 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
40 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
41 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
42 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 06.08.2026  43 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs 
 46 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2025-26) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
9. Shri Kishori Lal  
10. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Narain Dass Gupta  
24. Shri Praful Patel  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde*  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai#  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Abhiruchi Srivastava Committee Officer 
 
* Nominated as Member of the Committee vice Smt. Darshana Singh w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 
# Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 02 April 2026 and re-nominated as Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 03 June, 2026. 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Fortieth Report on action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report 
of the Committee (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
2. The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 12 March, 2026. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from Ministry of Corporate Affairs on   
11 June, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on        
06 August, 2026.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-First Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha 
Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
06 August, 2026      
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty-First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on                
12 March, 2026.  
1.2  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the eleven Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report on 11 June, 
2026. These have been analyzed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 
       Total - 11 
(Chapter- II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
                  Total - Nil 
(Chapter- III) 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. Nil 
       Total - Nil 
(Chapter -IV) 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. Nil                 
Total - Nil  
(Chapter- V) 
 

2 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that the replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I may be furnished to them expeditiously. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Prime Minister Internship Scheme  
1.5 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee acknowledge the encouraging response from industry under 
the Prime Minister Internship Scheme (PMIS), with more than 2.45 lakh 
internship opportunities posted across two rounds of the pilot phase and 
participation of over 350 companies. However, the Committee observe that 
actual outcomes in terms of intern joining, completion and fund utilisation 
remain substantially below projections. Against the large number of 
opportunities created, only 16,060 candidates joined internships across both 
rounds, and the dropout rate in Round I was as high as 53.6 per cent. The 
Committee further note the significant divergence between Budget Estimates, 
Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure, particularly in FY 2024–25 where, 
against a BE of ₹2000 crore and RE of ₹380 crore, the actual expenditure was 
only ₹29.29 crore, indicating overestimation of absorptive capacity and slower-
than-anticipated implementation. 
The Committee take note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the limited 
uptake and high dropouts, including location constraints with candidates 
preferring opportunities within a 5–10 km radius; the relatively long internship 
duration of 12 months; lack of interest in certain roles; inadequacy of the 
monthly allowance to meet living and mobility expenses, particularly for 
candidates required to travel or relocate; high discontinuation immediately after 
disbursal of the one-time ₹6,000 assistance; delays in stipend disbursement 
due to Aadhaar seeding and eligibility marking issues; low awareness and 
limited acceptance of internships among non-professional youth; restrictive age 
and qualification criteria; and absence of fully institutionalised State-level 
mechanisms for mobilisation and retention. The Committee also note the 
Ministry’s limited regional presence, with only 7 Regional Director offices and 
25 RoC offices, constraining field-level coordination and monitoring. The 
Committee further observe the need to address gender variation in participation 
and retention, as mobility, safety and relocation challenges may 
disproportionately affect female candidates. 
To address these issues, the Committee recommend that:– 
(i) The Ministry is urged to relax the eligibility condition relating to the existing 
age restriction and suitably broaden it to enable wider inclusion of eligible youth, 
including recent Class 10, 12, ITI and diploma pass-outs, as well as those 

3 
 
seeking employment at a later stage due to educational or socio-economic 
reasons. 
(ii) The monthly stipend be enhanced keeping in view prevailing living costs, 
and that a graded support mechanism including travel, relocation or 
accommodation assistance particularly for women candidates and those from 
rural or remote areas be introduced to improve retention. 
(iii) The internship duration be reviewed and flexible or modular options be 
considered to reduce dropouts and improve completion rates. 
(iv) Gender-disaggregated data on registration, joining, completion and dropout 
rates be systematically monitored and published, and targeted interventions 
such as safe accommodation tie-ups, transport facilitation and district-level 
clustering of opportunities be instituted to strengthen female participation. 
(v) Budget projections be aligned with realistic uptake capacity and phased roll-
out plans to minimise substantial revisions and under-utilisation of funds. 
(vi) A robust system for tracking post-internship outcomes at regular intervals 
be established to assess employability impact before scaling up the main 
scheme. 
(vii) Given the Ministry’s limited regional presence, the Committee recommend 
establishment of dedicated PMIS cells at the regional level, closer coordination 
with State Nodal Officers, and deployment of field-level coordinators to 
strengthen implementation. Structured awareness campaigns, particularly in 
smaller towns and rural areas, should be institutionalised to improve outreach 
and participation, supported by periodic field reviews and effective monitoring 
mechanisms. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive 
recalibration of the Scheme based on the learnings of the pilot phase and 
furnish a detailed, time-bound action plan incorporating the above measures 
along with measurable performance indicators prior to full-scale 
implementation.” 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has furnished the 
following written submission: 
“(i) The Ministry is urged to relax the eligibility condition relating to the 
existing age restriction and suitably broaden it to enable wider inclusion of 
eligible youth, including recent Class 10, 12, ITI and diploma pass-outs, as 
well as those seeking employment at a later stage due to educational or 
socio-economic reasons. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (i): - The guidelines for the PMIS Pilot 
Project were revised on 12.03.2026. As per the revised guidelines, eligibility 
criteria relating to age have been changed to 18 – 25 years from 21-24 years. 
Youth aged between 18 and 25 years (as on the date of submission of the 
application) are now eligible to apply for internships under the Scheme. Post 
graduates are also now eligible to apply. This revision is aimed at expanding 
access and ensuring greater participation of eligible young individuals. 

4 
 
(ii) The monthly stipend be enhanced keeping in view prevailing living 
costs, and that a graded support mechanism including travel, relocation or 
accommodation assistance particularly for women candidates and those from 
rural or remote areas be introduced to improve retention. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (ii): - As per the revised guidelines, interns 
will now receive an enhanced monthly assistance of ₹9,000. Of this, ₹900 
(10%) will be paid by the company from its CSR or own funds, and the 
remaining ₹8,100 will be disbursed by the Government via Direct Benefit 
Transfer to the intern’s Aadhaar-seeded bank account. In case the 
companies want to provide more than Rs. 900, they may do so from their own 
funds. Additionally, some of the participating companies are providing 
accommodation, travel and canteen assistance to interns. 
(iii) The internship duration be reviewed and flexible or modular options be 
considered to reduce dropouts and improve completion rates. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (iii): -  As per the revised guidelines, duration 
of the Internship is made flexible to 6 or 9 months depending on nature of 
internship, sector and company requirement.  
(iv) Gender-disaggregated data on registration, joining, completion and 
dropout rates be systematically monitored and published, and targeted 
interventions such as safe accommodation tie-ups, transport facilitation and 
district-level clustering of opportunities be instituted to strengthen female 
participation. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (iv): - The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has 
developed a robust mechanism within the PMIS portal to systematically 
monitor gender disaggregated data across all stages of the internship 
lifecycle, including registration, application, selection, joining, completion, and 
dropouts. This gender wise data is available through dashboards and is 
accessible to key stakeholders such as State Governments and District Nodal 
Officers to support monitoring and targeted interventions. Further, the PMIS 
portal provides companies with the functionality to indicate gender preference 
for internship opportunities; for such opportunities, the system prioritizes 
female applicants during shortlisting and forwards suitably shortlisted profiles 
to companies for final selection. 
To further strengthen female participation, the Ministry will be exploring 
convergence with the Ministry of Women and Child Development (M/o WCD) 
by leveraging existing working women hostel facilities to address 
accommodation concerns. In addition, IEC activities will be refined to highlight 
success stories of women interns, with a view to encouraging greater 
participation of female youth and creating positive role models at the district 
and grassroots levels. 
(v) Budget projections be aligned with realistic uptake capacity and 
phased roll-out plans to minimize substantial revisions and under- utilization 
of funds. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (v): -  In this regard, it is submitted that the 
Prime Minister Internship Scheme was announced in the Budget 2024-25 
with the total outlay of Rs 63000 Cr over five years for the main scheme which 
is yet to be commenced. 

5 
 
The Budget of Rs. 2000 crore for FY 24-25 and Rs. 10831.07 crore for FY 
25-26 in respect of PMIS was allocated to the Ministry for the main Scheme. 
However, the main scheme could not be commenced, and Pilot Project has 
been continued. The recommendation made by the committee is noted. 
(vi) A robust system for tracking post-internship outcomes at regular 
intervals be established to assess employability impact before scaling up the 
main scheme. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (vi): - A system for tracking post internship 
outcomes (POs/PPOs) exists in the PMIS portal. While the PMIS scheme is 
not designed to provide placement/employment, the Ministry has undertaken 
multiple facilitative interventions to enable a structured transition from 
internships to employment. The portal includes functionality to record and 
track Placement Offers (POs). Further, PMIS has been integrated with the 
National Career Service (NCS), of the Ministry of Labour and Employment as 
a significant step towards a unified national ecosystem for internships, and 
employment. MCA also collects feedback from interns who receive 
placement offers from companies other than their internship organization. 
(vii) Given the Ministry’s limited regional presence, the Committee 
recommend establishment of dedicated PMIS cells at the regional level, 
closer coordination with State Nodal Officers, and deployment of field- level 
coordinators to strengthen implementation. Structured awareness 
campaigns, particularly in smaller towns and rural areas, should be 
institutionalized to improve outreach and participation, supported by periodic 
field reviews and effective monitoring mechanisms. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive 
recalibration of the Scheme based on the learnings of the pilot phase and 
furnish a detailed, time-bound action plan incorporating the above measures 
along with measurable performance indicators prior to full- scale 
implementation. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (vii): - The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has 
undertaken several steps to strengthen implementation at the regional and 
state level. State Nodal Officers have been appointed by 34 States/UTs (with 
West Bengal and Lakshadweep pending), capacity-building workshops have 
been conducted, and state nodal officer and district nodal offices are provided 
access to PMIS portal. Further, State-Level Committees (with District-Level 
Committees) have been constituted in 17 States, as on 10th June 2026, to 
oversee the implementation of PMIS at the respective level.  
The Ministry has further received approval for strengthening field-level 
execution through the establishment of dedicated Project Management Units 
(PMUs) at the State levels. These PMUs will support implementation, 
monitoring, and coordination with educational institutions, ITIs, and other 
stakeholders at the State level.  
Additionally, PMIS Nodal Officers have also been appointed at MCA’s 
regional offices of Regional Directors and Registrar of Companies to facilitate 
coordination with the State/UT government, conducting IEC activities, 
engagement with companies, etc. in their respective jurisdictions. The 
Committee suggestion to have a comprehensive recalibration of the Scheme 

6 
 
based on the learnings of the pilot phase prior to full-scale implementation is 
noted.” 
 
1.7 The Committee note that while the Ministry has accepted and acted upon 
several recommendations relating to relaxation of eligibility criteria, 
enhancement of stipend support, flexibility in internship duration, gender-
disaggregated monitoring, post-internship tracking and strengthening of 
implementation mechanisms, certain important recommendations remain only 
partially addressed. 
The Committee observe that no structured and institutionalized 
mechanism has been proposed for providing travel, relocation or 
accommodation assistance, particularly for women candidates and youth from 
rural and remote areas, as recommended by the Committee. The Committee 
further note that the recommendation regarding alignment of budget projections 
with realistic uptake capacity and phased roll-out plans has not been adequately 
addressed, as the Ministry has merely attributed the expenditure shortfall to the 
continuation of the pilot project and has not furnished specific measures to 
improve budget forecasting and expenditure estimation. 
The Committee also note that, while the Ministry has taken cognizance of the 
recommendation for comprehensive recalibration of the Scheme based on the 
learnings of the pilot phase, it has not furnished the detailed, time-bound action 
plan with measurable performance indicators sought by the Committee prior to 
full-scale implementation of the Scheme. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that a 
structured support mechanism for travel, relocation and accommodation 
assistance be instituted, particularly for women candidates and youth from rural 
and remote areas; that budget projections be aligned with realistic uptake 
capacity and phased implementation plans to minimise substantial revisions 
and under-utilisation of funds; and that a comprehensive, time-bound action 
plan incorporating measurable performance indicators be prepared and 
furnished to the Committee before commencement of the full-scale 
implementation of the Prime Minister Internship Scheme. 

7 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Recovery in Avoidance (PUFE) Proceedings through Third-Party Litigation 
Funding 
1.8 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that although interim finance under Sections 20 and 
25 of the Code may be utilized for pursuing avoidance transactions, a 
substantial quantum of funds over ₹3.85 lakh crore across 1,396 applications 
remains locked in avoidance (PUFE (Preferential, Undervalued, Fraudulent, 
and Extortionate)) proceedings, of which only 368 cases have been disposed 
of and ₹7,931 crore has been ordered to be clawed back. The Committee 
further note that PUFE transactions are undertaken by the corporate debtor 
before the commencement of insolvency proceedings that unfairly favour 
certain creditors or divert the company’s assets, thereby reducing the value 
available for resolution. The Committee further note that no study has been 
undertaken on international practices relating to third-party litigation funding in 
fraud and avoidance proceedings in insolvency matters, and that no proposal 
for its introduction is presently under consideration. 
In view of the magnitude of funds involved and the limited recoveries realized 
thus far, the Committee recommend that the Ministry undertake a structured 
comparative assessment of international best practices on regulated third-party 
litigation funding in insolvency and restructuring regimes, and, based on such 
assessment, introduce an enabling statutory and regulatory framework to 
expressly permit third-party litigation funding in avoidance/PUFE proceedings. 
The Committee are of the view that third-party litigation funding in fraud and 
avoidance proceedings can enable the pursuit of complex and high-value 
claims such as tracing diverted assets, undertaking forensic investigations, and 
initiating recovery actions without imposing additional financial burden on the 
already depleted insolvency estate. In several jurisdictions, such arrangements 
have been used to unlock value in cases where insolvency professionals lack 
the resources to sustain lengthy litigation against promoters or related parties 
involved in suspect transactions. By allowing an independent funder to bear the 
costs of investigation and litigation in return for a share in the eventual recovery, 
such mechanisms can help ensure that meritorious PUFE claims are actively 
pursued rather than abandoned due to lack of funds. 
Such a framework should incorporate appropriate safeguards, including 
mandatory disclosure of funding arrangements before the Adjudicating 
Authority and the Committee of Creditors, prohibition of funder control over 
litigation strategy, transparent and reasonable return structures, and regulatory 
oversight by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India. The Committee are 
of the view that a calibrated funding framework would facilitate pursuit of high- 
value and complex avoidance claims, reduce the pressure on already stressed 
insolvency estates, and significantly enhance recovery outcomes under the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.” 

8 
 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has furnished the 
following written submission: 
“Litigation funding for PUFE transactions will be examined in light of global 
best practices and refined through detailed consultation with all relevant 
stakeholders. The market for litigation funding is still nascent in India.” 
 
1.10 The Committee had, while examining the implementation of the IBC, 
expressed concern over the substantial quantum of funds locked in avoidance 
(PUFE) proceedings. The Committee had noted that over ₹3.85 lakh crore 
remains locked in 1,396 PUFE applications, of which only 368 have been 
disposed of, resulting in recovery orders of ₹7,931 crore. Observing that 
avoidance transactions directly erode the value available to creditors, the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry undertake a structured 
comparative assessment of international best practices relating to regulated 
third-party litigation funding in insolvency proceedings and, based on such 
assessment, introduce an enabling statutory and regulatory framework for third-
party funding of avoidance proceedings, incorporating appropriate safeguards 
and regulatory oversight. 
The Ministry, in its action-taken reply, has stated that litigation funding 
for PUFE transactions will be examined in light of global best practices and 
refined through detailed consultation with relevant stakeholders. The Ministry 
has further submitted that the market for litigation funding is still nascent in 
India. While noting the assurance of the Ministry that the matter will be 
examined, the Committee would like to be apprised of the roadmap and 
methodology proposed for such examination, including the scope of 
stakeholder consultations and comparative assessment of international 
practices. The Committee would further like to be informed of the outcome of 
the examination and the Ministry's position on introducing an enabling 
framework for third-party litigation funding in avoidance proceedings. 
  

9 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
Strengthening of RoCs and RDs 
1.11 The Committee, in their Report, had observed/ recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the budget allocation for Registrars of Companies 
(RoCs) increased from ₹65.77 crore in 2021-22 to ₹78.19 crore in 2025-26, 
and for Regional Directors (RDs) from ₹31.51 crore to ₹37.60 crore during 
the same period, while actual utilization of these funds has often been below 
the approved budget, ranging from 78% to 98%. Similarly, the Committee 
observe that despite the cadre review of ICLS in 2024, which added 69 new 
posts, a significant number of these posts remain vacant, resulting in 
manpower shortages across several offices. The Committee also note that 
pending adjudication cases stood at 484 as of December 2025, while the 
enforcement-related 3Is (Inquiry, Inspection, Investigation) pendency, 
particularly investigations, increased to 153 cases during the same period. 
Further, the Committee observe that reduced frequency of KYC filings, along 
with 33.5% of registered companies being inactive, increases the risks of 
shell companies and misuse of corporate structures. The Committee also 
note that the MCA21 portal handled 3.16 lakh tickets in FY 2025-26 (up to 
January 2026), indicating recurring technical challenges despite a high 
resolution rate of 98%. In addition, over 5.8 lakh companies failed to file 
financial statements and annual returns in FY 2024-25, while penalties 
recovered were minimal. The Committee feel that these challenges in 
manpower, infrastructure, compliance monitoring, and IT systems cannot be 
viewed merely as administrative constraints but require corrective action. In 
view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
expedite filling of vacant posts, rationalize workloads, strengthen MCA21 
Version 3 and the proposed FOCUS Lab for real-time monitoring and timely 
adjudication, and implement proactive surveillance and audits for inactive and 
high-risk companies. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry 
ensure full utilization of allocated funds for manpower, infrastructure, and 
technology, and examine global best practices in corporate compliance and 
enforcement for adoption in the Indian context to enhance corporate 
governance and strengthen enforcement across the country.” 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has furnished the 
following written submission: 
“The Budget utilization is being closely monitored on a monthly basis to avoid 
lapses. 
Details of Implementation plan of Cadre Review of ICLS:  
Cadre Review of ICLS, vide which 69 posts were added to the ICLS cadre, 
was approved by the Cabinet in the meeting held on 16.08.2024. The 
Implementation Plan for filling up these 69 posts is as follows:-  

10 
 
 
Out of these 69 posts, all the posts allocated to SAG, JAG and STS grade 
are filled. As per the recruitment rules (RRs) the posts at the level of JTS 
Grade are distributed in the ration of 60:40 amongst Direct Recruits (DRs) 
and Departmental Promotion (DP). The posts of DR quota have already been 
reported to DoPT for inclusion in the Civil Service Examination for the years 
mentioned in the above table. However, the 40 % posts allotted to the 
Promotion Quota at the level of JTS could not be filled up due to an ongoing 
court case. Amendment of the RRs of ICLS Cadre is also under process and 
currently under submission to UPSC.  
Offices have undertaken special drives to dispose of pending adjudication 
cases within prescribed timelines.  Regular monitoring of pendency is being 
carried out at the field level. Regular reviews of pending enforcement-related 
cases is being done in the Ministry.  
Offices are conducting scrutiny of inactive/non-compliant companies based 
on available MCA21 data. Action under the Companies Act, 2013 (including 
strike-off and penal action) is being initiated in appropriate cases. High-risk 
entities are being identified and flagged for further examination.  
Issues faced in MCA21 are being promptly reported through the ticketing 
system. Offices coordinate with the technical team for resolution of 
stakeholder grievances. 
The endeavor of the Ministry is to improve compliance in place of penalizing. 
Efforts are being made to increase awareness among stakeholders regarding 
compliance requirement by sending SMS alerts and by other means.  
Administrative approval has been given for establishment of the FOCUS Lab. 
The process for finalizing the RFP is underway. 
Upon full operationalization, FOCUS Lab will directly and substantively 
address the Committee's recommendation on real-time corporate monitoring 
and proactive surveillance of inactive and high-risk companies through its 
core functional capabilities, namely, Early Warning Alerts, Network and 
Connection Analysis, and 360-degree Entity Profiling through FOCUS Risk 
Briefs — thereby strengthening the Ministry's supervisory and enforcement 
S. 
No. 
Grade Total In
crease 
Year(s) 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 
1. SAG 04 01 03 00 00 00 
2. JAG 16 09 07  00  00 00 
3. STS 18 01 17 00 00 00 
4. JTS 16 03 03 03 03 04 
5. Reserve 15 10 00 00 00 00 
Total 69 24 30 03 03 04  

11 
 
ecosystem.” 
1.13 The Committee note the reply of the Ministry and observe that action has 
been initiated on certain aspects of the Recommendation, including 
implementation of the ICLS cadre review, regular monitoring of budget 
utilization and pendency, scrutiny of inactive and non-compliant companies, 
and according administrative approval for establishment of the FOCUS Lab.The 
Committee, however, note that vacancies in the JTS grade earmarked for the 
promotion quota continue to remain unfilled on account of pending litigation. 
Considering that manpower shortages were a key concern highlighted by the 
Committee, the Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken to 
address the issue and the timeline envisaged for filling the remaining vacancies. 
The Committee further note that, despite special drives and regular 
monitoring, the Ministry has not furnished any information regarding the 
reduction achieved in pending adjudication cases and enforcement-related 
Inquiry, Inspection and Investigation matters. The Committee would therefore 
like to be informed of the current pendency position, the progress made in 
disposal of such cases, and the measures proposed to ensure their timely 
resolution. 
While noting that scrutiny of inactive and non-compliant companies is 
being undertaken and action under the Companies Act, 2013 is being initiated 
in appropriate cases, the Committee would like to be apprised of the outcomes 
achieved through such scrutiny, including the number of companies examined, 
actions initiated, companies struck off, and penalties imposed during the last 
two years. The Committee would also like to be informed of the specific 
measures being adopted to address the risks arising from the large number of 
inactive companies and persistent non-filing of statutory returns. The 
Committee further note that the process for finalization of the RFP for 
establishment of the FOCUS Lab is underway. Given the importance of the 
proposed platform for real-time monitoring and proactive surveillance, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the timeline  
  

12 
 
for its operationalization and the progress made in developing its proposed 
capabilities relating to early-warning alerts, network analysis and risk profiling. 
 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
Budgetary Allocation and Utilization  
The Committee note that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs for the financial year 2026-
27 has been allocated Rs. 5,561.86 crore against a projected requirement of Rs. 
7,418.13 crore, comprising Rs. 5,506.24 crore under Revenue Head and Rs. 55.62 
crore under Capital Head.  
The Committee observe significant volatility in budgetary allocations during the last 
three financial years. The total Budget Estimate increased from Rs. 756.19 crore in 
2023-24 to Rs. 2,667.10 crore in 2024-25 and further to Rs. 11,561.19 crore in 2025-
26, before being reduced sharply at the Revised Estimate stage. In 2024-25, the BE 
of Rs. 2,667.10 crore was reduced to Rs. 1,078.40 crore at RE stage and the actual 
expenditure was only Rs. 679.92 crore, which is 25.49% of BE and 63.05% of RE. In 
2025-26, the BE of Rs. 11,561.19 crore was reduced drastically at RE stage to Rs. 
1,137.24 crore, with actual expenditure of Rs. 705.33 crore as on 09.02.2026. The 
Committee are concerned that such wide divergence between BE, RE and actual 
expenditure reflects issues in realistic budgeting, forecasting and expenditure 
planning. 
The Committee further observe that substantial funds have been surrendered during 
the last five years, particularly Rs. 1,983.30 crore in 2024-25 and Rs. 10,755.86 crore 
in 2025-26. The major reasons cited include delay in approvals, non-fulfilment of 
milestones by service providers, delayed submission of bills and lower uptake under 
the PMIS Scheme. The Committee note that repeated instances of surrender and as 
many as 29 cases of re-appropriation in 2024-25 indicate weaknesses in internal 
financial control and planning mechanisms. 
The Committee also observe a steep increase under Object Head “Professional 
Services” from Rs. 48.73 crore in 2024-25 (Actual) to Rs. 289.12 crore proposed in BE 
2026-27, primarily to clear accumulated liabilities under the MCA-21 project. Similarly, 
Rs. 1,220 crore has been proposed under “Buildings and Structures” for acquisition of 

14 
 
office space, though the proposal has not yet materialised. The Committee are of the 
view that inclusion of large capital provisions without due diligence and final approvals 
results in distortion of budgetary projections. 
The Committee further note that a supplementary demand of Rs. 7,548.19 crore was 
sought in 2025-26, largely on account of transfer to the Investor Education and 
Protection Fund, pursuant to audit observations regarding short transfer of funds. The 
Committee are of the opinion that such substantial supplementary provisions and 
audit-related adjustments point towards the need for stronger financial oversight and 
compliance systems. 
The Committee are of the considered view that mere allocation of funds is not sufficient 
to ensure effective implementation of schemes. Realistic estimation of expenditure, 
strict adherence to project milestones, timely administrative approvals and 
strengthened contract management are essential for improving budget credibility. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry put in place a robust expenditure 
forecasting mechanism, strengthen monitoring of major digital and infrastructure 
projects, and institutionalise quarterly outcome-based reviews to minimise surrenders 
and avoid large-scale revisions at the RE stage. The Ministry may also furnish to the 
Committee a comprehensive action plan to enhance efficiency, transparency and 
accountability in financial management. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry acknowledges the observations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee on 
Finance regarding budgetary allocation, utilization of funds, surrender of savings, re-
appropriations, and the need for strengthening financial planning and expenditure 
management. 
The Ministry would like to submit that the substantial variations between Budget 
Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and actual expenditure during recent years 
have been largely influenced by factors relating to major schemes and projects, 
particularly the PM Internship Scheme (PMIS), whose allocations constituted 75% of 
the Ministry’s overall Budget Estimates in FY 2024-25 and 93.69 % in FY 2025-26. 
Lower-than-anticipated uptake under the pilot phase of the Scheme is leading to the 
continuation of the pilot project and not the full roll out of the main scheme, 

15 
 
procedural requirements, and evolving expenditure patterns, resulted in the 
surrender of a substantial portion of the allocated funds and consequent revisions at 
the RE stage. 
Further, payment under the MCA-21 Project were postponed, as there was delay in 
achievement of contractual milestones.  
With regard to the provision under “Professional Services” in BE 2026-27, the 
allocation has been made keeping in view committed liabilities and anticipated 
expenditure relating to MCA-21. Similarly, provisions under capital heads, including 
acquisition of office space and related infrastructure, have been made on the basis 
of projected requirements and ongoing consultations with the concerned authorities. 
Provision of ₹1,220 crore is proposed mainly for acquisition of the MTNL Building at 
Chanakyapuri and office space for NCLT Delhi (₹600 crore each), along with funding 
for Corporate Bhawan projects and rooftop solar installations. Expenditure against 
such provisions shall be incurred only after obtaining all requisite approvals and in 
accordance with extant financial rules and procedures. 
As regards the Supplementary Demand for Grants during FY 2025-26, the same was 
necessitated primarily on account of transfer of funds to the Investor Education and 
Protection Fund (IEPF) in compliance with audit observations and applicable 
statutory requirements. Necessary steps have been taken to ensure timely 
reconciliation and strengthening of compliance mechanisms. 
The Ministry has taken note of the Committee’s recommendation regarding realistic 
budgeting, expenditure forecasting, and enhanced financial oversight. In this regard, 
the Ministry has strengthened its expenditure monitoring framework through regular 
reviews at senior management level, close coordination with Programme Divisions 
and implementing agencies, and periodic assessment of fund requirements during 
the course of the financial year. Quarterly reviews of physical and financial progress 
of major schemes and projects are also being undertaken to improve expenditure 
forecasting and ensure timely corrective action wherever required. 
The Ministry remains committed to improving budget credibility, enhancing 
transparency and accountability in financial management, and ensuring optimal 
utilization of public resources. The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee will 

16 
 
be factored into future planning, monitoring and execution processes. In this regard, 
enhanced monitoring mechanism through monthly expenditure reviews in Senior 
Officer’s Meeting is being observed along with closer coordination with Program 
Divisions. Further, weekly overview of files is also being done for prompt action. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
Prime Minister Internship Scheme 
The Committee acknowledge the encouraging response from industry under the Prime 
Minister Internship Scheme (PMIS), with more than 2.45 lakh internship opportunities 
posted across two rounds of the pilot phase and participation of over 350 companies. 
However, the Committee observe that actual outcomes in terms of intern joining, 
completion and fund utilisation remain substantially below projections. Against the 
large number of opportunities created, only 16,060 candidates joined internships 
across both rounds, and the dropout rate in Round I was as high as 53.6 per cent. The 
Committee further note the significant divergence between Budget Estimates, Revised 
Estimates and Actual Expenditure, particularly in FY 2024–25 where, against a BE of 
₹2000 crore and RE of ₹380 crore, the actual expenditure was only ₹29.29 crore, 
indicating overestimation of absorptive capacity and slower-than-anticipated 
implementation. 
The Committee take note of the reasons furnished by the Ministry for the limited uptake 
and high dropouts, including location constraints with candidates preferring 
opportunities within a 5–10 km radius; the relatively long internship duration of 12 
months; lack of interest in certain roles; inadequacy of the monthly allowance to meet 
living and mobility expenses, particularly for candidates required to travel or relocate; 
high discontinuation immediately after disbursal of the one-time ₹6,000 assistance; 
delays in stipend disbursement due to Aadhaar seeding and eligibility marking issues; 
low awareness and limited acceptance of internships among non-professional youth; 
restrictive age and qualification criteria; and absence of fully institutionalised State-
level mechanisms for mobilisation and retention. The Committee also note the 
Ministry’s limited regional presence, with only 7 Regional Director offices and 25 RoC 

17 
 
offices, constraining field-level coordination and monitoring. The Committee further 
observe the need to address gender variation in participation and retention, as 
mobility, safety and relocation challenges may disproportionately affect female 
candidates. 
To address these issues, the Committee recommend that:– 
(i) The Ministry is urged to relax the eligibility condition relating to the existing 
age restriction and suitably broaden it to enable wider inclusion of eligible youth, 
including recent Class 10, 12, ITI and diploma pass-outs, as well as those 
seeking employment at a later stage due to educational or socio-economic 
reasons. 
(ii) The monthly stipend be enhanced keeping in view prevailing living costs, 
and that a graded support mechanism including travel, relocation or 
accommodation assistance particularly for women candidates and those from 
rural or remote areas be introduced to improve retention. 
(iii) The internship duration be reviewed and flexible or modular options be 
considered to reduce dropouts and improve completion rates. 
(iv) Gender-disaggregated data on registration, joining, completion and dropout 
rates be systematically monitored and published, and targeted interventions 
such as safe accommodation tie-ups, transport facilitation and district-level 
clustering of opportunities be instituted to strengthen female participation. 
(v) Budget projections be aligned with realistic uptake capacity and phased roll-
out plans to minimise substantial revisions and under-utilisation of funds. 
(vi) A robust system for tracking post-internship outcomes at regular intervals 
be established to assess employability impact before scaling up the main 
scheme. 
(vii) Given the Ministry’s limited regional presence, the Committee recommend 
establishment of dedicated PMIS cells at the regional level, closer coordination 
with State Nodal Officers, and deployment of field-level coordinators to 
strengthen implementation. Structured awareness campaigns, particularly in 
smaller towns and rural areas, should be institutionalised to improve outreach 
and participation, supported by periodic field reviews and effective monitoring 
mechanisms. 

18 
 
The Committee desire that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive 
recalibration of the Scheme based on the learnings of the pilot phase and 
furnish a detailed, time-bound action plan incorporating the above measures 
along with measurable performance indicators prior to full-scale 
implementation. 
Reply of the Government 
To address these issues, the Committee recommend that: – 
(i) The Ministry is urged to relax the eligibility condition relating to the 
existing age restriction and suitably broaden it to enable wider inclusion of 
eligible youth, including recent Class 10, 12, ITI and diploma pass-outs, as well 
as those seeking employment at a later stage due to educational or socio-
economic reasons. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (i): - The guidelines for the PMIS Pilot Project were 
revised on 12.03.2026. As per the revised guidelines, eligibility criteria relating to age 
have been changed to 18 – 25 years from 21-24 years. Youth aged between 18 and 
25 years (as on the date of submission of the application) are now eligible to apply for 
internships under the Scheme. Post graduates are also now eligible to apply. This 
revision is aimed at expanding access and ensuring greater participation of eligible 
young individuals. 
(ii) The monthly stipend be enhanced keeping in view prevailing living 
costs, and that a graded support mechanism including travel, relocation or 
accommodation assistance particularly for women candidates and those from 
rural or remote areas be introduced to improve retention. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (ii): - As per the revised guidelines, interns will 
now receive an enhanced monthly assistance of ₹9,000. Of this, ₹900 (10%) will be 
paid by the company from its CSR or own funds, and the remaining ₹8,100 will be 
disbursed by the Government via Direct Benefit Transfer to the intern’s Aadhaar-
seeded bank account. In case the companies want to provide more than Rs. 900, they 
may do so from their own funds. Additionally, some of the participating companies are 
providing accommodation, travel and canteen assistance to interns. 

19 
 
(iii) The internship duration be reviewed and flexible or modular options 
be considered to reduce dropouts and improve completion rates. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (iii): -  As per the revised guidelines, duration of 
the Internship is made flexible to 6 or 9 months depending on nature of internship, 
sector and company requirement.  
(iv) Gender-disaggregated data on registration, joining, completion and 
dropout rates be systematically monitored and published, and targeted 
interventions such as safe accommodation tie-ups, transport facilitation and 
district-level clustering of opportunities be instituted to strengthen female 
participation. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (iv): - The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has 
developed a robust mechanism within the PMIS portal to systematically monitor 
gender-disaggregated data across all stages of the internship lifecycle, including 
registration, application, selection, joining, completion, and dropouts. This 
gender-wise data is available through dashboards and is accessible to key 
stakeholders such as State Governments and District Nodal Officers to support 
monitoring and targeted interventions. Further, the PMIS portal provides companies 
with the functionality to indicate gender preference for internship opportunities; for 
such opportunities, the system prioritizes female applicants during shortlisting and 
forwards suitably shortlisted profiles to companies for final selection. 
To further strengthen female participation, the Ministry will be exploring convergence 
with the Ministry of Women and Child Development (M/o WCD) by leveraging 
existing working women hostel facilities to address accommodation concerns. In 
addition, IEC activities will be refined to highlight success stories of women interns, 
with a view to encouraging greater participation of female youth and creating positive 
role models at the district and grassroots levels. 
(v) Budget projections be aligned with realistic uptake capacity and 
phased roll-out plans to minimize substantial revisions and under- utilization of 
funds. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (v): -  In this regard, it is submitted that the Prime 
Minister Internship Scheme was announced in the Budget 2024-25 with the total outlay 

20 
 
of Rs 63000 Cr over five years for the main scheme which is yet to be commenced. 
The Budget of Rs. 2000 crore for FY 24-25 and Rs. 10831.07 crore for FY 25-26 in 
respect of PMIS was allocated to the Ministry for the main Scheme. However, the main 
scheme could not be commenced, and Pilot Project has been continued. The 
recommendation made by the committee is noted. 
(vi) A robust system for tracking post-internship outcomes at regular 
intervals be established to assess employability impact before scaling up the 
main scheme. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (vi): - A system for tracking post-internship 
outcomes (POs/PPOs) exists in the PMIS portal. While the PMIS scheme is not 
designed to provide placement/employment, the Ministry has undertaken multiple 
facilitative interventions to enable a structured transition from internships to 
employment. The portal includes functionality to record and track Placement Offers 
(POs). Further, PMIS has been integrated with the National Career Service (NCS), of 
the Ministry of Labour and Employment as a significant step towards a unified national 
ecosystem for internships, and employment. MCA also collects feedback from interns 
who receive placement offers from companies other than their internship organization. 
(vii) Given the Ministry’s limited regional presence, the Committee 
recommend establishment of dedicated PMIS cells at the regional level, closer 
coordination with State Nodal Officers, and deployment of field- level 
coordinators to strengthen implementation. Structured awareness campaigns, 
particularly in smaller towns and rural areas, should be institutionalized to 
improve outreach and participation, supported by periodic field reviews and 
effective monitoring mechanisms. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive 
recalibration of the Scheme based on the learnings of the pilot phase and 
furnish a detailed, time-bound action plan incorporating the above measures 
along with measurable performance indicators prior to full- scale 
implementation. 
Reply to Recommendation No. 2 (vii): - The Ministry of Corporate Affairs has 
undertaken several steps to strengthen implementation at the regional and state level. 

21 
 
State Nodal Officers have been appointed by 34 States/UTs (with West Bengal and 
Lakshadweep pending), capacity-building workshops have been conducted, and state 
nodal officer and district nodal offices are provided access to PMIS portal. Further, 
State-Level Committees (with District-Level Committees) have been constituted in 17 
States, as on 10th June 2026, to oversee the implementation of PMIS at the respective 
level.  
The Ministry has further received approval for strengthening field-level execution 
through the establishment of dedicated Project Management Units (PMUs) at the State 
levels. These PMUs will support implementation, monitoring, and coordination with 
educational institutions, ITIs, and other stakeholders at the State level.  
Additionally, PMIS Nodal Officers have also been appointed at MCA’s regional offices 
of Regional Directors and Registrar of Companies to facilitate coordination with the 
State/UT government, conducting IEC activities, engagement with companies, etc. in 
their respective jurisdictions. The Committee suggestion to have a comprehensive 
recalibration of the Scheme based on the learnings of the pilot phase prior to full-scale 
implementation is noted. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Financial Sustainability under IBC 
 
The Committee observe that against 78 sanctioned posts in the IBBI, only 33 
personnel are presently in position, leaving 45 vacancies, even as the Board 
supervises 4,513 registered IPs, 127 IPEs, and 3,719 ongoing assignments, besides 
administering 18 principal regulations and 118 amendments issued since 2016. The 
Committee further note that IBBI has not availed grant-in-aid since FY 2024–25 and 
has been sustaining itself through internal resources, with budgetary allocation 
declining from ₹39 crore (BE 2021–22) to ₹0.03 crore (BE 2025–26 and 2026–27). 
While financial self-sufficiency is acknowledged, the Committee are concerned that 

22 
 
significant manpower shortages coupled with a sharply reduced budgetary allocation 
may constrain supervisory oversight, enforcement, data analytics and policy 
responsiveness. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry undertake a 
comprehensive review of the Board’s financial and human resource requirements, 
ensure timely filling of vacancies, strengthen specialised and analytical capacity, and 
provide assured and adequate budgetary support so that regulatory independence 
and institutional effectiveness are not compromised. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to institutional capacity, the Government recognizes the need to 
strengthen the functioning of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (|BBI). A 
comprehensive review of its human resource and financial requirements will be 
undertaken. The Insolvency process as envisaged under the IBC is basically a 
professional – tribunal – CoC (Committee of Creditors) driven process where the 
Board’s oversight mechanism has to ensure that the conduct of the process and that 
of the professional is not arbitrary. While the Board has moved towards financial self-
sufficiency, it has ensured that regulatory effectiveness is not constrained. The Board 
has generated sufficient corpus to sustain itself without Grants in Aid from the 
Government as the Regulatory Fee levied by it as a percentage of the resolution costs 
as well as subscription fee levied from the professionals is designed to keep the 
institution self-reliant. The Board being an autonomous body also evaluates its own 
requirements based on its needs and conducts recruitments as and when the 
necessity arises. 
Further, the recruitment at IBBI is a continuous process, and undertaken based on 
functional requirements and emerging organizational needs. The IBBI also inducts 
officers on deputation from Financial Institutions, Banks, Ministries, and other 
Government organisations, bringing in diverse and relevant expertise to strengthen its 
institutional capacity. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
  

23 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
Institutionalising a Formal Regulatory Impact Assessment Framework 
The Committee note that although the IBBI (Mechanism for Issuing) Regulations, 2018 
provide for public consultation and limited economic analysis prior to issuance of 
regulations, no formally institutionalised Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) 
framework currently exists. The Committee further observe that since 2016, 18 
principal regulations and around 118 amendments have been notified under the Code, 
reflecting the evolving and economically significant nature of the insolvency 
framework.  
While noting that no such proposal is presently under consideration, the Committee 
recommend that a mandatory and institutionalised RIA framework be introduced for 
major regulatory amendments under the Code. Such a framework should provide for 
structured pre-notification impact assessment, cost-benefit analysis, stakeholder 
consultation, defined implementation timelines, post-implementation review, and 
mechanisms for inter-regulatory coordination, so as to enhance transparency, 
regulatory stability and long-term policy effectiveness. 
Reply of the Government 
On the issue of regulatory framework and the need for a structured Regulatory Impact 
Assessment (RIA) mechanism, it is submitted that an external evaluation by the 
National Council of Applied Economic Research in 2021 confirmed a high standard of 
regulatory quality. Further, the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad has been 
engaged by IBBI to undertake a comprehensive review of regulatory processes, 
including an in-depth assessment of existing Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) 
practices and identification of areas for strengthening institutional mechanism. The 
report, expected within the next 3-4 months, will provide key inputs for the design and 
implementation of a mandatory RIA framework. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
  

24 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
Recovery in Avoidance (PUFE) Proceedings through Third-Party Litigation 
Funding 
The Committee observe that although interim finance under Sections 20 and 25 of the 
Code may be utilised for pursuing avoidance transactions, a substantial quantum of 
funds over ₹3.85 lakh crore across 1,396 applications remains locked in avoidance 
(PUFE (Preferential, Undervalued, Fraudulent, and Extortionate)) proceedings, of 
which only 368 cases have been disposed of and ₹7,931 crore has been ordered to 
be clawed back. The Committee further note that PUFE transactions are undertaken 
by the corporate debtor before the commencement of insolvency proceedings that 
unfairly favour certain creditors or divert the company’s assets, thereby reducing the 
value available for resolution. The Committee further note that no study has been 
undertaken on international practices relating to third-party litigation funding in fraud 
and avoidance proceedings in insolvency matters, and that no proposal for its 
introduction is presently under consideration. 
In view of the magnitude of funds involved and the limited recoveries realised thus far, 
the Committee recommend that the Ministry undertake a structured comparative 
assessment of international best practices on regulated third-party litigation funding in 
insolvency and restructuring regimes, and, based on such assessment, introduce an 
enabling statutory and regulatory framework to expressly permit third-party litigation 
funding in avoidance/PUFE proceedings. The Committee are of the view that third-
party litigation funding in fraud and avoidance proceedings can enable the pursuit of 
complex and high-value claims such as tracing diverted assets, undertaking forensic 
investigations, and initiating recovery actions without imposing additional financial 
burden on the already depleted insolvency estate.  In several jurisdictions, such 
arrangements have been used to unlock value in cases where insolvency 
professionals lack the resources to sustain lengthy litigation against promoters or 
related parties involved in suspect transactions. By allowing an independent funder to 
bear the costs of investigation and litigation in return for a share in the eventual 
recovery, such mechanisms can help ensure that meritorious PUFE claims are actively 
pursued rather than abandoned due to lack of funds. 
Such a framework should incorporate appropriate safeguards, including mandatory 
disclosure of funding arrangements before the Adjudicating Authority and the 

25 
 
Committee of Creditors, prohibition of funder control over litigation strategy, 
transparent and reasonable return structures, and regulatory oversight by the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India. The Committee are of the view that a 
calibrated funding framework would facilitate pursuit of high-value and complex 
avoidance claims, reduce the pressure on already stressed insolvency estates, and 
significantly enhance recovery outcomes under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016. 
Reply of the Government 
Litigation funding for PUFE transactions will be examined in light of global best 
practices and refined through detailed consultation with all relevant stakeholders. The 
market for litigation funding is still nascent in India. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
Strengthening the Recovery Ecosystem under the IBC 
The Committee note that 78% of companies ending in liquidation and 42% of those 
resolved under the Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process (CIRP) were already 
defunct or had prior proceedings before the Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR), indicating substantial erosion of enterprise value even before 
admission into the insolvency framework. This underscores the need for stronger 
early-stage detection and more effective mechanisms to preserve value before and 
immediately after admission. The Committee further observe that 32,179 companies 
were able to resolve financial distress at the pre-admission stage, involving an amount 
of ₹14.61 lakh crore, and that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) accounted 
for 52.4% of total bank recoveries in 2024–25 (₹54,528 crore out of ₹1,04,099 crore), 
highlighting its central role in India’s credit recovery ecosystem. 
The Committee further note that the IBC was designed as a framework for time-bound 
resolution and value maximisation, and not as a mere debt recovery or coercive 
instrument. Any misuse, collusive practices, or strategic manipulation of the process 

26 
 
undermines the credibility and objectives of the Code. In this regard, the Committee 
take note of the recent observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India expressing 
concern over the increasing misuse of the IBC framework, wherein it was remarked 
that in certain cases corporate assets are significantly undervalued and disposed of 
through pre-planned or non-transparent auction processes, sometimes enabling 
acquisition by related parties, family members, or close associates. 
In view of the systemic importance of the Code, the Committee recommend 
strengthening early warning and pre-admission intervention mechanisms, enhancing 
the availability of interim finance, enforcing stricter creditor governance, and ensuring 
greater transparency and accountability in the decision-making processes of the 
Committee of Creditors. The Committee further emphasise the need to address the 
concerns highlighted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court regarding possible undervaluation 
of corporate assets and questionable auction practices during the insolvency process. 
The Committee therefore recommend institutionalising robust oversight mechanisms, 
including periodic regulatory impact assessments, to safeguard the integrity of the 
insolvency process. Particular attention should be given to strengthening valuation 
standards, ensuring independence and accountability of valuers, promoting wider and 
more competitive participation in bidding processes, and preventing potential conflicts 
of interest in resolution and auction procedures. Such measures would help ensure 
that assets are not transferred at prices significantly below their fair market value, curb 
questionable auction practices, maximise recoveries for creditors, and reinforce 
confidence in the insolvency resolution framework. 
Reply of the Government 
With regard to strengthening the recovery ecosystem and addressing value erosion, 
the recent amendment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code includes provisions for 
a creditor-led, out-of-court resolution mechanism (CIIRP) aimed at enabling early and 
cost-effective resolution of stress.  
Steps are also being taken to strengthen valuation standards, ensure independence 
and accountability of valuers, and promote wider participation in the resolution process 
including but not limited to implementing the onboarding of the entire Insolvency 
ecosystem on to a unified platform (iPIE) which would be AI driven and expected to 

27 
 
usher in transparency. This would also be linked to the Banks facilitating a mechanism 
to predict stress and evaluate pre-admission intervention mechanisms. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
NCLT and NCLAT 
The Committee note that over the past five years, the National Company Law Tribunal 
(NCLT) has faced a growing workload, with fresh filings ranging from 9,212 cases in 
2021‑22 to 6,318 cases in April–December 2025, and a pendency of 14,575 cases as 
of 31.12.2025. While disposal of IBC cases under Sections 7, 9, and 10 remains high 
(over 90%), delays in complex and interlocutory applications have extended resolution 
timelines, with the average time from insolvency commencement to approval of a 
resolution plan at 764 days. 
The Committee further note that NCLT’s sanctioned strength of one President and 62 
Members remains underfilled, with only 53 Members in position and the President post 
vacant, and that bench-wise pendency shows significant regional disparities, e.g., New 
Delhi 2,494 cases and Mumbai 4,027 cases. While the Budget Estimates for NCLT 
rose from ₹75.22 crore in 2020‑21 to ₹124.08 crore in 2026‑27, as furnished by the 
Ministry, actual utilization has often lagged behind revised estimates due to 
infrastructure, ICT, and operational requirements. Similarly, for NCLAT, the BE 
increased from ₹25.32 crore in 2020‑21 to ₹46.25 crore in 2026‑27, with actuals often 
lower than projected reflecting delays in filling vacancies, development of IT 
infrastructure, and contingent expenditures. 
In view of the above, and taking into account the observations contained in the 28th 
Report of the Committee on the Review of the Working of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and Emerging Issues, the Committee strongly reiterate the 
need to increase the number of benches of the National Company Law Tribunal and 
to ensure the prompt filling of existing vacancies. The Committee further emphasize 
the necessity of ensuring adequate and fully utilized budgetary support, as well as 
strengthening digital and hybrid infrastructure, so as to reduce pendency, expedite the 
disposal of cases, and safeguard enterprise value under the Code. 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
As regards the functioning of the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT), the Government is taking steps 
to address issues of pendency and capacity constraints. Filling up of vacancies is a 
continuous process undertaken in collaboration with the Judiciary. Emphasis is also 
being laid on improving utilization of budgetary allocations and strengthening 
infrastructure including state of art digital infrastructure.  
It would be pertinent to point out that the IBC is intended to function as a time-bound 
resolution framework focused on value maximisation and not merely as a recovery 
mechanism. 
Cases are adjudicated and disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the 
statutory procedures laid down under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC). 
While the high disposal rate of over 90% is successfully maintained for primary 
insolvency filings under Sections 7, 9, and 10, the Ministry notes the concerns of the 
Hon'ble Committee regarding the average resolution timeframe of 764 days. These 
delays are primarily driven by specific legal complexities, the high volume of 
Interlocutory Applications (IAs) filed by stakeholders, the detailed nature of evidence 
required, multiple rounds of third-party litigation, and stays granted by higher 
appellate courts, rather than structural capacity limitations alone. 
The filling up of vacancies for the post of President and Members in the NCLT and 
NCLAT is a dynamic, integrated, continuous and collaborative process between 
Executive and Judiciary. Steps are taken regularly to fill positions as they fall vacant 
due to retirement, resignation, or completion of tenure. As a part of this process, the 
Government has recently appointed Justice (Retd.) Anupinder Singh Grewal as 
President in NCLT who has assumed charge on 11.05.2026. Further, the selection 
process of Members is actively underway to fill the vacant posts and bring the working 
capacity up to the sanctioned strength of 62 members. 
Bench-wise pendency across heavily burdened regions like Mumbai and New Delhi 
is monitored closely to ensure appropriate allocation of administrative resources. 
To address the lag between Budget Estimates (BE) and actual utilization, dedicated 
Financial Advisers have been sanctioned and appointed in both NCLT and NCLAT, 

29 
 
who comprehensively review the specific budget requirements of the tribunals. Based 
on this fiscal oversight, funds are being provided suitably and progressively to match 
actual operational timelines. 
Further, to optimize budgetary expenses and to curb operational dependencies, full 
financial powers have been delegated to the Secretary, NCLT and Registrar, NCLAT 
which they may exercise in consultation with their independent Financial Advisors. 
The tribunals are fully empowered to independently execute minor civil works, 
repairs, renovations, and technical infrastructure updates relating to ICT, and handle 
day-to-day contingent expenditure within their allocated budgets. Besides, full power 
have been delegated to NCLT and NCLAT for appointment of supporting staff within 
the approved limits 
Benches of the NCLT are established depending on regional workloads, case 
concentration, and geographical requirements. At present, 1 Principal Bench and 15 
territorial Benches are fully functional across India. The proposal to set up additional 
benches is being examined keeping in mind the regional infrastructure and support 
requirements. 
To expedite the disposal of cases, the Government has been taking continuous steps 
to augment the enterprise capacity and strengthen the institutional framework of the 
NCLT and NCLAT through improved infrastructure, digital initiatives, and 
administrative reforms. These related measures aim to ensure that the adjudicatory 
process remains efficient, well-supported, and responsive to the evolving needs of 
the IBC framework.  
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
National Financial Reporting Authority (NAFRA) 
The Committee note that the National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA) has 
received a total of 252 complaints/matters, of which 139 have been disposed of and 
113 remain under process. The Committee further note that no final order has been 
issued in the past one year. The Committee were informed by the Ministry that this 
prolonged lull in issuing orders is attributable to an interim order dated 17.02.2025 

30 
 
passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, which permitted NFRA to continue its 
proceedings but restrained it from passing or enforcing any final disciplinary orders 
during FY 2025–26. 
The Committee were further informed by the Ministry that NFRA has filed an appeal 
before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India against the judgment dated 07.02.2025 of 
the Hon’ble Delhi High Court. As informed by the Ministry While the Hon’ble High Court 
upheld several aspects of the constitutional and legal framework governing NFRA, 
including its retrospective jurisdiction, it quashed 11 show-cause notices/orders and 
observed that there should be a separation between audit quality review functions and 
subsequent disciplinary proceedings. The Committee also take note of the information 
furnished by the Ministry that the Hon’ble High Court observed that certain cases in 
which no audit quality review had been conducted were also included among the 
matters that were quashed, against which NFRA has preferred an appeal before the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.The Committee further note that, pursuant to the 
directions and observations of the Hon’ble High Court, the Ministry is presently 
considering suitable amendments to the relevant provisions under the Companies Act, 
2013. 
In view of the above developments, the Committee observe that the ongoing judicial 
proceedings and the interim restrictions on the issuance of final disciplinary orders 
have created a temporary regulatory gap in the enforcement framework of the National 
Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA). While noting that the Hon’ble Delhi High Court 
has upheld the broader constitutional and legal framework governing NFRA, the 
Committee emphasise the need for greater clarity and institutional strengthening in the 
separation of audit quality review and disciplinary functions, as highlighted by the 
Court. The Committee are of the view that the proposed amendments under the 
Companies Act, 2013 should be examined and finalised expeditiously so as to provide 
a clear statutory basis for NFRA’s processes, ensure procedural robustness, and 
prevent similar legal uncertainties in the future, while preserving the Authority’s ability 
to effectively discharge its mandate of maintaining high standards of auditing and 
financial reporting. 
The Committee further observe that NFRA does not presently maintain 
comprehensive, stage-wise data on pending complaints, disciplinary proceedings, or 
follow-up actions, which limits effective monitoring, transparency, and oversight of 

31 
 
audit quality enforcement. The Committee also note that NFRA has not undertaken 
any sectoral studies to identify industry-specific audit quality concerns, nor developed 
sector-specific accounting guidance, despite repeated representations from industries 
such as oil, energy, and insurance, where accounting practices and risk profiles may 
differ significantly. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry take expeditious 
steps to operationalise the separation between audit quality review and disciplinary 
functions within NFRA, as emphasised by the Hon’ble Delhi High Court, including 
through appropriate legislative or regulatory amendments under the Companies Act, 
2013, so as to strengthen procedural clarity, institutional independence, and the 
credibility of the audit oversight framework. The Committee further recommend that 
NFRA establish a robust data management and monitoring system to track 
complaints, disciplinary proceedings, and follow-up actions in a structured and 
transparent manner, thereby enabling effective oversight and timely resolution of 
cases. The Committee also recommend that NFRA undertake sectoral studies to 
identify industry-specific accounting and audit challenges and, where necessary, 
develop sector-specific accounting guidance for key sectors such as oil, energy, and 
insurance, with a view to strengthening transparency, enhancing investor confidence, 
and improving the overall effectiveness of audit regulation and supervision. 
Reply of the Government 
Amendments related to NFRA which will address the issues mentioned in the 
Committee’s report are included in the recently introduced Corporate Laws 
(Amendment) Bill 2026.  
In pursuance of the proceedings arising out of IA No. 334375 of 2025 in the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court on 16.04.2026, and without prejudice to any rights and contentions in 
any pending proceedings before any court including Hon’ble Supreme court or any 
Tribunal, NFRA has formed Divisions headed by Chairperson and Full-Time Members, 
as feasible currently. This position has been submitted in the Supreme Court. 
Consequently, NFRA has submitted to Hon’ble Supreme Court to remove the bar on 
passing disciplinary orders. The matter is sub-judice.  
NFRA has a dedicated online portal for filing complaints. Comprehensive, stage wise 
data on pending complaints, disciplinary proceeding and follow-ups actions is also 

32 
 
maintained by NFRA. Further, a quarterly report on the status of show cause notices 
is also published at NFRA website as a measure of transparency.  
In the periodic audit quality inspections conducted by NFRA where audit firms are 
evaluated for adherence to quality control standards and individual audit assignments 
are also picked up on a sample basis for checking audit quality, the samples of 
companies that are picked up are representative of various sectors such as real estate, 
pharma, manufacturing, travel, power etc. Sectoral studies are yet to be taken up. The 
recommendation of the Committee regarding undertaking sectoral studies is noted for 
further necessary action.  
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
Competition Commission of India 
The Committee note that, despite the CCI’s proactive measures such as establishing 
the Digital Markets Division, recruiting economists and data analysts, conducting 
market studies on AI and competition, and coordinating with other regulators it 
continues to operate with only 117 of 195 sanctioned posts filled, limiting its capacity 
to effectively monitor and enforce competition law. Consequently, the CCI faces 
persistent challenges in addressing market concentration and anti-competitive 
practices, particularly in digital markets and sectors dominated by duopolistic 
structures.  The Committee further observe that, despite enforcement actions and 
market studies undertaken by the Competition Commission of India targeting dominant 
firms in digital markets, several traditional sectors of the Indian economy also display 
duopolistic or highly concentrated market structures, resulting in disproportionate 
market power that may adversely affect consumer welfare, fair competition, and 
regulatory compliance, as reflected in recent cases. The Committee also note that the 
proposed Digital Competition Bill, intended to address the growing dominance of large 
digital platforms, remains pending, thereby leaving a critical regulatory gap at a time 
when digital markets are expanding rapidly. 
In view of these concerns, and in light of the observations made in the 25th Report of 
the Committee on Evolving Role of Competition Commission of India in the Economy, 

33 
 
Particularly the Digital Landscape, the Committee reiterate and strongly recommend 
that the Ministry expedite the introduction of the Digital Competition Bill with a clear 
and time-bound roadmap, so as to ensure timely and effective regulation of large 
digital platforms. The Committee further recommend strengthening the institutional 
capacity of the Competition Commission of India by ensuring the expeditious filling of 
all sanctioned posts, particularly in the Digital Markets Division, and augmenting its 
technical and analytical capabilities to deal with complex competition issues arising in 
digital markets. 
The Committee also recommend that the Commission intensify proactive monitoring 
of duopolistic and high-concentration sectors across the economy covering both digital 
and traditional markets through regular market studies, competition risk assessments, 
and targeted sector-specific interventions. Such efforts should be supported by 
stronger coordination with sectoral regulators and relevant stakeholders to address 
emerging competition concerns, safeguard consumer welfare, and ensure compliance 
with regulatory frameworks. The Committee are of the view that these measures, 
complemented by evidence-based and forward-looking monitoring mechanisms, 
would help detect anti-competitive practices like duopoly and market concentration at 
an early stage, promote fair competition, and protect consumer interests in a rapidly 
evolving economic landscape. 
Reply of the Government 
At present, 118 out of 195 sanctioned posts in CCI are filled and efforts are being 
made to fill vacancies. In this regard, eight deputation-based recruitment drives have 
been undertaken during the last three years, including four for strengthening the 
investigative arm i.e. O/o Director General. Further, in view of the amendments to the 
Competition Act, 2002 in 2023 and evolving functional requirements, a cadre 
restructuring proposal in CCI for creation of additional posts is under consideration in 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA); To address immediate capacity constraints, 
CCI engages Young Professionals and domain experts on contractual basis in areas 
such as digital markets, data analytics and algorithmic systems. 
The Digital Markets Division (DMD) of CCI is staffed with economists and data analysts 
possessing expertise in the economics of digital markets, data science, and 

34 
 
information and communication technologies relevant to digital ecosystems.  
Based on the feedback received from stakeholders-including industry bodies, legal 
experts, civil society organisations, and domestic and global digital enterprises on the 
report of Committee on Digital Competition Law (CDCL) and Draft Digital Competition 
Bill of CDCL, the Government decided to adopt an evidence-based approach before 
finalizing the legislation. Accordingly, the Ministry has initiated a Market Study, the 
objective of which is as follows:- 
a) To review and evaluate the proposed qualitative and quantitative thresholds of 
the draft Digital Competition Bill; 
b) To review the list of proposed core digital services in the draft DCB; 
c) To evaluate the implications of the draft Digital Competition Bill on these 
services and stakeholders, including the potential impact on competition and 
market entry; and  
d) To assess the potential impact of the proposed ex-ante framework on smaller 
players including start-ups & MSME’s. 
The outcome of this study will guide the development of a balanced, forward-looking 
digital competition framework that fosters innovation while ensuring fairness and 
competitive neutrality in digital markets. 
The selection of an agency for this purpose was carried out through a Request for 
Proposal (RFP) floated on GeM portal and a contract/ agreement has been signed 
with the Management Development Institute to carry out the Market Study. 
Besides, CCI has initiated capacity-building programs with industry experts, academia 
and global regulators to enhance its understanding of emerging competition 
challenges like algorithmic competition, self-preferencing and data monopolization. 
CCI also maintains active coordination with other regulators on a need basis to 
leverage sector-specific expertise.  
Further, CCI conducts market studies from time to time to gauge market 
developments, track evolving competition dynamics, understand specific business 
practices and analyse implications for competition arising from structural features 
including duopoly or high concentration. These studies enable evidence-based 

35 
 
monitoring and enhance in-house capacity for detecting anti-competitive practices and 
market concentration and for promoting fair competition. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
Strengthening of RoCs and RDs 
The Committee note that the budget allocation for Registrars of Companies (RoCs) 
increased from ₹65.77 crore in 2021-22 to ₹78.19 crore in 2025-26, and for Regional 
Directors (RDs) from ₹31.51 crore to ₹37.60 crore during the same period, while actual 
utilisation of these funds has often been below the approved budget, ranging from 78% 
to 98%. Similarly, the Committee observe that despite the cadre review of ICLS in 
2024, which added 69 new posts, a significant number of these posts remain vacant, 
resulting in manpower shortages across several offices. The Committee also note that 
pending adjudication cases stood at 484 as of December 2025, while the enforcement-
related 3Is (Inquiry, Inspection, Investigation) pendency, particularly investigations, 
increased to 153 cases during the same period. Further, the Committee observe that 
reduced frequency of KYC filings, along with 33.5% of registered companies being 
inactive, increases the risks of shell companies and misuse of corporate structures. 
The Committee also note that the MCA21 portal handled 3.16 lakh tickets in FY 2025-
26 (up to January 2026), indicating recurring technical challenges despite a high 
resolution rate of 98%. In addition, over 5.8 lakh companies failed to file financial 
statements and annual returns in FY 2024-25, while penalties recovered were minimal. 
The Committee feel that these challenges in manpower, infrastructure, compliance 
monitoring, and IT systems cannot be viewed merely as administrative constraints but 
require corrective action. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should expedite filling of vacant posts, rationalise workloads, strengthen 
MCA21 Version 3 and the proposed FOCUS Lab for real-time monitoring and timely 
adjudication, and implement proactive surveillance and audits for inactive and high-
risk companies. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry ensure full 
utilisation of allocated funds for manpower, infrastructure, and technology, and 
examine global best practices in corporate compliance and enforcement for adoption 

36 
 
in the Indian context to enhance corporate governance and strengthen enforcement 
across the country. 
Reply of the Government 
The Budget utilization is being closely monitored on a monthly basis to avoid lapses. 
Details of Implementation plan of Cadre Review of ICLS:  
Cadre Review of ICLS, vide which 69 posts were added to the ICLS cadre, was 
approved by the Cabinet in the meeting held on 16.08.2024. The Implementation Plan 
for filling up these 69 posts is as follows:-  
Out of these 69 posts, all the posts allocated to SAG, JAG and STS grade are filled. 
As per the recruitment rules (RRs) the posts at the level of JTS Grade are distributed 
in the ration of 60:40 amongst Direct Recruits (DRs) and Departmental Promotion 
(DP). The posts of DR quota have already been reported to DoPT for inclusion in the 
Civil Service Examination for the years mentioned in the above table. However, the 40 
% posts allotted to the Promotion Quota at the level of JTS could not be filled up due 
to an ongoing court case. Amendment of the RRs of ICLS Cadre is also under process 
and currently under submission to UPSC.  
Offices have undertaken special drives to dispose of pending adjudication cases 
within prescribed timelines.  Regular monitoring of pendency is being carried out at 
the field level. Regular reviews of pending enforcement-related cases is being done 
S. 
No. 
Grade Total In
crease 
Year(s) 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 
1. SAG 04 01 03 00 00 00 
2. JAG 16 09 07  00  00 00 
3. STS 18 01 17 00 00 00 
4. JTS 16 03 03 03 03 04 
5. Reserve 15 10 00 00 00 00 
Total 69 24 30 03 03 04  

37 
 
in the Ministry.  
Offices are conducting scrutiny of inactive/non-compliant companies based on 
available MCA21 data. Action under the Companies Act, 2013 (including strike-off 
and penal action) is being initiated in appropriate cases. High-risk entities are being 
identified and flagged for further examination.  
Issues faced in MCA21 are being promptly reported through the ticketing 
system. Offices coordinate with the technical team for resolution of stakeholder 
grievances. 
The endeavor of the Ministry is to improve compliance in place of penalizing. Efforts 
are being made to increase awareness among stakeholders regarding compliance 
requirement by sending SMS alerts and by other means.  
Administrative approval has been given for establishment of the FOCUS Lab. The 
process for finalizing the RFP is underway. 
Upon full operationalization, FOCUS Lab will directly and substantively address the 
Committee's recommendation on real-time corporate monitoring and proactive 
surveillance of inactive and high-risk companies through its core functional 
capabilities, namely, Early Warning Alerts, Network and Connection Analysis, and 
360-degree Entity Profiling through FOCUS Risk Briefs — thereby strengthening the 
Ministry's supervisory and enforcement ecosystem. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) 
The Committee note that the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) is a multi-
disciplinary statutory body tasked with investigating complex financial frauds involving 
company law, banking, taxation, and capital markets, with its headquarters at New 
Delhi and five regional offices. The Committee observe that budget allocations for 
SFIO have increased over the past five years, from ₹29.23 crore in 2021-22 to ₹55.86 
crore in 2025-26, with additional funds earmarked for forensic audits, digital 

38 
 
investigations, and hiring of experts; however, expenditure remains dependent on 
consolidated administrative and technical requirements rather than case-specific 
allocation, making it difficult to assess average cost per investigation. The Committee 
also note that SFIO handles highly complex and time-consuming investigations, with 
simultaneous cases and detailed, voluminous reports, and that the number of cases 
successfully prosecuted stood at 68.89% as of February 2026. While the Committee 
acknowledge that SFIO has institutional safeguards, including Internal Summon 
Committees, Peer Review Groups, and judicial oversight to ensure accountability and 
fairness, they observe that the increasing complexity and volume of corporate fraud 
cases require sustained enhancement of manpower, technical capabilities, and 
operational support. In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should further strengthen SFIO by ensuring adequate staffing, expanding technical 
and digital forensic infrastructure, and providing sufficient funds for expert engagement 
and advanced investigative tools to enable timely and effective investigation and 
prosecution of complex corporate frauds. The Committee further recommend that 
mechanisms for periodic review of procedural efficiency and case disposal timelines 
should be institutionalised to improve responsiveness and reduce pendency of high-
value fraud investigations. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs acknowledges the Committee's valuable 
observations. Reply to the recommendations made by the Standing Committee is as 
under: - 
 SFIO has a sanctioned strength of 238 posts, out of which 151 posts are filled. 
Process is going on for filling up the remaining posts. 
 SFIO has its own state of art Computer Forensic Data Mining Lab (CFDML) 
notified under section 79A of Information Technology Act, 2000. The lab is 
notified as "Examiner of Electronic evidence within scope of Computer Media". 
It is equipped with latest digital forensic tools/state-of-the-art tools such as Neo 
Falcon, EnCase, Forensic Workstations, Intella Pro/Reviewer, MSAB XRY and 
Oxygen Forensic Suite, Cellebrite Digital collector & Inspector, Cellebrite 
Insytes which help in the extraction, preservation, and deep analysis of digital 

39 
 
data obtained from electronic devices and corporate IT systems. 
 It is submitted that there is a periodic review mechanism and case disposal timeline 
in place in SFIO to review the progress of ongoing investigations. This will further 
strengthen and improve responsiveness and reduce pendency of high-value fraud 
investigations. 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G-30/1/2026-Bgdt-MCA dated 11.06.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
06 August, 2026      
15 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                    
BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB  
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
  

43 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the Forty-Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2025-
26) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 06th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1710 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘62’, First Floor, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Rajesh Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
7. Shri K. Gopinath  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Thiru Arun Nehru  
10. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
11. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
12. Prof. Sougata Ray  
13. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
14. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
15. Shri Manish Tewari  
16. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri P. Chidambaram  
18. Shri Praful Patel  
19. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
20. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
21. Shri Sanjay Seth  
22. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
23. Shri Vinod Shridhar Tawde  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal     - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rathore  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 

44 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
i) Thirty-Eighth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Seventh 
Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the subject 
‘Performance Review of National Statistical Commission’ of the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
ii) Thirty-Ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). 
 
iii) Fortieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 
iv) Forty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-
27)’ of the Ministry of Planning. 
 
v) Forty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports 
without any modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present 
the Reports to the Parliament. 
 

45 
 
 
PART II 
 
4. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
Record of the Verbatim Proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
* * * 
 
  

46 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
  Total % of total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
11  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(vide Recommendations at SI. 
Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 and 11) 
 
11 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 
NIL  -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
NIL -- 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
  
 
**** 
 