 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs’] 
 
  
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 16 

ii 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on 'Demands for Grants 
(2024-25) of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs’] 
 
 
                    Presented to Lok Sabha on 31 July, 202503.2023 
 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 July, 202503 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 


iii 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                                   (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                                 (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION-ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I Report 1 
Chapter - II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
15 
Chapter-  III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
36 
Chapter-  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee 
37 
Chapter-  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government is still awaited 
38 
                             ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.07.2025  39 
                             APPENDIX  
 Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the     
Recommendations contained in the Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs’ 
 42 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri T. Mathivanan Deputy Secretary 
   

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been authorized by 
the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report on action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Committee 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs. 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha / laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
06 December, 2024.  The Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were 
received from Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 05 March, 2025. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29 July, 
2025.       
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee is given in the Appendix. 
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                                
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Finance deals with action taken by 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 3rd Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha / laid in Rajya Sabha on 06th December, 2024. 
 
2.  The Action Taken Notes were received from Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 05th 
March, 2025.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the 07 recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
analyzed and categorized as follows: 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7     
         (Total - 07) 
(Chapter- II) 
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
            (Total -NIL) 
(Chapter- III) 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
         (Total -NIL) 
 (Chapter- IV) 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies by the 
Government are still awaited: 
         (Total -NIL) 
(Chapter- V) 
 
3.  The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 

2 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) 
4. The Committee note that the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) has 
completed more than twenty years since its establishment in July 2003. The SFIO was 
accorded statutory status under the Companies Act, 2013 in 2015, a move necessitated 
by the major failures of non-banking financial institutions and stock market scams. The 
Committee observe that over the years, the budgetary allocation for SFIO has seen a 
gradual increase, with a downward jump in the Budget Estimates (BE) from Rs. 54.92 
crore in 2023-24 to Rs. 43.01 crore in 2024-25, reflecting the growing responsibilities of 
the SFIO. 
 The Committee further note that the SFIO faces significant vacancies, with 116 of 
its 238 sanctioned posts unfilled. Despite efforts to recruit, 43 posts remain for deputation 
and 27 for direct recruitment, slowing its capacity to handle investigations. Additionally, 
the SFIO has a backlog of cases, with 74 pending as of October 2024, and the average 
age of pending complaints is alarmingly high at 184 months, indicating delayed 
resolutions. 
 The Committee recognize that despite these challenges, the SFIO has achieved 
374 successful prosecutions out of 511 disposed complaints, with a conviction rate of 
73.2%.The Ministry is improving performance through upgrades to the Computer 
Forensic Data Mining Lab (CFDML), enhancements to the Summon & Notice 
Management System (SNMS), and the creation of panels for CA firms and legal counsel 
to assist with investigations. 
 Given these circumstances, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
expedite the process of filling all vacant posts within SFIO within the current financial year. 
The Committee feel that the enhancement in budget should be fully utilized towards this 
goal. Moreover, the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that by the next financial year, 

3 
 
all sanctioned positions in SFIO are filled. The Committee believe that this will enable the 
SFIO to handle its growing caseload more efficiently and expedite the resolution of 
pending cases, thus strengthening its role in combating financial fraud and white-collar 
crimes. The Committee hope that with a fully staffed workforce and upgraded 
technological infrastructure, the SFIO will be better positioned to meet its growing 
mandate and deliver timely results in the coming years. 
 
5. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has furnished the 
following written submission:- 
“SFIO has a sanctioned strength of 238, out of which 134 are filled up at present. 
Filling up of vacant positions is an ongoing process as the vacant posts are required 
to be filled on repatriation of officers on completion of deputation tenure. 
Accordingly, advertisements to fill vacant posts on deputation (ISTC basis) are 
issued from time to time.  Rigorous efforts are being made to fill up the remaining 
vacant posts as under: 
A. For posts under Direct recruitment: 
1. UPSC has recommended 12 officers [Assistant Director (CL). Offer of 
appointment has been issued to the candidates and 5 have already joined 
this office and the remaining are in the process. 
2. UPSC has also recommended 12 officers (Prosecutors) for which issuance 
of offer of appointment is under process. 
3. Action is also in progress to fill 05 posts [02 posts of AD (Banking) and 03 
posts of AD (CL) through UPSC. 
4. Requisition to fill 04 posts of Stenographers and 01 post of Assistant has 
already been submitted to SSC through MCA. 
B. For positions under Deputation (ISTC): 
1. 14 officers have already been recommended for appointment on 
deputation basis and offer letters have been issued to the candidates. 7 
have joined office till date. 

4 
 
2. Interviews have already been conducted for 05 posts on deputation and 
the follow up action is being taken.” 
6. The Committee appreciate the Ministry's proactive commitment to tackling 
the persistent staffing shortages within the Serious Fraud Investigation Office 
(SFIO). The Committee observe the Ministry's earnest efforts, including leveraging 
UPSC recommendations for critical roles like Assistant Directors and Prosecutors, 
submitting formal requisitions to the Staff Selection Commission, and actively 
pursuing deputation-based appointments. These initiatives are a clear signal of the 
Ministry's dedication to addressing the significant deficit of 104 vacant positions 
out of a sanctioned strength of 238. However, despite these commendable 
procedural advancements, the Committee note with concern that the current 
recruitment trajectory, while active, isn't meeting expectations for a timely and 
comprehensive workforce augmentation within the SFIO. The very nature of 
"ongoing processes" for deputation-based roles inherently creates a perpetual 
state of organizational flux, posing a consistent challenge to achieving and 
maintaining a full staff complement. This protracted timeline for filling a substantial 
proportion of the remaining vacancies significantly hinders the SFIO's core 
capacity to judiciously manage its burgeoning investigative caseload and 
efficiently resolve complex financial malfeasance. This issue is particularly 
pressing given the alarming average age of pending complaints, which currently 
languishes at 184 months. 
The Committee stress the critical need for a more decisive and agile 
approach to rapidly fill the SFIO's formidable human capital vacancies. This 
necessitates a time-bound, comprehensive recruitment drive encompassing both 

5 
 
direct hiring and deputation. For mission-critical roles, a judicious balance 
between deputation and direct recruitment is paramount to ensure continuity and 
preserve institutional memory, thereby significantly enhancing the SFIO's capacity 
to combat sophisticated financial fraud and white-collar crime with increased 
alacrity and prosecutorial rigor. 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) Authority 
7. The Committee observe that the Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) 
Authority, established under Section 125 of the Companies Act, 2013, has made 
significant strides in investor education, awareness, and protection. However, it faces 
challenges, including unfilled vacancies, underutilization of allocated funds, and a growing 
backlog of claims, which hinder its ability to perform optimally. The Committee note that 
as of 2024-25, 15 vacant posts remain unfilled out of 29 sanctioned positions, significantly 
limiting the Authority’s capacity to manage claims and ensure timely refunds. Despite 
increasing claim filings, with 55,032 claims submitted in 2023-24, the number of pending 
claims has surged to 43,226. The Committee further note that the allocated budget for 
2023-24, which stood at ₹9.13 crore, was not fully utilized, with only ₹8.17 crore being 
spent due to staffing constraints and slow administrative processes. For 2024-25, the 
Ministry requested ₹11.11 crore in BE, but only ₹7.70 crore was allocated due to overall 
budget reductions. Consequently, ₹11.07 crore is being sought in RE 2024-25 to address 
funding gaps. The Committee feel that he underutilization of allocated funds for 2023-24 
and the reduction in budget allocation for 2024-25 due to staffing issues and budget cuts 
raises concerns about efficient fund utilization and the potential impact on Ministerial 
operations. 
 The Committee recognize that the IEPF Authority has successfully implemented 
various awareness programs, holding over 85,000 events to promote investor literacy. 
However, the Committee feel with the high rate of claim rejections and delays in the claims 
process, there remains considerable scope for improvement. In light of these challenges, 
the Committee recommend the following: 

6 
 
(1) Fill the 15 vacant posts by the end of this financial year and ensure all positions 
are filled by the next year, while optimizing fund utilization to effectively manage 
claims and enhance investor education. 
(2) Prioritize IT integration across MCA21, NSDL/CDSL, and PFMS to automate 
claims processing, reduce delays, and ensure faster, accurate refunds by next 
financial year. 
(3)  Revise the claims rejection process, as 30,884 claims were rejected in 2023-
24. Ensuring thorough verification before rejection will reduce avoidable 
rejections and increase transparency. 
(4) Enhance the investor support by providing clearer documentation guidelines 
and improving access to claim resources. Collecting additional data on claim 
types and demographics will help tailor support initiatives to better meet 
investor needs. 
(5)  Evaluate international innovative best practices and strategies from leading 
international benchmarks. By assessing and adopting relevant strategies that 
align with India's regulatory environment, the Ministry can strengthen and 
enhance the efficiency of the country's investor protection ecosystem. 
8. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has furnished the 
following written submission: 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(1)] 
“There are 29 sanctioned posts in the Authority which are filled up either 
through deputation (20) or on regular basis (09). Out of 29 posts, 16 (09 on 
deputation and 07 on regular basis) officers/officials are in place. However, to 
compensate the shortage of staff in IEPFA 03 ICLS officers (2-DD & 1-AD) have 
been temporarily posted on loan basis. In order to reduce pendency, 8 ICLS 
officers were given on loan basis for a period of 3 months from January 2025 as a 
special case. 
Out of 29 sanctioned posts, 16 posts are filled up and 13 posts are vacant. 
The detail of 13 vacant post are as under: 

7 
 
(As on 17.02.2025) 
Name of the Post Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled Vacant 
Dy. General Manager 3 2 1 
Sr. Accounts Officer 
(Encadred)** 
2 1 1 
Public Relation Officer 1 0 1 
Private Secretary 1 0 1 
Asstt. Manager 4 0 4 
Personal Asstt. 1 0 1 
Sr. Accountant/ Accountant 
(Encadered)** 
1 0 1 
Sr. Secretariat Asstt. 1 0 1 
Stenographer 2 1 1 
Jr. Secretariat Asstt. 1 0 1 
For the 06 posts of PS/PA/Steno/SSA/JSA, open vacancy circular was 
published on 24.06.2019, 21.10.2019 and 19.02.2021. However, due to non-
availability of applications only one post of Stenographer could be filled up while 
other 05 posts remained vacant. 
For the 01 post of DGM, vacancy circular was published on 06.09.2024, 
however due to non-receipt of application, the post remained vacant. 
For the 05 posts of PRO/ Asstt Manager, vacancy circular was published 
on 05.09.2024, however due to non-receipt of application, the posts remained 
vacant. 
The issue of filling up the vacant en-cadred posts of 01 Sr. Accounts Officer 
and 01 Accountant/Sr. Accountant has again been taken up with the O/o Chief 
Controller of Accounts, M/o Corporate Affairs on 07.01.2025 and 24.01.2025.” 
 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(2)] 
“Integration of claim system with depositories (NSDL/CDSL) and PFMS is 
being undertaken through MCA21. Search module to enable investors to search 
shares and amount transferred by companies to IEPF has been developed and 
deployed in Beta. 

8 
 
The rules, processes and procedure for claim refund from IEPF has been 
reviewed and various relaxations have been provided. The new forms under IEPF 
rules have been notified and deployed under MCA 21. Number of forms required 
to be filed by companies have been reduced from 5 to 3 and transfer to IEPF fund 
has been linked directly to Bharatkosh.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(3)] 
“The claims are closed as rejected only when they are rejected by 
companies. The Authority relies on the companies for entitlement of the claimant 
as complete information is available only with the companies. In cases where 
verification report is not received from companies, various reminders are sent to 
the claimants and companies before closing such claim applications after 
statutory timelimit of 75 days as per rule 7(3) of IEPFA(AATR) Rules.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(4)] 
“The Ministry has prescribed clear and uniform documentation 
requirements as Schedules to IEPFA (AATR) Rules. 
Similarly, Procedure to be followed while disposing the claims is 
prescribed under the rules. Additional data on claim types is proposed to be 
collected in the new integrated portal.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(5)] 
 
“No such evaluation has been carried out in respect of IEPF so far. 
However, the suggestion of the Committee has been noted please.”  
9. The Committee note the Ministry of Corporate Affairs' (MCA) detailed 
elucidation of the Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) Authority's 
current operational status and its significant strides in IT integration. The beta 
deployment of a search module, the streamlining of claim rules, the introduction of 
new MCA21 forms, and the direct linkage of fund transfers to Bharatkosh are 

9 
 
positive advancements that align with the Committee's recommendation for 
automation and expedited, accurate refunds enhancing operational efficiency. 
The Committee, however, express reservations regarding several critical 
areas. First, the persistent vacancy of 13 out of 29 sanctioned posts within the 
IEPFA, despite repeated vacancy circulars, highlights a systemic challenge in 
attracting qualified personnel, hindering the IEPFA’s optimal functioning. Second, 
the Ministry’s approach to the claims rejection process, which relies on companies 
for entitlement verification fundamentally abdicates the IEPFA's independent 
oversight role, raising serious concerns about the integrity and fairness of a 
process that yielded 30,884 rejections in 2023-24. This delegation of critical 
verification to the very entities against whom claims are lodged creates a potential 
conflict of interest and contravenes the spirit of investor protection and 
transparency. Lastly, the Ministry's candid admission that "no such evaluation has 
been carried out in respect of IEPF so far" regarding international best practices 
indicates a disheartening absence of proactive strategic foresight, which is 
indispensable for fortifying India's investor protection paradigm against evolving 
global standards. Therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry to formulate a 
comprehensive recruitment strategy to fill all vacant IEPFA posts at the earliest; 
immediately reform the claims rejection protocol to vest greater independent 
verification authority within IEPFA; and mandate a time-bound, rigorous evaluation 
of international best practices in investor protection for strategic assimilation in 
the Indian context. 
  

10 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) 
10. The Committee acknowledge the critical role of NCLT in expediting corporate 
dispute resolution and enhancing the ease of doing business. Since its inception in 2016, 
NCLT has made significant strides, disposing of 86,828 cases by August 2024.However, 
the Committee note that the backlog of 19,969 cases highlights persistent challenges in 
addressing procedural delays, infrastructure constraints, and manpower shortages. The 
Committee observe that he average time for case disposal, particularly for insolvency 
resolution and liquidation, remains concerning, with delays undermining the tribunal’s 
efficiency and the broader objective of swift corporate dispute resolution. 
 The Committee further note that Budget allocations for the NCLT have steadily 
increased from ₹52.15 crore in 2019-20 to ₹89.36 crore in 2022-23 but have seen a 
marginal reduction in BE to ₹89.31 crore in 2024-25, potentially limiting operational 
enhancements. The Committee note that manpower shortages remain critical, with 238 
regular posts abolished due to recruitment delays but revived in 2023. While recruitment 
for 100 additional members is underway, the tribunal’s demand for 729 posts highlights 
significant gaps. The Committee feel that reliance on contractual staff, though helpful, 
cannot replace the need for a permanent workforce. The Committee have observed that 
infrastructure challenges further exacerbate delays. Despite the implementation of E-
Courts and hybrid hearings across 16 benches, physical infrastructure gaps and 
incomplete digital integration hinder optimal performance. The Committee feel that the 
Ministry’s plan to establish an integrated IT platform and expand benches is promising, 
but timely execution is essential. To address these issues comprehensively, the 
Committee strongly recommend the following: 
(1) Expedite the filling of all revived and sanctioned posts within the current 
financial year. Proactive steps are needed to streamline the recruitment 
process for additional posts to ensure adequate staffing levels. 
(2)  Procedural rules tailored to NCLT’s role under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (IBC) should be finalized and implemented swiftly. Training programs 

11 
 
and regular colloquiums for tribunal members can further reduce procedural 
delays and improve case management. 
(3) The Ministry should prioritize the development of the integrated IT platform and 
address physical infrastructure gaps. These upgrades are vital for improving 
case processing times and ensuring transparency in tribunal operations. 
(4) Allocated funds must be fully utilized, with emphasis on recruitment, 
infrastructure development, and technology integration. The reduction in BE 
for 2024-25 should not impede these critical objectives. 
(5)  The Ministry should establish a performance monitoring mechanism to track 
pendency and disposal rates, enabling timely interventions to clear backlogs 
and improve resolution timelines. The Ministry should also maintain data with 
respect to average time taken for resolution process. 
(6) The Committee recommend adopting a mechanism under NCLT to count 
additional applications within the same case separately to avoid inflating the 
number of pending cases, ensuring a more accurate reflection of the case 
backlog. 
 The Committee believe that addressing these challenges systematically, the NCLT 
will be better positioned to fulfill its mandate of expeditious corporate dispute resolution, 
thereby contributing to economic growth and the ease of doing business in India. 
 
11. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has furnished the 
following written submission:- 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(1)] 
“NCLT is continuously advertising for all the deputation posts, the response 
from prospective Deputationists remains tepid due to which NCLT is unable to fill 
these posts. Further, on multiple occasions, the selected candidates have also 
failed to join due to which the post remains unfilled.” 
 

12 
 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(2)] 
“Draft Adjudicating Authority Rules are under finalization in the Ministry. 
Regular Colloquiums are being held for capacity building of Members to ensure 
speedier and uniform judicial delivery system. Induction training programmers are 
held for newly appointed Members.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(3)] 
“The Draft RFP (Request for Proposal) for selection of Consultancy 
Firm/Agency for Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) as well as selection of System 
Integrator for the implementation of Project “iPIE” is underway.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(4)] 
“The funds allocated to NCLT are being utilized optimally considering the 
requirements of NCLT. Rs. 112.4671 Crores has been allocated to NCLT under 
RE 2024-25. 
The Ministry is providing adequate funds for the infrastructure development 
of NCLT from time to time as per their requirements. Recently 4 new ‘state of the 
art’ courts have been made for NCLT in Kolkata, however, the shifting is stalled 
due to an ongoing stay on shifting based on the petition filed by NCLT Bar 
Association. Similarly, a ‘state of the art’ court was constructed in the CGO 
Complex, Delhi, which had to be abandoned due to orders of the Delhi High Court, 
again based on a petition of the NCLT Bar Association.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(5)] 
“The Ministry is working on developing iPIE system, which will incorporate 
an advanced API mediation layer that will sever as a crucial bridge for seamless 
data exchange among various systems and subsystems within the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) ecosystem. This mediation layer will facilitate efficient 
communication with individual systems, including NCLT/NCLAT e-Courts, IBBI 
web application, NeSL, iPIE, MCA 21 and other external systems. Adopting a 
comprehensive, end-to-end technology platform for the insolvency and Bankruptcy 

13 
 
Code (IBC) ecosystem would streamline operations across the entire IBC 
spectrum-from debt and default filing to the resolution plan’s execution. By offering 
a single source of truth, it would empower the National Company Law Tribunal 
(NCLT) to make faster and more informed decisions, ultimately leading to quicker 
resolutions and improved outcomes. This initiative would not only enhancing 
efficiency and transparency in the insolvency proceeding but also empower the 
Ministry to monitor the insolvency matters to identify the bottlenecks and resolve 
them accordingly.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(6)] 
“Additional applications” or interlocutory Applications in case are not 
considered as a separate case. There is no inflation in the number of pending 
cases by NCLT on account of the same.” 
12. The Committee note the Ministry of Corporate Affairs' (MCA) detailed 
response concerning the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the ongoing 
efforts to address staffing and infrastructural challenges. The Ministry highlights 
persistent difficulties in filling deputation posts due to a "tepid response" from 
applicants, alongside ongoing training initiatives for NCLT Members and progress 
on the "iPIE" integrated IT platform. While funds are stated to be "utilized optimally" 
with substantial allocations for infrastructure, recent court construction projects 
have faced unfortunate legal impasses. 
However, the Committee find that the Ministry's reply largely reiterates the 
status quo and lacks substantive, actionable strategies to resolve the identified 
systemic deficiencies. The continued reliance on deputation and the absence of a 
concrete, time-bound plan to fully staff the NCLT (including the 729 sanctioned 
posts) remain critical concerns, undermining the Tribunal's capacity to address its 
alarming case backlog. Similarly, while IT integration is progressing, its full 

14 
 
operationalization lacks definitive timelines, and the Ministry's handling of physical 
infrastructure impediments appears reactive rather than proactively strategic. The 
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to implement an accelerated, 
time-bound recruitment strategy for all NCLT vacancies; expedite the finalization 
of Adjudicatory Authority Rules for IBC; provide firm timelines for full-scale 
development and ubiquitous deployment of the "iPIE" integrated IT platform which 
is imperative recognizing its pivotal role in real-time monitoring and expedited case 
processing; and establish a robust, transparent performance monitoring 
mechanism to ensure the NCLT can effectively fulfill its mandate of expeditious 
corporate dispute resolution. 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
   
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION 
The scrutiny of the budgetary allocations and expenditures of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs (MCA) reveals concerning trends of underutilization and variance in 
fund management. For example, in FY 2022-23, the BE were set at ₹733.02 crore, which 
was subsequently revised down to ₹630.36 crore at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage. 
However, the actual expenditure was only ₹568.69 crore, representing just 90.21% of the 
R.E. This led to surrender of an amount of ₹161.47 crore, which included a technical 
surrender of ₹102.66 crore, with the actual surrender standing at ₹58.81 crore. Similarly, 
in FY 2023-24, while the BE was set at ₹756.19 crore, the RE was reduced to ₹617.43 
crore, and the actual expenditure was ₹590.84 crore (95.69% of the RE). Ministry has 
informed that delays in contractual obligations, postponement of key initiatives, unfilled 
positions and the non-receipt of expected bills from the vendors in the last month of FY 
2022-23contributed to this underutilization. 
 The Committee observe that such trends of unrealistic budget formulation, erratic 
downward revision at the RE stage, and consistent underutilization of funds highlight 
inefficiencies in the budget-making and expenditure-monitoring processes of the MCA. 
The Committee feel these issues not only undermine the Ministry's ability to achieve its 
stated objectives but also result in the blocking of scarce public resources. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the following corrective measures to arrest this trend: 
• The ministry should undertake a thorough review of its past expenditure 
pattern and project funds requirement more accurately to avoid overestimation 
at the BE stage. 
• A robust system should be established to periodically monitor the pace of 
expenditure and ensure timely implementation of the projects. 

16 
 
• Efforts must be made to ensure that contractual obligations are fulfilled on time, 
key programs such as CSR awards and research activities are implemented 
as scheduled and vacancies in attached offices are filled without delay. 
• The delays in vendor bill submissions must be addressed by instituting 
streamlined processes and clean timelines for compliance. 
 The Committee expect the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to implement these 
measures earnestly. 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  
In this regard, it is submitted that efforts are being made to ensure that contractual 
obligations are fulfilled on time. Most of the procurements in the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs are being done through the GeM portal wherein timelines for submission of bills 
and payment are clearly specified. However, the bills of the vendor providing Services 
under MCA-21 project have remained unpaid because of non-fulfilling of contractual 
obligations by the Vendor. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Prime Minister’s Internship Scheme (PMIS) 
The Committee commend the ambitious vision of the PMIS, which aims to provide 
internships to 1 crore youth over five years with an estimated expenditure of ₹63,000 
crore. The pilot phase, targeting 1.25 lakh internships in FY 2024-25, successfully 
integrates skill development, financial assistance, insurance coverage, and transparent 
processes through the PMIS portal, demonstrating a commendable effort to empower 
youth and bridge the skills gap. 
 The Committee observe the allocated ₹2,000 crores in the BE and ₹380 crores in 
the RE for FY 2024-25. These funds suffice for the pilot phase, but dynamic reassessment 

17 
 
of financial needs is crucial for scaling up. While these features are commendable, 
challenges persist regarding inclusivity, monitoring, stakeholder participation, and post-
internship outcomes, impacting overall budget efficiency.   
 The committee feel that Scheme’s Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning (MEL) 
framework is pivotal for transparency and timely corrections. The Committee observe that 
collaboration with top 500 companies through CSR funding is a key strength, yet broader 
engagement with SMEs, Startups, and regional stakeholders is essential to ensure 
inclusive sectoral and geographic representation. The digital portal and multilingual 
outreach enhance accessibility but require targeted campaigns for remote areas. Risks 
such as misuse by companies and inadequate internship oversight must be mitigated to 
safeguard outcomes and there should be a mechanism to keep a check on it. 
 The Committee also believe that addressing the challenges faced by candidates 
from remote or underserved regions is crucial for ensuring equitable access to 
internships. The committee feel without adequate support for living expenses, these 
candidates may be unable to participate, thereby hindering the program's inclusivity and 
its potential to attract a diverse pool of talent. 
 The Committee also note that two key provisions of the scheme's eligibility criteria 
exclude candidates if any of their family member earns over ₹8 lakh or is a regular 
government employee. The committee find that the blanket exclusion of regular 
government employee families unwarranted, as many earn below ₹8 lakh and may need 
support under the scheme. The Committee strongly recommend revising the criteria to 
focus solely on the ₹8 lakh income limit, eliminating the exclusion of permanent/regular 
government employees to make the scheme more inclusive and equitable. 
 The Committee further recommend that host companies align training programs 
with industry skill requirements to ensure interns are industry-ready. The Committee urge 
periodic independent evaluations for transparency and suggest relaxing eligibility norms 
for marginalized and economically weaker candidates to enhance inclusivity. While the 
scheme is in its pilot phase, the Committee emphasize that the internship-to-employment 
conversion rate should be a key success indicator. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend establishing a robust system to monitor and track this metric, ensuring the 
program effectively creates career opportunities and aligns with industry demands. 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Committee have been noted please. 
Keeping in mind the volume and complex nature of the PMIS, a Pilot Project was 
launched as a pivotal phase that would allow for testing concepts, strategies and systems 
before a full-scale implementation. Based on the feedback received and evaluation of 
outcomes during the implementation of the Pilot Project, lessons drawn shall be collated 
by the Ministry. The suggestions of the Committee shall be included in the above exercise. 
The same will be factored in after due consideration while rolling out the first phase of the 
PM Internship Scheme, as announced in the Budget 2024-25.  
However, it may be noted that engagement with MSMEs, Start Ups and other 
regional stakeholders is permitted under the present guidelines wherein companies are 
allowed to offer internship opportunities in organizations/ companies in their value chain.  
Further, in order to make an outreach across different geographical locations apart from 
an ongoing social media campaign, a targeted IEC campaign in the field has also been 
undertaken by MCA in partnership with State Governments and educational institutions. 
In the month of February 2025 itself more than 67 campaigns have been held in about 50 
districts of the country, particularly, those having the maximum number of internship 
opportunities.   
Further, it may be noted that a Monitoring and Steering Committee (MSC) headed 
by the Secretary, Corporate Affairs has been constituted to oversee the implementation, 
operations, design and other aspects of the Pilot Project of the PM Internship Scheme. 
The MSC has representation also from other Ministries/ Departments and representatives 
from the industry. The MSC is empowered to periodically review the progress of PMIS 
and recommend changes at the policy level to align with stakeholders’ requirements and 
evolving priorities.  Meanwhile, the Ministry is carrying out concurrent evaluation of the 
scheme, through a feedback Survey being carried out by the following institutes:- 
·         Indian Institute of Management- Bangalore (IIM-B)- Southern Region 
·         Delhi School of Economics (DSE)- Northern Region 
·         Symbiosis Institute of Business Management (SIBM)-Western Region 
·         Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA)- Eastern Region  

19 
 
 
A dashboard has also been prepared to regularly monitor and evaluate progress 
and end-to-end implementation across all fronts. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
MCA21 e-Governance Project 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Corporate Affairs has implemented the 
MCA21 e-Governance project to provide stakeholders with a secure, user-friendly 
platform for corporate compliance and service delivery. The launch of MCA21 Version 
3.0, incorporating advanced technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine 
Learning (ML), is a commendable step toward aligning with international benchmarks and 
enhancing the Ease of Doing Business (EoDB). However, the Committee observe several 
persistent issues that need attention. One significant concern is the constant 
underutilization of funds, attributed to delays in service delivery and other project 
setbacks. The Committee note that the Ministry has acknowledged this issue, but further 
efforts are necessary to ensure timely project execution and optimal resource allocation. 
 The Committee note that data discrepancy has emerged as a critical issue, with 
instances reported where companies, after filling out their details, encountered data from 
other entities upon downloading forms. This not only poses significant privacy and 
confidentiality risks but also erodes stakeholder confidence in the system’s reliability. 
 The Committee further note that the absence of a comprehensive desktop and 
mobile application limits accessibility and convenience, particularly for stakeholders 
requiring mobility and offline capabilities. The Committee feel that International best 
practices underscore the need for robust and secure digital solutions, and the Committee 
are of the opinion that developing a full-fledged MCA21 application is essential for India 
to match global standards. Such an application should include offline form-filling with 
seamless synchronization, real-time issue reporting, biometric authentication, and 
comprehensive access to all eForms. 

20 
 
 To address the pressing issue of data discrepancies, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry to adopt an advanced data validation mechanisms using technologies like 
Blockchain to ensure secure and tamper-proof data handling. The committee believe that 
a robust audit trail should be implemented to identify and rectify inconsistencies promptly, 
along with regular third-party security audits to safeguard data integrity. Establishing an 
efficient feedback and grievance redressal mechanism will further enable swift resolution 
of discrepancies. 
 The Committee further recommend that the Ministry prioritize system upgrades, 
stakeholder training, and vendor accountability to improve the platform’s functionality and 
user trust. The Committee urge the Ministry that adequate resources and expertise must 
be allocated to establish MCA21 as a global model of e-Governance, ensuring seamless 
compliance, enhanced privacy, and fostering corporate growth. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MCA21, launched in 2006 under the National e-Governance Mission, has 
undergone three iterations. The current phase (MCA21 Version 3.0) aims to strengthen 
enforcement, promote Ease of Doing Business, and enhance user experience. There 
have been some issues with service delivery, but the Ministry is actively monitoring the 
project's progress and ensuring vendor compliance with contractual terms. 
MCA21 V3 has introduced web based filing that further improves the quality of data 
using real time validation. However, since filing in MCA21 is based on Digital Signature 
of Stakeholders, these are to be made through a Desktop/Laptop. MCA21 V3 has 
introduced a mobile app in September 2024 on Apple and Google play store offering 
features like dashboard, master data checks, and filing status. An offline utility for annual 
filing forms is under development. 
MCA V3 contract envisages regular Audits of the critical aspects of the project. In 
addition, MCA also undertakes audits as per the directions of MeITY from time to time.  
MCA21 is one of the flagship projects of Government of India that facilitates Ease 
of Doing Business and Corporate Governance in India. The Ministry is regularly 
undertaking meetings with stakeholders to address their grievances. Regular meetings 

21 
 
are held with the Service Provider and Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) team to ensure 
quality of service delivery. MCA provides a complaint redressal facility through its portal, 
including the ability to track complaints and reopen them for review. There are also efforts 
to improve system efficiency and user satisfaction, including direct user feedback and 
interactions via social media platforms like X. 
MCA offers user awareness sessions, webinars, and online training, supported by 
instruction kits and FAQs. A live chat support system is available for query resolution, and 
the ‘Corporate Seva Kendra’ assists users with additional support. Infrastructure 
improvements are being made to handle high traffic during peak filing periods. 
Overall, the Ministry is committed to ensuring the successful implementation of 
MCA21 V3, addressing issues as they arise, and continually improving the platform's 
functionality and user experience. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) 
The Committee note that the Serious Fraud Investigation Office (SFIO) has 
completed more than twenty years since its establishment in July 2003. The SFIO was 
accorded statutory status under the Companies Act, 2013 in 2015, a move necessitated 
by the major failures of non-banking financial institutions and stock market scams. The 
Committee observe that over the years, the budgetary allocation for SFIO has seen a 
gradual increase, with a downward jump in the Budget Estimates (BE) from Rs. 54.92 
crore in 2023-24 to Rs. 43.01 crore in 2024-25, reflecting the growing responsibilities of 
the SFIO. 
 The Committee further note that the SFIO faces significant vacancies, with 116 of 
its 238 sanctioned posts unfilled. Despite efforts to recruit, 43 posts remain for deputation 
and 27 for direct recruitment, slowing its capacity to handle investigations. Additionally, 
the SFIO has a backlog of cases, with 74 pending as of October 2024, and the average 

22 
 
age of pending complaints is alarmingly high at 184 months, indicating delayed 
resolutions. 
 The Committee recognize that despite these challenges, the SFIO has achieved 
374 successful prosecutions out of 511 disposed complaints, with a conviction rate of 
73.2%.The Ministry is improving performance through upgrades to the Computer 
Forensic Data Mining Lab (CFDML), enhancements to the Summon & Notice 
Management System (SNMS), and the creation of panels for CA firms and legal counsel 
to assist with investigations. 
 Given these circumstances, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
expedite the process of filling all vacant posts within SFIO within the current financial year. 
The Committee feel that the enhancement in budget should be fully utilized towards this 
goal. Moreover, the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that by the next financial year, 
all sanctioned positions in SFIO are filled. The Committee believe that this will enable the 
SFIO to handle its growing caseload more efficiently and expedite the resolution of 
pending cases, thus strengthening its role in combating financial fraud and white-collar 
crimes. The Committee hope that with a fully staffed workforce and upgraded 
technological infrastructure, the SFIO will be better positioned to meet its growing 
mandate and deliver timely results in the coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
SFIO has a sanctioned strength of 238, out of which 134 are filled up at present. 
Filling up of vacant positions is an ongoing process as the vacant posts are required to 
be filled on repatriation of officers on completion of deputation tenure. Accordingly, 
advertisements to fill vacant posts on deputation (ISTC basis) are issued from time to 
time.  Rigorous efforts are being made to fill up the remaining vacant posts as under: 
A. For posts under Direct recruitment: 
1. UPSC has recommended 12 officers [Assistant Director (CL). Offer of 
appointment has been issued to the candidates and 5 have already joined 
this office and the remaining are in the process. 

23 
 
2. UPSC has also recommended 12 officers (Prosecutors) for which issuance 
of offer of appointment is under process. 
3. Action is also in progress to fill 05 posts [02 posts of AD (Banking) and 03 
posts of AD (CL) through UPSC. 
4. Requisition to fill 04 posts of Stenographers and 01 post of Assistant has 
already been submitted to SSC through MCA. 
B. For positions under Deputation (ISTC): 
1. 14 officers have already been recommended for appointment on 
deputation basis and offer letters have been issued to the candidates. 7 
have joined office till date. 
2. Interviews have already been conducted for 05 posts on deputation and 
the follow up action is being taken. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 6 of Chapter I) 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 
 The Committee acknowledge that the implementation of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code (IBC) has made significant strides in improving the resolution of 
distressed corporate assets in India. Over the years, the IBC has not only enhanced credit 
discipline but also facilitated a transparent and efficient resolution process, underscoring 
its role in fostering economic stability. The recovery of over ₹3.5 lakh crore for creditors 
exemplifies the success of the Code in achieving its primary objective. Furthermore, the 
IBC has enabled the revival of unproductive assets, turning them into productive 
contributors to the economy, which is a testament to its far-reaching impact. However, 
the Committee observe persistent challenges hinder its full effectiveness. Notably, 535 
investigations and 166 show-cause notices against Resolution Professionals (RPs) 
highlight competence and conduct issues, and nearly 64% of CIRPs exceed the statutory 
330-day limit, causing delays. The Committee note that the lack of clarity on Government 

24 
 
creditors' claims and issues around stakeholder representation further dilute the Code’s 
efficiency. The Committee feel that the rising costs of CIRPs and frequent litigation by 
stakeholders exacerbate delays, frustrating the intended outcomes of the IBC. The 
Committee observe that delays in the insolvency resolution process, particularly at the 
stage of admission and adjudication at the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), 
remain a significant bottleneck. The Committee note that despite the IBC's intent to 
ensure time-bound resolutions, the average timeframes for resolving cases have been 
increasing steadily. These delays not only impact the recovery value for creditors but also 
affect the confidence of stakeholders in the efficiency of the insolvency framework. The 
committee, therefore, believe that addressing procedural inefficiencies and capacity 
constraints in adjudication is critical to achieving the IBC's objective of expeditious and 
effective resolution. To address these challenges, the Committee recommend the 
following: 
(1) Establish fast track tribunals with strict timelines for high priority cases.  
(2) Ministry should consider adopting an urgent list system for insolvency cases, 
similar to the UK, to prioritize time-sensitive matters. Additionally, allowing the 
appointment of resolution professionals outside of courts can help reduce 
delays and streamline the process for quicker resolutions. 
(3)  The Committee recommend introducing a provision under the IBC, similar to 
Article 226(3) of the Constitution, to mandate the processing of applications 
within 14 days. This will help address excessive delays, which currently extend 
to over two years, and ensure timely resolution of cases. 
(4) Enhance RPs standards with rigorous certification, specialized training, and 
independent performance reviews, particularly for high-stakes cases. A dual 
oversight system involving IBBI and external experts can improve RP 
regulation. 
(5) Explore PPP models to improve judicial processes, drawing on the success of 
privatized Seva Kendras. Private investments in technology can modernize 
infrastructure and enhance case resolution speed. 
(6) Ensure NCLT members and adjudicating bodies possess specialized 
knowledge, as highlighted in the Supreme Court’s Finolex Industries case, for 
better decision-making in complex insolvency cases. 

25 
 
(7) Provide clearer guidelines on the treatment of government dues, especially 
taxes and penalties, ensuring equitable and transparent resolution of 
government claims. 
 (8) By addressing delays, competency gaps, and broadening stakeholder 
engagement, along with leveraging technology and domain expertise, the IBC can 
further enhance its impact on India’s economy, ensuring faster resolutions and 
boosting investor confidence. 
Reply of the Government 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(1)] 
In the Union Budget of FY 2024-25, the Government has announced that 
appropriate changes to the IBC, reforms and strengthening of the tribunal and appellate 
tribunals will be initiated to speed up insolvency resolution. Additional tribunals will be 
established. Out of those, some will be notified to decide cases exclusively under the 
Companies Act. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(2)] 
The proposed Adjudicating Authority (AA) Rules have provisions for priority listing 
of cases.The Resolution Professionals are recommended by the creditor and approved 
by NCLT at the time of admission. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(3)] 
The IBC provides timelines for the adjudication of applications. Under Section 7(4), 
the Adjudicating Authority (AA) has to ascertain the existence of default within 14 days of 
receiving an application from a financial creditor. Section 9(5) provides for applications by 
operational creditors and Section 10 provides for applications by corporate debtors, 
requiring the AA to either admit or reject applications within 14 days based on specified 
criteria. The Code also requires the AA to record its reasons in writing if it fails to ascertain 
default and pass orders within the prescribed timeline. 

26 
 
However, the Hon’ble Supreme Court, in Surendra Trading Company vs. 
JuggilalKamlapat Jute Mills Company Ltd., has clarified that these 14-day timelines 
prescribed in the Code are directory in nature rather than mandatory. 
The Court observed that “we are of the view that the judgments cited by the NCLAT 
and the principle contained therein applied while deciding that period of fourteen days 
within which the adjudicating authority has to pass the order is not mandatory but directory 
in nature would equally apply while interpreting proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 7, 
Section 9 or sub-section (4) of Section 10 as well.” 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(4)] 
Skill upgradation of the professionals by IBBI is a continuous process. The IBBI, 
Regulator under the Code, actively engages with IPs through diverse formats such as 
advocacy programmes, workshops, webinars, and specialised training sessions, focusing 
on both foundational and advanced aspects of insolvency practice. 
Efforts to augment IPs' expertise include workshops targeting niche areas of 
insolvency, alongside encouraging Insolvency Professionals Agencies (IPAs) to offer 
similar educational opportunities. Through Indian and international experts, Training-of-
Trainersprogramme, aimed at expanding the pool of knowledgeable professionals within 
the insolvency ecosystem, are being organised regularly. 
IBBI and IPAs, independently as well as in consultation have been issuing 
communications facilitating conduct of process by an IP, issuing best practices on 
recurrent complex issues and releasing publications for guidance of the IPs and other 
stakeholders. The IPAs are also including case studies of large cases in their pre-
registration education course and CPE programmes. 
Till September 2024, the IBBI has conducted 123 Workshops, 77 Webinars, 139 
roundtables and 12 training programmes for capacity building of IPs. 
Thus, the framework of IBBI, as laid down above, has been evolving regularly for 
meeting post- registration professional development needs of IPs in a comprehensive 
manner, enabling them to meet the emerging challenges of insolvency resolution, 
particularly in large and complex cases. 

27 
 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(5)] 
The Government has decided to set up an Integrated Technology Platform under 
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. This state-of-the-art electronic platform will 
integrate the key institutions forming pillars of the IBC ecosystem. 
It will provide for an integrated case management system for processes under the 
IBC, automated processes to file applications with the Adjudicating Authority, delivery of 
notices, enable interaction of Insolvency Professionals with stakeholders, storage of 
records of the corporate debtor, and incentivize effective participation of stakeholders. 
The Integrated Technology Platform would lead to better transparency, 
minimisation of delays, effective decision making and better oversight of the processes 
by the authorities 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(6)] 
The Members of the NCLT comprise of Judicial Members and Technical Members. 
The Judicial Members have been highly experienced judges of the High Court or 
District Courts or practicing lawyers. The Technical Members of NCLT possess 
specialised commercial knowledge and professional experience of more than 15 years in 
fields of industrial finance, industrial management, industrial reconstruction, investment, 
accountancy etc. 
Regular Colloquiums are being held for capacity building of Members to ensure a 
speedier and uniform judicial delivery system. Induction training programmes are held for 
newly appointed Members. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(7)] 
Section 53 of the Code provides the provisions with regard to the distribution of 
proceeds from the sale of liquidation assets, establishing the order of priority for different 
classes of creditors. 
 
 

28 
 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 5(8)] 
The observation of the Committee has been noted please. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) Authority 
The Committee observe that the Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) 
Authority, established under Section 125 of the Companies Act, 2013, has made 
significant strides in investor education, awareness, and protection. However, it faces 
challenges, including unfilled vacancies, underutilization of allocated funds, and a growing 
backlog of claims, which hinder its ability to perform optimally. The Committee note  that 
as of 2024-25, 15 vacant posts remain unfilled out of 29 sanctioned positions, significantly 
limiting the Authority’s capacity to manage claims and ensure timely refunds. Despite 
increasing claim filings, with 55,032 claims submitted in 2023-24, the number of pending 
claims has surged to 43,226. The Committee further note that the allocated budget for 
2023-24, which stood at ₹9.13 crore, was not fully utilized, with only ₹8.17 crore being 
spent due to staffing constraints and slow administrative processes. For 2024-25, the 
Ministry requested ₹11.11 crore in BE, but only ₹7.70 crore was allocated due to overall 
budget reductions. Consequently, ₹11.07 crore is being sought in RE 2024-25 to address 
funding gaps. The Committee feel that he underutilization of allocated funds for 2023-24 
and the reduction in budget allocation for 2024-25 due to staffing issues and budget cuts 
raises concerns about efficient fund utilization and the potential impact on Ministerial 
operations. 
 The Committee recognize that the IEPF Authority has successfully implemented 
various awareness programs, holding over 85,000 events to promote investor literacy. 
However, the Committee feel with the high rate of claim rejections and delays in the claims 
process, there remains considerable scope for improvement. In light of these challenges, 
the Committee recommend the following: 
(1) Fill the 15 vacant posts by the end of this financial year and ensure all positions 
are filled by the next year, while optimizing fund utilization to effectively 
manage claims and enhance investor education. 

29 
 
(2) Prioritize IT integration across MCA21, NSDL/CDSL, and PFMS to automate 
claims processing, reduce delays, and ensure faster, accurate refunds by next 
financial year. 
(3)  Revise the claims rejection process, as 30,884 claims were rejected in 2023-
24. Ensuring thorough verification before rejection will reduce avoidable 
rejections and increase transparency. 
(4) Enhance the investor support by providing clearer documentation guidelines 
and improving access to claim resources. Collecting additional data on claim 
types and demographics will help tailor support initiatives to better meet 
investor needs. 
(5)  Evaluate international innovative best practices and strategies from leading 
international benchmarks. By assessing and adopting relevant strategies that 
align with India's regulatory environment, the Ministry can strengthen and 
enhance the efficiency of the country's investor protection ecosystem. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(1)] 
There are 29 sanctioned posts in the Authority which are filled up either through 
deputation (20) or on regular basis (09). Out of 29 posts, 16 (09 on deputation and 07 on 
regular basis) officers/officials are in place. However, to compensate the shortage of staff 
in IEPFA 03 ICLS officers (2-DD & 1-AD) have been temporarily posted on loan basis. In 
order to reduce pendency, 8 ICLS officers were given on loan basis for a period of 3 
months from January 2025 as a special case. 
Out of 29 sanctioned posts, 16 posts are filled up and 13 posts are vacant. The 
detail of 13 vacant post are as under: 
 
 

30 
 
 
(As on 17.02.2025) 
Name of the Post Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled Vacant 
Dy. General Manager 3 2 1 
Sr. Accounts Officer (Encadred)** 2 1 1 
Public Relation Officer 1 0 1 
Private Secretary 1 0 1 
Asstt. Manager 4 0 4 
Personal Asstt. 1 0 1 
Sr. Accountant/ Accountant (Encadered)** 1 0 1 
Sr. Secretariat Asstt. 1 0 1 
Stenographer 2 1 1 
Jr. Secretariat Asstt. 1 0 1 
For the 06 posts of PS/PA/Steno/SSA/JSA, open vacancy circular was published 
on 24.06.2019, 21.10.2019 and 19.02.2021. However, due to non-availability of 
applications only one post of Stenographer could be filled up while other 05 posts 
remained vacant. 
For the 01 post of DGM, vacancy circular was published on 06.09.2024, however 
due to non-receipt of application, the post remained vacant. 
For the 05 posts of PRO/ Asstt Manager, vacancy circular was published on 
05.09.2024, however due to non-receipt of application, the posts remained vacant. 
The issue of filling up the vacant en-cadred posts of 01 Sr. Accounts Officer and 
01 Accountant/Sr. Accountant has again been taken up with the O/o Chief Controller of 
Accounts, M/o Corporate Affairs on 07.01.2025 and 24.01.2025. 
 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(2)] 
Integration of claim system with depositories (NSDL/CDSL) and PFMS is being 
undertaken through MCA21. Search module to enable investors to search shares and 
amount transferred by companies to IEPF has been developed and deployed in Beta. 

31 
 
The rules, processes and procedure for claim refund from IEPF has been reviewed 
and various relaxations have been provided. The new forms under IEPF rules have been 
notified and deployed under MCA 21. Number of forms required to be filed by companies 
have been reduced from 5 to 3 and transfer to IEPF fund has been linked directly to 
Bharatkosh. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(3)] 
The claims are closed as rejected only when they are rejected by companies. The 
Authority relies on the companies for entitlement of the claimant as complete information 
is available only with the companies. In cases where verification report is not received 
from companies, various reminders are sent to the claimants and companies before 
closing such claim applications after statutory timelimit of 75 days as per rule 7(3) of 
IEPFA(AATR) Rules. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(4)] 
The Ministry has prescribed clear and uniform documentation requirements as 
Schedules to IEPFA (AATR) Rules. 
Similarly, Procedure to be followed while disposing the claims is prescribed under 
the rules. Additional data on claim types is proposed to be collected in the new integrated 
portal. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 6(5)] 
No such evaluation has been carried out in respect of IEPF so far. However, the 
suggestion of the Committee has been noted please. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 9 of Chapter I) 
  

32 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) 
The Committee acknowledge the critical role of NCLT in expediting corporate 
dispute resolution and enhancing the ease of doing business. Since its inception in 2016, 
NCLT has made significant strides, disposing of 86,828 cases by August 2024.However, 
the Committee note that the backlog of 19,969 cases highlights persistent challenges in 
addressing procedural delays, infrastructure constraints, and manpower shortages. The 
Committee observe that he average time for case disposal, particularly for insolvency 
resolution and liquidation, remains concerning, with delays undermining the tribunal’s 
efficiency and the broader objective of swift corporate dispute resolution. 
 The Committee further note that Budget allocations for the NCLT have steadily 
increased from ₹52.15 crore in 2019-20 to ₹89.36 crore in 2022-23 but have seen a 
marginal reduction in BE to ₹89.31 crore in 2024-25, potentially limiting operational 
enhancements. The Committee note that manpower shortages remain critical, with 238 
regular posts abolished due to recruitment delays but revived in 2023. While recruitment 
for 100 additional members is underway, the tribunal’s demand for 729 posts highlights 
significant gaps. The Committee feel that reliance on contractual staff, though helpful, 
cannot replace the need for a permanent workforce. The Committee have observed that 
infrastructure challenges further exacerbate delays. Despite the implementation of E-
Courts and hybrid hearings across 16 benches, physical infrastructure gaps and 
incomplete digital integration hinder optimal performance. The Committee feel that the 
Ministry’s plan to establish an integrated IT platform and expand benches is promising, 
but timely execution is essential. To address these issues comprehensively, the 
Committee strongly recommend the following: 
(1) Expedite the filling of all revived and sanctioned posts within the current 
financial year. Proactive steps are needed to streamline the recruitment 
process for additional posts to ensure adequate staffing levels. 
(2)  Procedural rules tailored to NCLT’s role under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (IBC) should be finalized and implemented swiftly. Training programs 

33 
 
and regular colloquiums for tribunal members can further reduce procedural 
delays and improve case management. 
(3) The Ministry should prioritize the development of the integrated IT platform and 
address physical infrastructure gaps. These upgrades are vital for improving 
case processing times and ensuring transparency in tribunal operations. 
(4) Allocated funds must be fully utilized, with emphasis on recruitment, 
infrastructure development, and technology integration. The reduction in BE 
for 2024-25 should not impede these critical objectives. 
(5)  The Ministry should establish a performance monitoring mechanism to track 
pendency and disposal rates, enabling timely interventions to clear backlogs 
and improve resolution timelines. The Ministry should also maintain data with 
respect to average time taken for resolution process. 
(6) The Committee recommend adopting a mechanism under NCLT to count 
additional applications within the same case separately to avoid inflating the 
number of pending cases, ensuring a more accurate reflection of the case 
backlog. 
 The Committee believe that addressing these challenges systematically, the NCLT 
will be better positioned to fulfill its mandate of expeditious corporate dispute resolution, 
thereby contributing to economic growth and the ease of doing business in India. 
Reply of the Government 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(1)] 
NCLT is continuously advertising for all the deputation posts, the response from 
prospective Deputationists remains tepid due to which NCLT is unable to fill these posts. 
Further, on multiple occasions, the selected candidates have also failed to join due to 
which the post remains unfilled. 
  

34 
 
 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(2)] 
Draft Adjudicating Authority Rules are under finalization in the Ministry. Regular 
Colloquiums are being held for capacity building of Members to ensure speedier and 
uniform judicial delivery system. Induction training programmers are held for newly 
appointed Members. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(3)] 
The Draft RFP (Request for Proposal) for selection of Consultancy Firm/Agency 
for Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) as well as selection of System Integrator for the 
implementation of Project “iPIE” is underway. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(4)] 
The funds allocated to NCLT are being utilized optimally considering the 
requirements of NCLT. Rs. 112.4671 Crores has been allocated to NCLT under RE 2024-
25. 
The Ministry is providing adequate funds for the infrastructure development of 
NCLT from time to time as per their requirements. Recently 4 new ‘state of the art’ courts 
have been made for NCLT in Kolkata, however, the shifting is stalled due to an ongoing 
stay on shifting based on the petition filed by NCLT Bar Association. Similarly, a ‘state of 
the art’ court was constructed in the CGO Complex, Delhi, which had to be abandoned 
due to orders of the Delhi High Court, again based on a petition of the NCLT Bar 
Association. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(5)] 
The Ministry is working on developing iPIE system, which will incorporate an 
advanced API mediation layer that will sever as a crucial bridge for seamless data 
exchange among various systems and subsystems within the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code (IBC) ecosystem. This mediation layer will facilitate efficient communication with 
individual systems, including NCLT/NCLAT e-Courts, IBBI web application, NeSL, iPIE, 

35 
 
MCA 21 and other external systems. Adopting a comprehensive, end-to-end technology 
platform for the insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) ecosystem would streamline 
operations across the entire IBC spectrum-from debt and default filing to the resolution 
plan’s execution. By offering a single source of truth, it would empower the National 
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) to make faster and more informed decisions, ultimately 
leading to quicker resolutions and improved outcomes. This initiative would not only 
enhancing efficiency and transparency in the insolvency proceeding but also empower 
the Ministry to monitor the insolvency matters to identify the bottlenecks and resolve them 
accordingly. 
Reply to Recommendation [Serial No. 7(6)] 
“Additional applications” or interlocutory Applications in case are not considered 
as a separate case. There is no inflation in the number of pending cases by NCLT on 
account of the same. 
[Ministry of Corporate Affairs O.M. No. G/12/2024-Bgdt-MCA dated 05.03.2025.] 
 
(For Comments of the Committee, please refer Para No. 12 of Chapter I) 
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER - V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES BY THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
29 July, 2025 
07 Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Finance                                                                                              
 
  

39 
 
ANNEXURE  
Minutes of the Thirtieth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). The 
Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 July, 2025 from 1430 hrs to 1615 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘62’, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary 
3. Shri K. Gopinath 
4. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
5. Thiru Arun Nehru 
6. Smt. Sandhya Ray 
7. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
8. Dr. K. Sudhakar 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
10. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
12. Shri Sanjay Seth 
13. Smt. Darshana Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Bharti Sanjeev Tuteja   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  

40 
 
PART I 
2. XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  XX. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
PART II 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
(i) Fourteenth Report on  Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Finance (Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, 
Public Enterprises and Investment and Public Asset Management). 
 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
(iii) Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(iv) Seventeenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Planning. 
 
(v) Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
 
(vi) Nineteenth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Public Enterprises and Investment 
and Public Asset Management). 
 

41 
 
(vii) Twentieth Report- Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
 
(viii) Twenty-First Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
 
(ix) Twenty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Planning. 
 
(x) Twenty-Third Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
 
(xi) Twenty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Finance on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Financial Services). 
 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Action Taken Reports 
and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * 
  

42 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25) OF THE MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
  Total % of 
total 
(i) Total number of Recommendations 
 
07  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations 
which have been accepted by the 
Government (vide Recommendation 
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7) 
07 100% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations 
which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies  
 
 
NIL -- 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
 
NIL -- 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which final reply of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
NIL -- 
 
* * * 