 
                 MINISTRY OF PLANNING      DEMANDS FOR GRANTS                                                    2024-25                                                          FOURTH REPORT        LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI         December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)  
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 04 

FOURTH REPORTSTANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)MINISTRY OF PLANNINGDEMANDS FOR GRANTS     Presented to Lok Sabha on          Laid in Rajya Sabha on  LOK SABHA SECRETARIATDecember, 2024/   ii 
FOURTH REPORT    STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (2024-25)  (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA)    MINISTRY OF PLANNING   DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)   Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 December, 2024 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 December, 202403.2023             LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 


iii 
 
 
CONTENT 
REPORT 
 
Composition of the Committee                                                                              (iv) 
Introduction                                                                                                              (v) 
PART-I 
NARRATION ANALYSIS 
Page No. 
Chapter -  I NITI Aayog- An Introduction 1 
Chapter - II Analysis of Demands for Grants (2024-25) 6 
Chapter-  III Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) 13 
Chapter-  IV Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) & Self-Employment and 
Talent Utilisation (SETU) 
18 
Chapter-  V Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) and Aspirational  
Blocks Programme (ABP)  
24 
Chapter-  VI State Support Mission (SSM) 31 
Chapter-  VII Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  34 
PART-II 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  37 
                                    APPENDICES  
Appendix – I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 29.10.2024 44 
Appendix – II Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 04.12.2024 47 
                                              ANNEXURES 49 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE  (2024-25) 
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5.  Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
6. Shri K. Gopinath  
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap  
8. Shri Kishori Lal  
9. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
10. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
11. Thiru Arun Nehru  
12. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
13. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
14. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
15. Prof. Sougata Ray  
16. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
17. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
18. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
19. Shri Manish Tewari  
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
21. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri P. Chidambaram  
23. Shri Milind Murli Deora  
24. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal  
25. Shri Yerram Venkata Subba Reddy  
26. Shri S. Selvaganabathy  
27. Shri Sanjay Seth  
28. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
29. Smt. Darshana Singh  
30. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
31. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
 
                                                        SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Gaurav Goyal Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  Director 
3.  Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Vandana Committee Officer 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
   I, the Chairperson, of the Standing Committee on Finance, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Planning.  
2. The Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Planning have been 
examined by the Committee under Rule Section 331E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.   
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Planning on 29 October 2024.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Ministry of Planning for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing the material and information which the Committee desired in connection 
with the examination of the Demands for Grants (2024-25). 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on     
04 December, 2024.  
5. For facility of reference, the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at the end of the Report. 
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
  
 
 
New Delhi; 
4 December, 2024 
13 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab, 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
PART - I 
CHAPTER I 
NITI  AAYOG- AN INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 NITI Aayog ie. the ‘National Institution for Transforming India’, as an apex 
public policy think tank of the Government of India, was formed via a resolution of the 
Union Cabinet on 1st January 2015.  NITI Aayog is mandated to provide institutional 
capacity to the Ministry of Planning. Prime Minister is the executive head of the 
Ministry of Planning. It is the nodal agency tasked with catalysing economic 
development, and fostering cooperative federalism through the involvement of State 
Governments in the economic policy-making process using a bottom- up approach.  
1.2    Apart from designing strategic and long-term policies and programmes for the 
Government of India, NITI Aayog also provides relevant strategic and technical advice 
to the Centre, States and Union Territories (UTs). NITI Aayog acts as the 
quintessential platform for the Government of India to bring States to act together in 
national interest and thereby foster cooperative federalism.  Following are the key 
objectives and features  of NITI Aayog:- 
(a) To evolve a shared vision of national development priorities, sectors and 
strategies with the active involvement of States.  
(b) To foster cooperative federalism through structured support initiatives and 
mechanisms with the States on a continuous basis, recognizing that strong 
States make a strong nation. 
(c)  To develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans at the village level and 
aggregate these progressively at higher levels of government. 
(d) To ensure, on areas that are specifically referred to, the interests of national 
security are incorporated in economic strategy and policy.  
(e)  To pay special attention to the sections of our society that may be at risk of 
not benefiting adequately from economic progress.  
(f) To design strategic and long-term policy and programme frameworks and 
initiatives, and monitor their progress and their efficacy. The lessons 
learned through monitoring and feedback will be used for making innovative 
improvements, including necessary mid-course corrections. 
(g)  To provide advice and encourage partnerships between key stakeholders, 
national and international like-minded think tanks, as well as educational 
and policy research institutions. 

2 
 
(h)  To create a knowledge, innovation and entrepreneurial support system 
through a collaborative community of national and international experts, 
practitioners and other partners.  
(i)  To offer a platform for the resolution of inter-sectoral and inter-departmental 
issues in order to accelerate the implementation of the development 
agenda.  
(j) To maintain a state-of-the-art resource centre, be a repository of research 
on good governance and best practices in sustainable and equitable 
development as well as facilitate their dissemination to the stake-holders. 
(k) To actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes and 
initiatives, including the identification of the needed resources to strengthen 
the probability of success and scope of delivery. 
(l) To focus on technology upgradation and capacity building for 
implementation of programmes and initiatives. 
(m)To undertake other activities as may be necessary in order to further the 
execution of the national development agenda, along with the objectives 
mentioned above. 
1.3 NITI Aayog is supported by an attached office, Development Monitoring and 
Evaluation Office (DMEO) and an autonomous body, National Institute of Labour 
Economics Research and Development (NILERD). NITI Aayog’s activities can be 
divided into four key areas: 
          1. Promoting knowledge and innovation  
          2. NITI for States (Cooperative and Competitive Federalism) 
          3. Driving transformational change  
          4. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)    
 
 1.4     The different programmes, subjects, attached offices, and autonomous bodies 
of NITI Aayog provide the requisite coordination and support framework needed to 
carry out the above mandate. Ministry of Planning through NITI Aayog runs the 
following Central Sector Schemes: 
(a) Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self Employment and Talent Utilization   
(SETU). 
(b) Ongoing Programmes and Schemes through Research and Study (R&S). 
(c) Programme for Aspirational Districts (ADP)  
(d) State Support Mission (SSM). 

3 
 
 
1.5 Governing Council of NITI Aayog  
The Governing Council of NITI Aayog, comprising of Chief Ministers of all the 
States and UTs with legislatures and LGs of other UTs, came into effect on 16 
February, 2015 vide a notification issued by the Cabinet Secretariat. The Governing 
Council was last reconstituted vide a notification dated 19 February 2021 by the 
Cabinet Secretariat. The Governing Council is the premier body tasked with evolving a 
shared vision of national priorities and strategies, with the active involvement of 
States, in shaping the national development narrative. The Governing Council, which 
embodies the objectives of cooperative federalism, presents a platform to discuss 
inter-sectoral, inter-departmental and federal issues to accelerate the implementation 
of the national development agenda. So far, eight meetings of the Governing Council 
have been held under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Prime Minister with CMs/LGs 
of the States/UTs and other members of the Governing Council. 
 
1.6    The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Planning, NITI Aayog on 29.10.2024 in connection with examination of DFGs of 
Ministry of Planning (2024-25). In response to a specific query, the Ministry of 
Planning informed about the initiatives exclusively incubated by NITI Aayog since its 
inception, which have also been adopted  by the Central/State Governments. These 
are as stated below:- 
 
“NITI Aayog was set up in January 2015 as a premier think tank of Government of 
India. Over the last nearly a decade, a number of initiatives have been taken by 
NITI Aayog, some of which are subsequently being implemented by the respective 
Ministries.  Some of the key initiatives conceived in NITI Aayog are as follows- 
(i) Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
To enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities in critical sectors, the Production 
Linked Incentive was conceptualised in NITI and have been introduced in 14 key 
sectors with a budgetary outlay of Rs. 1.97 lakh Crore. The scheme is now being 
implemented by different Ministries.  
(ii) Asset Monetisation Programme 
NITI Aayog was mandated with creation of the National Monetization Pipeline 
(NMP).  NITI Aayog formulated the asset pipeline of 12 central line ministries to 
serve as a medium-term roadmap for Monetisation of Core Infrastructure Assets. 

4 
 
The progress is monitored periodically by the core group of secretaries under the 
chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. 
(iii)Aspirational Districts/ Blocks Programme 
NITI Aayog conceptualized Aspirational Districts and Blocks Programme with 
focused interventions across different sectors.  Various Central Ministries and 
States have been closely involved in these initiatives including for saturation of 
certain indicators through Sampoornata Abhiyan launched in July 2024.  
(iv)Lifestyle for Envirnoment (LiFE) 
NITI Aayog designed and curated the Mission LiFE as a mass movement to 
nudge people towards adopting sustainable lifestyles. MoEFCC is now 
implementing Mission LiFE. 
(v) Circular Economy 
NITI Aayog identified 11 areas to facilitate transition from a linear to circular 
economy and finalised 10 sectoral Circular Economy action plans for 
implementation by stakeholder Ministries. This is now implemented by MoEFCC. 
(vi)Transformative Mobility 
National Mission on Transformative Mobility and Battery Storage is chaired by 
NITI Aayog to build an ecosystem for proliferation of electric vehicles in India.  
Many Ministries and State Governments have been closely working with NITI for 
promotion of electric vehicles.  
(vii) Powering India’s participation in Global Value Chains 
NITI Aayog has released a report emphasising specific interventions needed for 
India to emerge as a global manufacturing hub for electronics and has shared the 
report with MeitY for implementation of the recommendations. It is also working on 
another initiative to increase the country’s penetration in automobile Global Value 
Chains. 
(viii) City-region Growth hub initiative 
To pioneer a transformative shift in urban development, NITI Aayog has taken up 
the ‘Growth Hub (G-Hub) Initiative’ prioritizing economic master planning as 
cornerstone for accelerated economic growth. The economic master plan report 
for two city regions, the Surat Economic Region (SER) and the Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region (MMR), have been launched.  
 

5 
 
(ix) Mining Reforms 
A High Level Committee (HLC) was constituted by the Government under the 
Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog in 2019 for enhancing exploration 
and mineral production, reducing imports and achieving rapid growth in exports. 
Based on the recommendations of the HLC, amendments were carried out in the 
last three years of the MMDR Act, 2015 to facilitate ease of doing business.  
Recommendations of the Report played an important role in subsequent reforms 
in the mining sector.  
(x) Health Sector 
A number of initiatives have been taken by NITI Aayog in the health sector which 
have subsequently been adopted by Central Ministries and/ or State 
Governments.  These include Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya 
Yojana (AB-PMJAY), orphan drugs for rare diseases, reforms in National Organ 
Transplant Programme, Increase in post graduate seats, upgradation of district 
hospitals to medical colleges, telemedicine guidelines, etc.  Besides, NITI Aayog 
also played a major role in Covid-19 pandemic management through Empowered 
Groups 1, 5 and 7 headed by Member and CEO, NITI Aayog.  NITI Aayog also 
contributed to legislations such as National Medical Commission Bill, Indian 
Nursing Council Act and National Dental commission Bill.” 
                                          
1.7  The subsequent chapters in Part-I deals  with the following topics:- 
(a) Analysis of Demands for Grants (2024-25) 
(b) Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) 
(c) Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) & Self-Employment and Talent Utilisation 
(SETU) 
(d) Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) and Aspirational Blocks 
Programme (ABP) 
(e) State Support Mission (SSM) 
 (f)  Sustainable Development Goals 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER II 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
2.1  The Ministry of Planning presented their detailed Demands for Grants (2024-
25) to Lok Sabha under Demand No. 77. The total allocation of Ministry of Planning 
for the year 2024-25 was to the tune of Rs. 837.26 crore. This comprises of an 
outlay of Rs. 205.26 crore for expenditure other than centrally sponsored and 
central sector schemes and Rs. 632.00 crore for Central Sector schemes/projects 
expenditure. The Revenue section is of Rs. 818.30 crore and Rs.18.96 crore is the 
Capital share. There is only a nominal increase of 1.56% in the Revenue Section 
for the year 2024-25 over the previous year, whereas in Capital Section the 
increase is 1.60%. There was a massive increase of Rs. 502.97 crore in BE 2023-
24 over BE 2022-23, this was approximately 156% in percentage terms.   The 
Actuals  2023-24 registered sharp decline to  the tune of Rs. 290.81 crore as 
against BE 2022-23.  For establishment related expenditure Rs. 193.96 crore has 
been allocated as BE 2024-25 as against Rs. 181.09 crore allocated as BE 2023-
24. Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) has been shifted under 
major Head-3451 from Financial Year 2024-25 and an allocation of  Rs.19.76 crore 
as BE 2024-25 against an earlier allocation of Rs.17.00 crore has been made.   
Rs.11.30 crore have been allocated as BE 2024-25 to National Institute of Labour 
Economics Research and Development (NILERD) with no budget enhancements 
from that of previous financial year. Economic Advisory Council to Prime Minister 
received an increased allocation of Rs. 4.3595 crore as BE 2024-25 against BE 
2023-24 of Rs.3.00 crore.  
 
2.2 There is no change in the allocations for all 04 Central Sector 
Schemes/Projects and Rs 632 crore have been allocated as BE 2024-25 as well.  
In respect of Atal Innovation Mission(AIM), no enhancement over BE-2023-24  has 
been provided and Ministry  has agreed to allocate Rs.155.00 crore  as BE  2024-
25 subject to the approval of the Cabinet for continuance of AIM Scheme. Further, 
Rs.433.00 crore as BE 2024-25 has been allocated under Official Development 
Assistance from Japan International Cooperation Agency(JICA) for Sustainable 
Development Goals(SDGs), again registering no change in the allocations over BE 
2023-24. 
 

7 
 
2.3 Details with regard to analysis of Demands for Grants in various heads during  
last three years of Ministry of Planning can be seen at Annexure I. 
 
2.4 The allocation for Ministry of Planning for the last three years is given below: 
       (in Rs. crore) 
  Year BE RE Actuals % Increase/ 
decrease in BE 
from previous 
year 
2022-23 321.42 1031.53 847.14 -69.76% 
2023-24 824.39 514.19 290.81   +156.48% 
2024-25 837.26 - -          +1.56% 
 
2.5 When the Committee wanted to know about the justifications for Increase of     
156.48% in the BE 2023-24 over BE 2022-23 and thereafter underutilization of the 
already curtailed RE during FY 2023-24., the Ministry of Planning in a written reply 
stated as under:- 
“Since, 2nd phase of ADP Scheme was approved in FY 2022-23 ₹ 433 Crore 
was allocated for FY 2023-24 and additionally, fund of ₹ 40 Crore was  also 
allocated for newly launched SSM Scheme, hence, BE 2023-24 was increased 
considerably over the BE of FY 2022-23. There was a decline in expenditure of 
Aspirational District Programme/Aspirational Blocks Programme because of 
slower utilization of funds at district level.  Expenditure on AIM has also come 
down owing to the ongoing process of recasting the AIM program.  Ministry of 
Finance has permitted Ministry of Planning to incur expenditure with certain 
restrictions on creating fresh committed liabilities. Hence, Savings occurred 
over and above the curtailed RE during FY 2023-24.”                                               
 
2.6 Revenue and Capital Sections of the allocation of Ministry of Planning for the 
last three years are given below:   
                                                                                                                   (in Rs. crore)                                                                                                     
Year 
 
BE RE Actuals 
Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital 
2022-23 310.67 10.75 1011.23 20.30 846.84 0.30 
2023-24 805.73 18.66 496.76 17.43 284.83 5.99 
2024-25 818.30 18.96 - - - - 
 

8 
 
 
2.7 When sought clarifications regarding decrease in RE as against BE in Revenue  
and Capital section during  2023-24, the Ministry of Planning in written reply stated the 
following:- 
 
“The allocation of ₹805.73 Cr under revenue section was reduced to ₹ 496.76 Cr 
and capital section from 18.66 Cr to ₹ 17.43 Cr because of slower than expected 
expenditure on Aspirational District Programme leading to a reduction in the 
allocation of ADP scheme from ₹ 433 Cr to ₹ 113 Cr in RE 2023-24.  The 
reduction of ₹ 1.23 Cr under Capital Section was very nominal because of less 
purchase of computers etc. under ICT as anticipated earlier.”  
.” 
2.8 As regard the percentage share of administrative and development expenditure 
in the total budget allocations, the Ministry of Planning  in their written replies apprised 
as under:- 
“ 
Administrative or Development 
Expenditure 
Allocation/ BE for 2024-
25 (Rs. In crore) 
Percentage of 
Budget 2024-25 
Administrative Expenditure 
 (Establishment + Other Central 
Expenditure) 
205.26 24.52% 
Development Expenditure  
(Central Sector Schemes)  
632.00 75.48% 
 
  Activities proposed during the Financial year 2024-25 
2.9    Various activities proposed to be undertaken in the Financial Year 2024-25 in 
terms of the Expenditure projected are as follows: 
  
(A)  Establishment Related Expenditure 
  (i)  Department of Planning 
Under this, the expenditure to be incurred to meet salary and allowances and 
other related expenses on travel and other administrative expenditures, as 
well as professional services expenditures in respect to the Office of the 
Minister of State for Planning, are being projected. 
(ii)  NITI Aayog 
Under this, the expenditure to be incurred to meet Salary and allowances and 
other related expenditures on Travel and Other Administrative Expenditures, 
as well as Professional Services related expenditures in respect of the Vice 
Chairman, Members, CEO and other Officials of the NITI Aayog and also the 

9 
 
Expenditure to be met in respect of various activities being carried out by 
various verticals/ divisions of NITI Aayog, are being projected.  
(iii)  Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister 
 Under this, the expenditure to be incurred to meet salary and allowances 
and other related expenses on travel and other administrative expenditures, as 
well as professional services expenditures for the chairman and other officials 
of the council, are covered.  
(iv)  Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office(DMEO) 
As the apex Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) office of the Government 
of India and an attached office of NITI Aayog, DMEO during 2024-25 would 
carry its mandated and emerging activities in Monitoring and Evaluation to 
strengthen evidence-based policy making both at the Centre and State levels, 
in line with the larger objective of cooperative and competitive federalism. 
The annual plan activities will be accomplished by the team of lateral 
and government staff led by the Director General, DMEO. DMEO would 
procure consultancy and survey services from external agencies to carry out its 
mandate efficiently and effectively. DMEO’s budgetary expenditure goes 
towards the salaries and professional fees of personnel engaged through 
various modes to carry out its Monitoring and Evaluation mandate, apart from 
essential office expenditure towards the maintenance of dashboards, 
information technology and others. 
(v) National Institute of Labour Economics Research and Development   
(NILERD) 
NILERD is an autonomous institute under NITI Aayog, which is 
supported through Budgetary grants in the form of Grants-in-Aid Salaries, 
Grants-in-Aid General and Grants-in-Aid for Creation of Capital Assets. During 
2024-25, NILERD will undertake training activities for senior and middle-level 
officials of different countries under the ITEC scheme of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, training programmes for officials of different States/UTs and 
undertaking research and evaluation studies. NILERD has been appointed as 
Central Nodal Agency (CNA) by NITI Aayog for their central sector schemes 
viz, Atal Innovation Mission, Aspirational Districts Programme and State 
Support Mission. It also publishes a quarterly peer-reviewed journal.     

10 
 
   (B)      Scheme-related Expenditure: 
(i)  Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), including Self Employment and Talent 
Utilization (SETU) 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), NITI Aayog is the Government of India's 
flagship initiative to promote the culture of innovation and entrepreneurship in 
the county and was set up in 2016. Towards this end, AIM has taken a holistic 
approach and is ensuring the creation of a problem-solving, innovative mindset 
in schools and creating an ecosystem of entrepreneurship in universities, 
research institutions, and corporate and MSME sectors 
 AIM is focused on developing the innovation and entrepreneurship 
ecosystem via its various Programmes such as Atal Tinkering Labs, Atal 
Incubation Centres, Atal New India Challenges, Applied Research for Small 
Enterprises, Atal Community Innovation Centres and ecosystem development 
activities etc., all these coupled together provide the plan of action for AIM. 
(ii) Ongoing programs and Schemes  
Under this, the expenditure regarding Research & Study is being met. 
The Research & Study is a Central Sector Scheme, and the scheme has a 
Budget Estimate (B.E.) of Rs. 4.00 cr for the year 2024-25. The scheme's 
objective is to stimulate research on issues of economic/social development 
and need assessment, which directly affect the formulation or implementation 
of government policies and schemes. The Scheme is primarily utilised to meet 
the expenditure involved in funding extramural research conducted by NITI 
Aayog by payment of a consultation fee. In addition, 
seminars/conferences/workshops, etc., organised by reputed organisations 
are supported under the Scheme.   
 
(iii) The Aspirational Districts Programme and Aspirational Blocks 
Programme 
The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP), launched in January 2018, 
is an initiative aimed at transforming 112 of India's relatively underdeveloped 
districts by focusing on 49 key indicators across five critical sectors: Health and 
Nutrition, Education, Agriculture and Water Resources, Financial Inclusion and 
Skill Development, and Basic Infrastructure. The program employs a robust 

11 
 
monitoring system, and districts are ranked monthly based on incremental 
progress to encourage a competitive environment among districts. The next 
phase of the program aims for saturation of relevant Government schemes, 
ensuring that all citizens in these districts benefit from the targeted 
interventions. The program's effectiveness is bolstered by a collaborative 
framework involving Prabhari Officers and development partners. 
Expanding on the ADP's framework, the Aspirational Blocks Programme 
(ABP) was launched in January 2023, targeting 500 underdeveloped blocks 
nationwide. ABP aims to achieve comprehensive development by focusing on 
essential government services in Health & Nutrition, Education, Agriculture & 
Allied Services, Social Development and Basic Infrastructure.  
         One of the main strategies for the current year is to deploy a targeted 
approach through initiatives like Sampoornata Abhiyaan, which aim to saturate 
key indicators, ensuring comprehensive coverage and maximising the impact of 
interventions. This focused strategy not only boosts the delivery of essential 
services but also actively involves local communities in their development 
journey, paving the way for sustainable growth and better quality of life in these 
regions. 
(iv)  State Support Mission   
State Support Mission (SSM), announced in the Union Budget of FY 
2023-24, is an initiative of NITI Aayog to expand its ongoing engagement with 
the states/UTs to achieve national priorities. Under the Mission, financial and 
technical support is provided to the interested States/UTs to establish State 
Institution for Transformation (SIT) or strengthen their existing Planning 
Departments/Boards so that these institutions can steer development strategies 
in the States/UTs to achieve their socio-economic goals. The Mission will also 
support States/UTs to strengthen their Monitoring & Evaluation ecosystem and 
leverage the expertise of knowledge institutions, development partners, multi-
lateral agencies, academia, etc. Following are the progress/achievements of 
the Mission: 
 
 
 

12 
 
State Institution for Transformation (SIT)  
As of date, 20 States/UTs have notified their SITs, and these SITs are at 
various stages of their operationalisation, which includes hiring technical 
resources, setting up an M&E and data analytics unit, etc.  
 
NITI-State Workshop Series  
 The NITI-State Workshop series was launched under SSM to bring States/UTs 
together to deliberate on themes relevant to the socioeconomic development of 
the States/UTs and other emerging national and global interest areas. So far, 
20 such workshops have been organised in various States/UTs. Another 40 
workshops under the NITI-State Workshop Series were planned for 2024-2025.  
 
NITI for States Platform 
To facilitate cross-learning and evidence-based decision-making through 
the sharing of best practices, policies and data sets, a NITI for State (NFS) 
Knowledge Platform, comprising of a NITI for States Portal and an experience 
room called Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) has been launched by NITI 
Aayog in March 2024 under the Mission. A set of knowledge products have 
been put together on the NITI for States Portal for various socio-economic 
sectors, including Agriculture, Education, Energy, Health, Livelihoods and 
Skilling, Manufacturing, MSME, Tourism, Urban, Water resources & WASH 
across two cross-cutting themes-Gender and Climate. VBSR is a digitally 
immersive experience that enables rich visualisation and engagement with 
insights, information and knowledge to enable effective in-person decision-
making. The strategy room is an interactive space where users can visualise 
data, trends, best practices and policies in an immersive manner, allowing them 
to make a holistic assessment of any problem statement. 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER III 
DEVELOPMENT MONITORING AND EVALUATION OFFICE (DMEO) 
 
 
3.1 Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) is the apex monitoring 
and evaluation office of the Government of India. Under NITI Aayog’s mandate of 
cooperative and competitive federalism, its scope of work also includes technical 
advice to States. DMEO is headed by the Director General (DG). The role of DMEO 
is: 
(i)  to monitor the progress and efficacy of strategic and long term policy and 
programme frameworks as well as initiatives to facilitate improvements, 
including the necessary mid-course corrections; and 
 
(ii)  to actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of programmes and 
initiatives to strengthen the probability of success and scope of delivery.  
 
3.2   DMEO undertook following major projects during  2023-24:- 
 (i)  Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
 (ii)  Data Governance Quality Index (DGQI)  
(iii) Monitoring of Global Indices for Reforms and Growth (GIRG)  
(iv)  Evaluations  
(v) Sector Review 
(vi) Project with States  
(vII) Capacity Building  
                      
         
 
3.3  DMEO undertakes evaluation of schemes of Government of India enabling 
evidence based public policy-making. The evaluations are conducted suo motu or at 
the request of the Ministries. These evaluations based on comprehensive literature 
review and survey data analysis provide critical insights to improve the functioning of 
schemes/programmes and facilitate it to achieve its intended objectives and 
outcomes. The evaluations are conducted with the aim to understand what works, 
why, for whom, and under what circumstances based on which the 
programmes/schemes are refined, adapted and mid-course correction are undertaken 
for the schemes/programmes to achieve their desired objectives 

14 
 
 
Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) 
 
3.4  Monitoring and Evaluation of schemes under the Central Government is an 
ongoing process. the Development Monitoring & Evaluation Office (DMEO) actively 
monitors and evaluates schemes/programmes. Since (2019-20), DMEO, NITI Aayog 
has been undertaking a rigorous process annually to improve the Output-Outcome 
Monitoring Framework to strengthen outcome-based monitoring of Central Sector(CS) 
and Centrally Sponsored Schemes(CSS) of the Government of India. This document 
is laid out in Parliament alongside the Union Budget every year as an Outcome 
Budget for all schemes with an annual outlay of Rs. 500 crore  or more. The 
respective Ministry/Department in the Parliament lays the framework for rest schemes 
along with their Detailed Demand for Grants (DDGs). These key outputs and 
outcomes for respective schemes, along with their key indicators, are identified and 
finalized under the approval of the respective Secretary of the Ministry/Department. 
Each Ministry/Department sets targets for each of those indicators for the upcoming 
year, and the same are shared with DMEO. The same exercise has just been 
completed for FY( 2024-25). 
 
3.5  During 2023-24 DMEO completed Evaluations of the following 9 Central Sector 
Schemes:-  
 
Sl. No.                  Name of Scheme Current Status 
1 Evaluation of schemes under Tea Board Completed  
2 Evaluation of schemes under Coffee Board Completed  
3 Evaluation of schemes under Rubber Board Completed  
4 Evaluation of schemes under Spices Board Completed  
5 Evaluation of schemes under Central Silk Board Completed  
6 Evaluation of Khadi and Gramodyog Vikas Yojana (KGVY) Completed  
7 Evaluation of Scheme of Fund for Regeneration of 
Traditional Industries (SFURTI) 
Completed  
8 Evaluation of Coir Vikas Yojana (CVY) Completed  
9 Evaluation of Credit Guarantee Fund for Micro Units 
(CGFMU) 
Completed  
 
The final evaluation reports, along with the recommendations/suggestions, were 
shared with the respective administrative/line Ministries/Departments, and also with 
the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  
 
3.6   Since inception in  the year 2015, DMEO has completed 153 studies, and 
currently 79 evaluation studies  are ongoing,  when asked to provide year-wise details 

15 
 
of the number of schemes evaluated  till date by DMEO,  the Ministry of Planning  in 
their written reply furnished following details:- 
“DMEO is mandated to actively monitor and evaluate the implementation of 
programmes and initiatives, including the identification of the needed resources so 
as to strengthen the probability of success and scope of delivery. The list of CS and 
CSS schemes is not maintained by DMEO, NITI Aayog. It can be obtained from the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. A brief of Evaluation Studies done 
by DMEO since its inception is given below: 
  
1. Since its inception in Sept. 2015, DMEO has completed 153 studies, and 79 
evaluation studies are ongoing.  
2. 2015-2018:  
In the first few years of its inception, very few studies were conducted as it was a 
transition phase from Planning Commission to the newly constituted NITI Aayog 
(around 5 studies were conducted during 2015 to 2018) 
 
    2019-2021  
1. In 2019, five quick assessment studies were conducted in-house by DMEO, 
based on a thin sample and interviewed by DMEO staff. These generated brief 
reports of 15-20 pages. These quick assessment studies also pertain to Centrally 
Sponsored Sector (CSS) Schemes. 
2. In 2019, the evaluation of all the CSS schemes was also conducted by DMEO - 
126 schemes under 28 Umbrella CSS. These evaluation studies were completed 
by the beginning of 2021.  
3. It may be noted that conducting data collection for these evaluation studies was 
a major challenge during this time period due to the Covid-19 pandemic.  
 
      2022-2024:  
 
  1. After completion of the CSS evaluation study in 2021, DMEO based on the 
direction of DoE also conducted the Central Sector (CS) Scheme evaluation. The list 
of such CS schemes to be evaluated was provided by DoE. In the last three years 
from 2022 to 2024 (till date), DMEO completed the evaluation of 16 Central Sector 
(CS) schemes.  
  2. Presently, out of six ongoing studies, 5 are from the CS and one is CSS.  
 
A year-wise number of schemes evaluated by DMEO, NITI Aayog since its year of 
inception is given in the table below. 
 
 Year  No. of CS  No. of CSS  Total No. of 
Schemes  
Completed 
2015   1 1 

16 
 
2016 3  3 
2017  1 1 
2018 - - - 
2019 - 5*+126 (CSS package)  131 
2020 - - - 
2021 1* - 1 
2022 1 - 1 
2023 6 - 6 
2024 9 - 9 
Ongoing 
2024 5 1+73 (CSS Package) 79 
Total  25 207 232 
* These studies were conducted in-house by DMEO with a very thin sample and 
short reports” 
 
3.7  To have complete functional autonomy, a separate budgetary allocation has 
been provided exclusively to DMEO. The allocation to DMEO for the last four years 
are given below: 
(In Rs Crore) 
  
      
Transforming Data Governance In India (DGQI)  
3.8 To transform data governance DMEO in the year 2020 developed a ‘Data 
Governance Quality Index (DGQI)’  to assess the data preparedness levels and use of 
IT-based systems for scheme monitoring across Ministries/Departments on various 
parameters, The first phase of DGQI exercise was conducted in 2020 in self-
assessment mode with 65 Ministeries/Departments, covering approximately 250 
CS/CSS. Subsequently, DGQI 2.0 was launched in 2021 covering as a regular 
exercise for monitoring and directing reforms in the direction. The DGQI exercise 
focuses on 3 pillars bifurcate into six themes namely data generation, data quality, 
technology integration, analysis, dissemination, security, and encourages sharing of 
best practices. Till date 6 Rounds of the exercise have been concluded, and as part of 
the 7th ongoing round of DGQI 2.0 exercise, 75 M/Ds are in the process of submitting 
their responses across around 579 interventions. 
Year 
  
BE RE Actuals 
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Revenue Capital 
2021-22 16 - 16 - - 15.73 - 
2022-23 17 - 17 - - 15.13 - 
2023-24 16.69 .31 17 - - 15.36 .52 
2024-25 19.39 .37 19.76 - - - - 

17 
 
 
Global Indices for Reforms and Growth (GIRG)  
 
3.9  The primary objectives of the GIRG initiative are to drive India’s performance 
across important social, economic, and development parameters for improving global 
perception of India and its global ranking, to drive reforms, and monitor the progress. 
For driving this exercise, DMEO, NITI Aayog has been designated as the knowledge 
partner and coordinator to engage with different stakeholders. The GIRG initiative of 
the Government of India aims at leveraging the monitoring of 27 Global Indices (GIs) 
for driving growth and reforms in the country. The 27 GIs selected for monitoring 
under GIRG are published by 18 unique global agencies (publishing agencies) which 
include Multilateral Organizations, International NGOs, Private Organizations, and 
Universities spread across four broad themes namely economy, development, 
governance, and industry. These 27 Indices have been allocated to 18 nodal 
Ministries in addition to the MoSPI, MEA, and MIB.  
  

18 
 
CHAPTER IV 
ATAL INNOVATION MISSION (AIM) & SELF-EMPLOYMENT AND TALENT 
UTILISATION (SETU) 
 
4.1 Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) is the Government of India’s flagship initiative to 
create and promote a culture of innovation and entrepreneurship in the country. AIM is 
an Innovation promotion platform involving academics, entrepreneurs and researchers 
and draw upon national and international experiences to foster a culture of innovation, 
R&D and Scientific Research in India.  Self Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU) 
is  a Techno-Financial, Incubation and Facilitation Programme to support all aspects 
of start-up businesses, and other self-employment activities, particularly in technology-
driven areas.Since its inception in 2016, AIM has established over 10,000 Atal 
Tinkering Labs, 72 Atal Incubation Centres, 14  Atal Community Innovation Centres 
and has launched 50 Atal New India Challenges across sectors. AIM has also forged 
76 domestic and international partnerships and 10 strategic programmes under AIM 
Ecosystem Development Programme. All the initiatives of AIM are currently being 
monitored and managed systematically using realtime MIS systems and through 
dynamic dashboards. To ensure continuous improvements, AIM has its programmes 
regularly reviewed by third-party agencies. 
 
4.2 Atal Tinkering Labs( ATLs) 
 Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) are a state of-the-art space established in schools 
with the goal to foster curiosity and problem-solving innovative mindset, amongst high 
school students across the country,s through 21st century tools and technologies. AIM 
has established 10,000 ATLs in schools in more than 700 districts across all 
States/UTs in India. 
 To strengthen the ever growing ecosystem of ATLs, a comprehensive self-
monitoring framework ‘ATL Sarthi’ has been  established . The initiative has four 
pillars to ensure the performance enhancement of ATLs through regular process 
improvements like a self-reporting dashboard known as MyATL Dashboard and 
Compliance SOPs for schools to ensure financial and non-financial compliances, on-
ground enablement of ATLs in collaboration with relevant local authorities through 
Cluster-based Approach and providing ownership to schools to analyze their 
performance through Performance-Enablement (PE) Matrix. 
 

19 
 
4.3 Atal Incubation Centre(AIC) 
 This programme was launched in 2017 with a vision to build an ecosystem of 
business incubators where entrepreneurs can gain access to a variety of facilities, 
including physical infrastructure, training and education, and access to key 
stakeholders including investors, other innovators, and mentors. Grant up to Rs 10 
crores is given to the AICs/Established Incubator Centers over a 5-year period. Till 
now AIM has established 72 AICs in the 21 States and UTs of India in Academic and 
Non Academic Institutions. These centres have supported more than 3500 Startups 
and have generated 40,000+ jobs across the country which works in different sectors 
and focus. 
AIM has also launched an Assessment Framework for Startup Incubation 
Centres to monitor and benchmark the performance of AICs in the year 2021. The 
framework will become an annual exercise for evaluating the performance of 
incubators and envisages to be a standard framework for evaluating incubators across 
the country.        
4.4     As regard the primary focus areas of the Atal Incubation Centres , the Ministry 
informed that AICs have been established to support startups across all areas of 
national importance. Over years, few focus areas have emerged out of these AICs, 
are mentioned below –  
 Textile and apparels 
 Defense technologies 
 Handicrafts  
 SDGs 
 Climate Tech 
 Women Centric  
 Coffee based products  
 Agri-technologies 
 Medical technologies 
 Education and livelihood 
 
4.5  When asked about the contribution of AICs in the indigenization of technology 
and infrastructure and estimate of the foreign exchange (FOREX) savings attributed to 
the innovations developed through the AIC, the Ministry of Planning in their written 
reply  furnished following information:- 
 

20 
 
“Atal Incubation Centres (AICs) are playing a pivotal role in indigenizing 
technologies and infrastructure in India by fostering a culture of innovation and 
supporting startups with resources and mentorship. 
 
 Support for Indigenous Innovation: AICs provide a platform for startups working 
on region-specific challenges, helping them develop solutions that are culturally 
and economically suited to local needs. This approach promotes indigenous 
technology development, tailored to Indian markets, rather than adopting 
foreign models that may not be fully compatible with Indian requirements. 
 Funding and Resource Access: Many AICs offer grants, seed funding, and 
investment access, which are crucial for startups with limited resources. This 
financial support helps young businesses in high-potential fields such as 
agritech, healthtech, and renewable energy gain a foothold, enabling them to 
develop homegrown solutions without reliance on foreign capital or 
technologies. 
 
  AICs are contributing towards indigenization of technologies, particularly in    
sectors such as – defence-tech, textiles and biotechnology. Cumulative FOREX 
savings attributed to innovations developed through AICs is estimated to be 
around Rs.250 crore. “ 
 
4.6.   In reply to a specific query of the Committee, Ministry of Planning has informed 
that since inception, more than 450 Patents have been generated by startups 
incubated under AICs. 
 
4.7  The Committee wanted to know about the research facilities created in 
Universities and to facilitate the purpose, AICs established, to promote research and 
development,  the Ministry of Planning intimated that AIM is mandated to establish 
101 Atal Incubation Centers (AICs) nationwide. Till date, AIM has established 72 AICs 
and R&D centers  in various Universities and remaining 29 AICs have been 
provisionally shortlisted. 
 
Atal Community Innovation Centre (ACICs) 
4.8 Atal Community Innovation Centers (ACICs) have been launched to encourage 
a spirit of entrepreneurship in the underserved/unserved regions of India by providing 
enabling infrastructure and facilitating environment for innovation. Till now, 14 ACICs 
have been operationalized across 9 States, with 36 more centres undergoing 
compliance check to establish ACIC. AIM intends to establish over 50 ACICs by the 
end of 2024. A total of Rs. 12+ crores has been disbursed to operationalise ACICs 
across India.  

21 
 
 
4.9    Atal Community Innovation Centres (ACICs) have been launched to encourage 
a spirit of entrepreneurship in the underserved/unserved regions of India by providing 
enabling infrastructure and facilitating environment for innovation. . AIM intends to 
establish over 50 ACICs. by the end of 2024 and till now only 14 ACICs have been 
operationalized across 9 States. When asked as to how Government propose to 
achieve this massive target with in the set deadline, the ministry in their written 
submissions provided as under :- 
 
“AIM intends to establish 50 ACICs across the country, out of which 14 have 
been operationalized. To establish the remaining 36 ACICs, AIM opened “Call for 
applications” through an online application portal followed by in-person 
presentation before a Screening-cum-Selection Committee. Through the 
committee’s recommendations, 36 institutions have been identified for 
establishment of ACICs. AIM plans to disburse the grant-in-aid to the selected 36 
ACICs as soon as it receives the necessary approvals for a recast AIM program.” 
                                                                               
Atal New India Challenge (ANIC) 
4.10 Atal New India Challenge (ANIC) is a flagship programme of Atal Innovation 
Mission, . The programme aims to seek, select, support and nurture technology-based 
innovations that solve sectoral challenges of national importance and societal  
 relevance. The primary goals of the ANIC programme are to incentivize innovations in 
areas critical to India’s development and growth – Education, Health, Water and 
Sanitation, Agriculture, Food Processing, Housing, Energy, Mobility, Space 
Application etc. ANIC solicits innovations in the prototype stage and supports the 
selected start-ups through to the commercialization stage over a course of 12 – 18 
months by funding up to INR 1 crore and other associated support from the AIM 
innovation ecosystem. 
      ANIC launched 2nd phase of the programme titled “ANIC 2.0”. Under ANIC 2.0 
–36 challenges were launched in 2 phases covering 12 sectors. 120 start-ups/MSMEs 
have been selected under ANIC 2.0 for funding and other associated support from 
AIM.  
 AIM Ecosystem Development Programme (AEDP) 
4.11 AEDP is strengthening the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem by 
building networks of relevant stakeholders to provide additional value to AIM 
beneficiaries beyond the framework of structured programs. AEDP has forged more 
than 70 domestic and international partnerships across various corporations, 
foundations engaging with industry leaders and faculty that support AIM beneficiaries 

22 
 
through infrastructure and technology, market and investor access, creation of 
modules, and adoption of ATLs.    
To create a global narrative for supporting startups and enabling synergies 
between startups, corporates, investors, innovation agencies and other key 
ecosystem stakeholders a ‘Startup 20 Engagement Group’ has been initiated under 
G20 India presidency of 2023.  The purpose of this group is to provide a common 
platform for startups from G20 member countries to come together to develop 
actionable guidance in the form of building of enabler’s capacities, identification of 
funding gaps, enhancement of employment opportunities, achievement of SDGs 
targets & climate resilience, and growth of an inclusive ecosystem.  
 
4.12    The Output and Outcome targets of AIM including SETU for the year 2024-25 
can be seen at Annexure II. 
4.13 The allocation to AIM including SETU for the last four years are given below: 
 (in Rs. Crore)  
 
Year                               BE                    Actuals 
 Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital 
2021-22 342 - 342 341.96 - 
2022-23 145.31 10 155.31 169.42 - 
2023-24 144.30 10.70 155 96.70 0.12 
2024-25 144.30 10.70 155 - - 
 
4.14 When asked to specify reasons for the underutilizations of the allocated fund of 
Rs. 155 crores (BE) during the year 2023-24, the Ministry of Planning in their written 
reply stated as under:- 
“The main reason for underutilization of allocated Budget is the ongoing recast of 
the AIM program to give it a new focus.  Consequently, no new liabilities are being 
created till this exercise is completed.  The expenditures will pick up once the AIM 
program is recast.”  
 
4.15 As per set targets, AIM has established over 10,000 Atal Tinkering Labs across 
nation, when asked as to whether 10000 ATLs  are sufficient to cater to the 
requirements of the student beneficiaries across country, the Ministry in their written 
submission stated as under:- 
  
“The proposal to expand ATLs is currently awaiting the recast of the AIM program.  
Future ATLs are likely to be established by the Education Department.  
Currently, 10,000 ATLs serve less than 5% of secondary and senior secondary 
schools. The saturation of ATLs across the country is under discussion with 
Ministry of Education.” 

23 
 
  4.16  When asked for the state-wise details of the total number of Atal Tinkering  
Labs established, the Ministry provided following details :-  
 
State-Wise Details of Atal Tinkering Labs set up by Atal Innovation Mission, NITI Aayog 
STATE / UT ATLs 
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR  ISLAND 10 
ANDHRA PRADESH 713 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH 32 
ASSAM 352 
BIHAR 97 
CHANDIGARH 22 
CHHATTISGARH 368 
DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI 4 
DELHI 198 
GOA 20 
GUJARAT 614 
HARYANA 435 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 112 
JAMMU AND KASHMIR 127 
JHARKHAND 126 
KARNATAKA 798 
KERALA 369 
LADAKH 2 
MADHYA PRADESH 601 
MAHARASHTRA 1,033 
MANIPUR 119 
MEGHALAYA 13 
MIZORAM 26 
NAGALAND 26 
ODISHA 331 
PUDUCHERRY 19 
PUNJAB 230 
RAJASTHAN 511 
SIKKIM 27 
TAMIL NADU 975 
TELANGANA 379 
TRIPURA 27 
UTTAR PRADESH 955 
UTTARAKHAND 87 
WEST BENGAL 242 
TOTAL 10,000 
 
  
  

24 
 
CHAPTER V 
ASPIRATIONAL DISTRICTS PROGRAMME (ADP) AND ASPIRATIONAL BLOCKS 
PROGRAMME (ABP)  
 
Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) 
 
 5.1  The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) is an initiative aimed at 
transforming 112 relatively underdeveloped districts of India by focusing on 49 key 
indicators across five critical sectors: Health and Nutrition, Education, Agriculture and 
Water Resources, Financial Inclusion and Skill Development, and Basic Infrastructure. 
This pioneering initiative has been instrumental in addressing critical gaps and 
fostering collaboration among diverse stakeholders, showcasing a model that goes 
beyond individual districts to contribute to nationwide inclusive and sustainable 
development. The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP), marked its six years of 
implementation in January 2024, as a testament to a pragmatic and data-driven 
approach to socio economic development in relatively underdeveloped regions of 
India. The impact of the ADP extends beyond individual districts. It offers a blueprint 
for scaling up initiatives across the nation, showcasing a model that can be replicated 
in diverse socio-economic contexts. By providing practical solutions to challenges 
faced by different regions, the programme contributes to the broader goal of inclusive 
and sustainable development in India.  
                                         
 
5.2  The ‘Champions of Change (CoC)’ is a real-time data collection and monitoring 
dashboard. The name emphasizes the critical role played by the DM/DC and their 
teams in the progress of districts. ADP hinges on inducing competition among 112 
districts through regular ranking, which is dynamic and reflects the incremental (delta) 
improvement made every month. Districts are encouraged to improve their data 
collection and maintenance mechanisms to enter up-to-date data on the dashboard. 
The Champions of Change portal 2.0  has been upgraded to further empower the 
District Administrations towards data-driven governance and evidence-based policy 
making. CoC 2.0 hosts many new features such as Citizen Reports, Citizen 
Feedback, Advanced Analytics, Project Management, Geo-Spatial Maps and other 
AI/ML Solutions. The automated system generated mailers on data quality and 
monthly performance are sent to the districts highlighting any discrepancies in data 
entered by them, based on pre-configured logics in the system.  
 
 

25 
 
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
 
5.3 Expanding on the ADP's framework, the Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
was launched in January 2023, targeting 500 underdeveloped blocks nationwide, 
These Blocks were selected on the basis of the Antyodaya data (MoRD), by by inter-
ministerial Committee in consultation with states. 160 blocks out of 500 are from 
Aspirational Districts. ABP aims to achieve comprehensive development by focusing 
on essential government services in Health & Nutrition, Education, Agriculture & Allied 
Services, Social Development and Basic Infrastructure. The objective is to ensure a 
tailored approach to development, allowing for context-based strategies that address 
the specific needs of each region, bringing decision-making closer to the grassroots. 
This holistic approach not only targets inequalities but also catalyses economic 
development, aligning with SDGs. ABP emphasizes last-mile service delivery, raising 
awareness, and providing a common platform for block administrations to showcase 
best practices and share learnings.  
            
5.4   One of the major initiatives under ABP was capacity building workshops for 
block-level officials and preparation of Block Development Strategy (BDS). Over 4,500 
block-level officials underwent Leadership training in 10 centres across the country 
during August and September 2023. A key outcome of this training has been the 
preparation of a robust BDS by all the Aspirational Blocks. The BDS outlines the 
priorities in each sector of the Block and the services that will be offered to the citizens 
while making the best possible use of the existing resources to achieve saturation of 
the identified socio-economic indicators. The strategy maps out targets for the 
forthcoming year and lays down a clear plan of action to achieve these objectives. All 
blocks under this programme have successfully crafted their BDS and are working 
towards achieving the set objectives.     
 
5.5  In a concerted effort to drive rapid and effective development in India's most 
underdeveloped regions, the Government launched a 3 month (July to September’ 
2024) focused campaign ‘Sampoornta Abhiyaan’ on 4-8 July, 2024 to ensure 
saturation of 6 identified indicators across the themes Health and Nutrition, Education, 
Agriculture and Social Development/ Financial inclusion and Skill Development. The 
objective was to focus on a few critical indicators and saturate these in a time-bound 
manner in all Aspirational Districts and Blocks. Under the programme Distrticts/ Blocks 
were were required to develop 3-month Action Plan  to implement awareness and 

26 
 
behavior change campaigns and other outreach events as per chalked out  campaign 
calendar. So far, 21 Aspirational Districts and 90 Aspirational Blocks have saturated 
all 6 indicators.          
        
5.6  Considering the efficacy  and achievements under ADP/ABP,  the Committee 
sought to know, if  the Government is contemplating  any increase in number of 
Aspirational Districts/Blocks, the Ministry of Planning in their  written reply stated the 
following:- 
 
“The main objective of the ADP is to achieve saturation in the identified 49 
Key Performance Indicators within the Aspirational Districts, which is an 
ongoing effort. To ensure that available resources are effectively targeted 
where they are most needed, no increase in the number of districts is 
currently envisaged. 
 
The Aspirational Blocks Programme is in the early stages of implementation. 
Any changes to the list of blocks will be based on performance. The focus 
currently is on effectively implementing the programme in the identified blocks 
and monitoring their progress.” 
                                       
 
5.7    The progress of district and blocks in 49 key performance indicators under ADP 
and ABP can be accessed through following dedicated public portals: 
1. ADP- http://championsofchange.gov.in/site/coc-home/ 
2. ABP- https://abp.championsofchange.gov.in/  
 
5.8  As The emphasis on data is a strategic acknowledgment that substantial 
improvements in socio-economic outcomes are contingent upon identifying and 
addressing challenges through rigorous data analysis, the Committee sought to know 
about the methods for ensuring the correctness and quality of data on which the 
success of the ADP/ABP is dependent, the Ministry of Planning in their written replies 
submitted the following :- 
 
“NITI Aayog collects data at both district and block levels as part of the 
Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) and the Aspirational Blocks 
Programme (ABP).  
 
Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP)  
 
Under the ADP, most of the data is sourced directly from the districts, where 
the district administrations upload the data. In order to ensure that ground level 

27 
 
data are reflected accurately, NITI Aayog uses a three-stage verification 
strategy. 
Stage 1 – Administration-led verification - District and state administrations 
already adhere to scheme-specific guidelines for sample-based data checks, 
overseen by supervisors and senior officers.  
Stage 2 - Analytics-based verification -  After the data is verified by local 
supervisors, it is uploaded to the Champions of Change dashboard 
(championsofchange.gov.in), which uses in-built analytics to detect any 
anomalous data patterns. If irregularities are identified, alerts are sent to the 
concerned District Magistrates for immediate action. 
Stage 3 - Third-party Survey - NITI Aayog has conducted third party survey of 
relevant indicators under ADP.  
 
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
 
Unlike ADP, under the ABP, data is not filled directly by the blocks; instead, 
it is sourced from the databases of relevant central ministries. This improves 
the data accuracy and reduces the reporting burden on local administrative 
units.”          
 
5.9  Asked about the measures taken to improve performance of States/UTs lagging 
behind on designated key indicators, the Ministry in their written submission stated the 
following:- 
“The Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) and the Aspirational Blocks 
Programme (ABP) target underdeveloped pockets within states and union 
territories, focusing on district and block-level disparities rather than addressing 
State/UT wide performance. These programmes represent a model for good 
governance by focusing on localized development through real-time data 
monitoring and promoting governance reforms at the ground level. These 
initiatives were launched to address inter- and intra-state disparities by 
emphasizing the following guiding principles:-  
 
(a) Convergence 
 
ADP and ABP emphasize convergence between various Central and State 
Government schemes to ensure that resources are utilized efficiently and that 
the full potential of various welfare programs is realized. This alignment helps 
districts and blocks integrate sectoral interventions, improving outcomes in 
areas such as health, education, and infrastructure.  
 
(b) Collaboration 
 
Collaboration is a key pillar of both programs, fostering partnerships between 
the Centre, State, District Administrations, Development Partners, and Citizens. 
These collaborative efforts create a unified approach to tackling the challenges 

28 
 
faced by underdeveloped areas. To ensure effective implementation, a Joint 
Secretary or Additional Secretary-level officer from the Government of India is 
appointed as the Central Prabhari Officer for each Aspirational District. These 
officers provide strategic guidance to district administrations. A significant 
component of this collaboration involves Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
contributions from Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs), which provide 
critical support for various district-level initiatives. Additionally, development 
partners provide technical and on-the-ground assistance, complementing 
government efforts to accelerate progress. 
 
(c) Competition 
 
Healthy competition is promoted between districts and blocks through monthly 
rankings based on their performance across Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs). These rankings are based on incremental progress, ensuring that even 
districts/blocks starting from lower baselines have the opportunity to compete 
and improve. This competitive spirit incentivizes districts and blocks to 
continuously innovate and enhance their service delivery.  
 
(d) Capacity Building 
 
A crucial component of both programmes is capacity building for district and 
block-level officials. Under the ABP, a major initiative was launched in 2023-24, 
training nearly 5,000 block-level functionaries in leadership and sectoral topics. 
This training covers key sectors such as health, education, and livelihoods, 
directly empowering local officials to manage and implement development 
programs more effectively. Key strategies within the ABP include the Delta 
Ranking system, which rewards blocks for measurable thereby incentivizing 
continuous improvement. Deploying block fellows introduces fresh energy and 
innovative approaches to governance, helping tackle complex local challenges. 
Additionally, the program emphasises capacity building, training 5000 block 
officials in leadership and sector-specific skills to ensure effective policy 
implementation and drive progress. One of the main strategies for the current 
year is to deploy a targeted approach through initiatives like Sampoomata 
Abhiyaan, which aim to saturate key indicators, ensuring comprehensive 
coverage and maximising the impact of interventions. This focused strategy not 
only boosts the delivery of essential services but also actively involves local 
communities in their development journey, paving the way for sustainable 
growth and better quality of life in these regions.” 
 
5.10    The Output and Outcome targets of Official Development Assistance (ODA) 
from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) for the year 2023-24 can be seen at Annexure III. 
 

29 
 
5.11 Under Official Development Assistance (ODA) from Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Government 
of India provides  fund to Aspirational Districts on challenge method.  Under this 
programme, every month (beginning January 2019), Districts are to be provided 
additional allocation on the basis of rank secured by them depending upon the 
incremental progress in key performance indicators of Aspirational Districts 
Programme.  In addition for Aspirational Districts Programme, Government of India 
has set up an Empowered Committee of Secretaries.  This Committee is empowered 
to sanction critical projects for the Aspirational Districts in addition to taking up 
projects for monitoring and validating data pertaining to SDGs in India.The allocation 
to Official Development Assistance (ODA) from Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the last four years are 
given below:- 
(In Rs. Crore) 
Year 
 
BE 
 
RE 
 
Actuals 
 
%increase /decrease 
in BE from previous 
year 
2021-22 581 
 
- 580.96 
 
+222.78% 
 
2022-23 
 
. 01 - 496.81 
 
-100% 
2023-24 
 
433 
 
-  +4329900% 
2024-25 
 
433 
 
- - - 
 
 
5.12   As it is evident from the details mentioned above that there is a  massive 
Increase in the BE 2023-24 over BE 2022-23 and thereafter nil utilization of the 
allocated  budget during FY 2023-24, when the Committee enquired about the  
reasons for the huge  deviations, the Ministry of Planning in their written reply stated 
as under:- 
“Under the EAP-SDG Phase II, a total allocation of Rs. 933 Crore was 
approved for the Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP) for the financial years 
2022-24. This allocation was broken down into Rs. 500 Crore for FY 2022-23 
and Rs. 433 Crore for FY 2023-24. Since the allocation for FY 2022-23 was Rs. 
500 Crore, there is no massive increase in the Budget Estimates (BE) for FY 
2023-24. 
According to the Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance, in 
their OM No. F.No. 1(18) PFMS/FCD/2021 dated March 9, 2022, the Central 
Nodal Agency (CNA) Model-2 was introduced for the Aspirational Districts 
Programme (ADP) starting December 2022. As per the revised guidelines by 

30 
 
MoF, certain validations in PFMS were mandated for making new sanctions in 
FY 2023-24. These validations include: 
(i) The bank account balance of the CNA must be less than 6.25% of the 
allocated budget for that CNA. 
(ii) The sanction amount must be less than 25% of the allocated budget for that 
CNA. 
A total amount of Rs. 496.81 Crore was sanctioned in FY 2022-23. The 
districts are given a time period of upto 2 years to complete the projects 
sanctioned as per EAP-SDG guidelines, resulting in a high CNA balance. Given 
this balance, generation of new sanctions is not allowed.  
Consequently, only a token amount of Rs. 8 against the administrative 
approval of Rs. 178.23 Crore was issued during FY 2023-24, resulting in 
budget savings for that year. However, the EAP SDG Phase-II has already 
been extended by the Department of Expenditure for FY 2024-25, for full 
utilization of the budget under the scheme.” 
 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER VI 
STATE SUPPORT MISSION (SSM) 
 
6.1  State Support Mission is an umbrella initiative of NITI Aayog announced in the 
Union Budget of FY 2023-24 aimed at fostering structured and institutionalized 
engagement of NITI Aayog with States and UTs. The mission facilitate States/UTs to 
develop a roadmap to achieve their socio-economic goals and facilitate their 
development strategies in alignment with national priorities, putting special focus on 
the core strength areas of the respective States/UTs. Under this mission, NITI Aayog 
support interested states to establish State Institution for Transformation (SIT) to act 
as a multi-disciplinary resource to steer the development strategies in the States/UTs. 
The States/UTs can either establish a separate institution as SITs or reimagine the 
role of their existing institutions, such as planning departments and boards.  
 
State Institution for Transformation (SITs)  
 
6.2  The States/UTs have established State Institution for Transformation( SIT) to 
reimagine the role of their existing institutions, such as Planning Departments and 
Boards, with the support of NITI Aayog. SIT being the most important component of 
SSM constitutes a multi-disciplinary Programme Implementation Unit (PIU), an 
embedded team consisting of sectoral experts including a Team Leader as required 
by the States/UTs, to facilitate establishment of SIT under the Mission. Till date a total 
20 SITs have been notified under SSM that are actively working to identify state 
specific growth drivers and growth enablers to boost their socio-economic growth, 
thereby facilitating state and sector-specific implementation and development 
strategies. 
 
NITI For States Platform (NFS) & Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) 
 
6.3   NITI Aayog has set up twin platforms NITI for States (NFS) and Viksit Bharat 
Strategy Room (VBSR) on 7th March, 2024. NITI for States (NFS) is meant to support 
government officials across States, Districts and Blocks to make evidence-based 
policy and administrative decisions. A set of knowledge products have been put 
together on the platform for various socio-economic sectors across two cross-cutting 
themes- Gender and Climate. The platform brings together a vast repository of 
governance best practices, policy resources and data insights across all States/UTs.  

32 
 
Viksit Bharat Strategy Room (VBSR) was also developed under NFS to enable 
rich visualization and engagement with insights, information and knowledge to enable 
effective decision-making. VBSR has been set up within NITI Aayog premises to 
engage top leaders across Central, State and District administration on critical 
insights, serving as a blueprint for further replication by States and UTs. 
 
NITI-State Workshop Series  
6.4   NITI Aayog has launched ‘NITI-State Workshop Series’ for fostering cooperative 
and competitive federalism. The workshops focus on themes relevant to socio 
economic development of the States/UTs and other emerging areas of national and 
global interest. It provides a unified platform for collaboration and knowledge sharing 
on key development issues concerning States/UTs by sharing policy insights and 
good governance practices, etc. across States/UTs.  
6.5    State Support Mission (SSM) was announced in the Union Budget of FY 2023-
24. This scheme was allocated a sum of Rs. 50 Lakh in 2022-23 (RE) and Rs. 40 
crore each in 2023-24 and 2024-25 (BE). The mission is to be  implemented  from 
2022-23 to 2024-25. The allocations to SSM till date have been mentioned below:- 
 
(in Rs. Crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
 Revenue Capital Total  Revenue Capital 
2022-23 - - - .50 - - 
2023-24 39.70 .30 40 - 21.57 - 
2024-25 39.99 .01 40 -- - - 
 
6.6  Seeing the allocations, the Committee pointed out that out of the total allocated 
funds during 2023-24, only 53.92% of the allocated funds were utilized and sought 
reasons for the same, the Ministry of Planning in their written reply submitted following 
clarifications:- 
 
“The scheme of SSM has the major objective of supporting interested 
States/UTs in establishing State Institutions for Transformation (SITs) or 
strengthening their existing Planning Departments/Boards.  
In FY 2023-24, proposals/action plans of 15 States/UTs was approved by the 
Mission Implementation Committee (MIC) under SSM for disbursal of funds. 
However, due to lack of funds in the budget head Grant-in-Aid (GIA) General, 
the funds were not disbursed to all 15 States/UTs. With the available fund of 
Rs. 14.0 Cr. in the head of Grant-in-Aid (GIA) General, Rs. 12.8 Cr. was 
disbursed to the following States/UTs: 

33 
 
1. Karnataka 
2. Uttar Pradesh 
3. Chhattisgarh 
4. Uttarakhand 
5. Sikkim 
6. Assam 
7. Tripura 
8. Puducherry 
 2. As SSM is a demand driven scheme and was in a nascent stage during FY 
23-24, therefore, funds were utilised under some specific heads, only.” 
             
6.7  When enquired about the State Institutions for Transformation (SITs) established 
during 2023-24 against the projected physical targets, the Ministry of Planning in their 
written replies submitted following details:- 
 
“ A total of 20 SITs were notified and established during FY 2023-24 against the 
projected target of 7 SITs under this scheme, funds were disbursed to 8 SITs for 
a) hiring of Professionals under Programme Implementation Unit (PIU); b) 
administrative expenses for PIU; c) establishing and strengthening M&E System 
and Data Analytics Platform; and d) for undertaking studies, projects, workshops, 
conferences, etc. concerning priority sectors.” 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER VII 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS (SDGs) 
 
7.1 NITI Aayog has the twin mandate to oversee the adoption and monitoring of the 
SDGs in the country and promote competitive and cooperative federalism among 
States and UTs. NITI Aayog  not just periodically collect data on SDGs but proactively 
realise the goals and targets. In 2015, the United Nations General Assembly adopted 
the document titled ‘Transforming our World: 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development’, consisting of 17 Sustainable Development Goals and 169 associated 
targets. In India NITI Aayog is the nodal agency for the 2030 Agenda. The SDGs were 
adopted as a universal call-to-action for people, worldwide, to address the five critical 
areas of importance by 2030: people, planet, prosperity, peace, and partnership. The 
17 SDGs and 169 targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the three 
dimensions of sustainable development i.e. economic, social and the environmental. 
The determined goals and targets were expected to stimulate action over the next 15 
years in areas of critical importance for humanity and the planet.  
 
7.2 To achieve 2030 Target, NITI Aayog has developed monitoring tools such as 
the SDG India Index, NER District SDG Index and National Multidimensional Poverty 
Index (MPI) to evaluate the performance and rank States/Districts, thus promoting 
competitive federalism. While SDG India Index provides an aggregate assessment of 
the performance of all Indian States and UTs on various SDGs, NER District SDG 
Index provides insights into goal-wise performance at district levels in the North 
Eastern Region. The National MPI captures overlapping deprivations across the three 
dimensions of health, education and standard of living across 12 indicators. These 
indices help leaders and change-makers evaluate their performance on social, 
economic and environmental parameters. 
          
7.3 The National Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), released by NITI Aayog, is 
a comprehensive index which measures the simultaneous deprivations across key 
dimensions of health, education, and standard of living three, encompassing 12 
indicators across all States and UTs. The first edition of the Index was published in 
2021, while the second edition followed in 2023. The Index indicates the State/Union 
Territory-wise details of multidimensional poverty in India. The National 
Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) is closely aligned with the methodology used to 

35 
 
compute Global Multidimensional Poverty Index. Both indices assess poverty through 
a multidimensional lens, evaluating simultaneous deprivations in these three key 
dimensions. The National Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) aims to utilize the 
monitoring mechanism and methodology of the internationally acknowledged MPI to 
meticulously assess both national and subnational performance, with the goal of 
initiating targeted programmatic actions and reforms. Subsequently, NITI Aayog in 
collaboration with UNDP, and Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative 
(OPHI) also developed India’s National MPI that offers a multi-dimensional 
perspective on poverty. 
 
7.4  NITI Aayog  released the second edition of the National MPI report titled ‘National 
Multidimensional Poverty Index: ‘A Progress Review 2023’ on 17 July,2023.  The 
report brings attention to the status of multidimensional poverty based on NFHS-5, 
outlining India’s progress in reducing multidimensional poverty at national, state and 
district levels. The National Multidimensional Poverty Index (NMPI) measures 
simultaneous deprivations across three equally weighted dimensions of Health, 
Education and Standard of Living that are represented by 12 SDG aligned indicators. 
Following are the major highlights of the report:- 
i) The proportion of India’s multidimensionally poor has nearly halved from 24.85 
percent to 14.96 percent between the 2015-16 and 2019-21 period, resulting in 
13.5 crore individuals escaping multidimensional poverty during the 5-year 
period. 
ii) The progress underscores that India is on track to achieve SDG Target 1.2 that 
aims to reduce “at least by half the proportion of men, women and children of 
all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions” 
by 2030.  
iii) The decline in multidimensional poverty was consistently noted at subnational 
levels as well. Uttar Pradesh demonstrated the most significant progress, with 
the highest number of individuals (3.43 crore) escaping multidimensional 
poverty between 2015-16 to 2019-21, followed by Bihar (2.25 crore) and 
Madhya Pradesh (1.36 crore). 
 
7.5  NITI Aayog in collaboration with United Nations Development Programme 
recently published a discussion paper on the multidimensional poverty in India since 
the year 2005-06, This paper specifically focuses on the prevalence of 

36 
 
multidimensional poverty in India from 2005-06 to 2022-23. According to the 
discussion paper, India has experienced a substantial reduction in multidimensional 
poverty, decreasing from 29.17 percent in 2013-14 to 11.28 percent in 2022 23.                      
7.6  On being asked about the number of  Sustainable Development Goals realized till 
date and steps taken to expedite implementation of SDGs, the Ministry of planning in 
their written  replies furnished the following status:-      
“The progress on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is reported 
through the SDG India Index, developed by NITI Aayog. Since 2018, NITI 
Aayog has been consistently monitoring the implementation of SDGs through 
the SDG India Index and Dashboard. It ranks States and Union Territories 
across 16 SDGs with qualitative analysis of SDG-17. The Index indicates the 
state-wise score of each SDGs. This score is an indication of the overall 
position of the State/UTs in their journey towards achieving the SDGs. The 
index not only assesses progress but also motivates States to actively engage 
in SDG localization efforts. 
SDG Coordination Centres have been established in some states to ensure 
effective implementation of the SDGs. To advance this effort, NITI Aayog has 
proposed the creation of SDGCAC (Sustainable Development Goals 
Coordination and Acceleration Centres) to expedite the localization of the 
SDGs. In this endeavor, NITI Aayog stands prepared to support States and 
Union Territories, as required, in localizing the SDGs through the establishment 
of these centres. The States and UTs are expected to adopt a similar structure 
and focus on several key areas to enhance their efforts. NITI Aayog also 
extends its support to States/UTs in developing state-specific indices and 
dashboards to monitor their regional progress and customize SDG 
implementation according to local needs.” 
 
7.7  NITI Aayog and UNDP India have signed an MoU  for five years, in August 2023 
to formalise a framework of cooperation on a range of areas, including SDG 
localisation, data-driven monitoring, Aspirational Districts and Blocks, among others. 
NITI Aayog is the nodal Institution for coordinating the adoption and monitoring of 
SDGs at the national and sub-national levels. UNDP plays the integrator role in 
coordinating efforts to fast-track progress on the SDGs within the UN system.  
                                                        
  

37 
 
 
   PART - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Analysis of Budget 
 
1. The Committee note that the total budget allocation of the Ministry of 
Planning for the year 2024-25 is Rs.837.26 crore. This comprises of an outlay of 
Rs. 205.26 crore for expenditure other than Centrally Sponsored and Central 
Sector Schemes and Rs. 632.00 crore for central Sector schemes/projects 
expenditure. There is only a nominal increase of 1.56% in the BE 2024-25 over 
BE 2023-24, which was pegged at Rs. 824.39 crore. The Committee note that 
actual expenditure for fiscal 2023-24 was to the tune of Rs.290.81 crore which 
stood at only 35.27% of the BE. The underutilization of the allocated grants has 
been attributed to the factors like slower pace of fund utilization under 
Aspirational Districts Programme/ Aspirational Blocks Programme at district 
level, recasting of Atal Innovation Mission and certain restrictions imposed by 
Ministry of Finance on creating fresh committed liabilities. The Committee are of 
the firm view that not all of the intervening responsible factors were 
unforeseeable and careful financial planning could contain the underutilization 
of allocated grants.  The recasting of AIM was not a sudden development and 
could be kept in consideration well ahead while allocating funds for the scheme. 
Optimum resources utilization is the crucial ingredient of prudent financial 
planning and parking of funds in one Head may devoid other priorities of the 
required funds. In opinion of the Committee at RE stage Ministry must be in 
position to assess and estimate with greater accuracy the probable 
requirements of funds depending upon the pace of fund utilization and 
demands for budget support therefore must be closest to the actual projected 

38 
 
requirements at RE stage. The Committee desire and recommend Ministry to be 
more fiscally prudent in future in allocating as well as utilising the available 
monetary resources.  
 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) 
2. The Committee note that the budget allocation during FY 2024-25  
towards the flagship scheme of Atal Innovation Mission are pegged at Rs.155 
crore with no enhancement over the allocations of previous financial year 2023-
24. The Committee further note that there had been an underutilization of the 
allocated budget in FY 2023-24, where the Actuals were Rs.96.82 crore only 
against the BE of 155 crore  which is  only 62.46%  of the allocated budget in 
percentage term. The Ministry of Planning has stated that the underutilization 
has resulted on account of ongoing recast exercise of AIM Programme 
intending to give AIM a new focus and hence no fresh liability was created till 
the completion of the recast process. Nonetheless, the impact of recast process 
has evidently cascaded upon the progress of other initiatives under AIM,  like 
network expansion of Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs). They have informed that the 
current ATLs network of 10,000 labs is only able to cater to the requirements of 
less than 5% of Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools. In this regard, 
Ministry of Planning has apprised that proposal for expansion of ATL network is 
presently under consideration of Ministry of Education and awaiting the 
completion of recast of the AIM programme.  The recasting exercise has 
affected the progress of the projects in the year 2022-23 as well.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend Ministry of Planning to expedite recasting of 
AIM to give way for the clearance and start of other initiatives and programmes 
under the umbrella scheme of AIM which are facing delays on this account.  
  

39 
 
 
Atal Tinkering Labs Network 
3. The Committee note that the Government has successfully established a 
huge network of 10,000 Atal Tinkering Labs (ATLs) across Indian States\UTs.  
The Committee would first like to commend the Ministry of Planning for the 
accomplishment of the ambitious target.  A varied number of ATLs have been 
established in these States/UTs ranging from 2 in Union Territory of Ladakh 
straight to 1033 in State of Maharashtra.  The number and network distribution 
of these ATLs does not appear to correspond with the area of the States\UTs. 
Surprisingly, in the sprawling state of Rajasthan only 511 ATLs have been 
established and states having considerably smaller territorial boundaries like 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu have an impressive network of ATLs at 
their disposal. North Eastern States are also having comparatively scanty 
coverage of ATLs.  The Committee further observe that the proposal for the 
expansion of ATLs network is currently under contemplation of Ministry of 
Education. The Committee recommend that in the second phase of ATLs such 
disproportions must be taken care of and ATL network must cover all States 
/UTs evenly. The Committee also want that the Ministry of Planning must not 
only confine itself to the limited target of establishing ATLs, rather it must 
proactively go all in to remove constraints and create necessary infrastructure 
to facilitate the access of ATLs  to all.  
 
Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP)/Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) 
 
4.       The Committee note that the success of ADP/ABP in its entirety depends 
upon the correctness of the data relied upon to assess and rank Districts and 
Blocks on basis of key performance parameters. It is only through rigorous 
analysis of data collected  in respective stages from varied sources that well 

40 
 
performing  Districts  and blocks are incentivized  and additional funds are 
allocated for other projects. The Committee note with satisfaction that NITI 
Aayog is presently using three stage verification strategy  for collecting and 
ensuring the correctness of data under ADP. In case of ABP, data is being 
sourced directly from databases maintained by Ministries concerned. The 
Committee are however of the opinion that Ministry should keep evolving their 
tools and techniques to further improvise their data collection techniques and 
must also employ methods like regular/random data quality checks to ensure 
the completeness and accuracy to establish  data standards.  The Committee 
would also recommend that regular Workshops and Seminars for the field 
Officers in local administrative units, working close to ground realities must be 
organized  to inculcate and share best practices in data management. The local 
administrative units must also be trained to work in coordination with other 
Government departments/agencies to take advantage of information and 
knowledge database maintained by them.  
 
Sampoornta Abhiyaan 
 
5.  The Committee note that Aspirational Districts Programme (ADP)/ 
Aspirational Blocks Programme (ABP) has presented a data-driven approach to 
socio economic development of  relatively underdeveloped Districts/Blocks of 
the country on  the  basis of performance in the 49 key indicators.  Further, for 
rapid and effective development in India's most underdeveloped regions, the 
Government  had launched a focused campaign ‘Sampoornta Abhiyaan’ in July, 
2024 to ensure saturation of 6 critical  indicators across the themes of Health 
and Nutrition and Nutrition Education, Agriculture and Social Development/ 
Financial inclusion and Skill Development in  3 months period.  The Committee 

41 
 
are satisfied to note that encouraging outcomes have been received out of this 
exercise as so far, 21 Aspirational Districts and 90 Aspirational Blocks have 
successfully saturated all 6 indicators in the short span of three months. The 
Committee therefore recommend that NITI Aayog must formulate and organize 
more such focused campaigns and drives in future to speed up saturation of  all 
remaining Districts and Blocks in respect of the rest of the KPIs.  
 
State Support Mission (SSM) 
6. The Committee note that ‘State Support Mission’ was announced in the 
Union Budget for FY 2023-24 for implementation during 2022-23 to 2024-25. 
Under this Central Sector Scheme ‘State Institution for Transformation (SIT)” 
are established in the interested States/UTs to support them achieve their 
respective social-economic goals and develop their strategies and state vision 
@2047 in alignment with Indian Vision @2047 and other national priorities and 
to re-imagine the role of their existing Planning Departments. The Committee 
has been informed that in Financial Year 2023-24 Mission Implementation 
Committee (MIC) of SSM had approved proposal /Action Plan of 15 States /UTs 
for disbursal of funds. However, due to lack of funds in the Budget Head Grant-
in-aid, General, only Rs.12.8 crore was disbursed to 8 States/UTs out of the 
available funds of Rs.14 crore. The Committee are concerned to note that 
significant initiatives like State Support Mission which aims at fostering 
structured and institutionalised engagement of NITI Aayog with States and UTs 
are getting stalled due to paucity of funds as the requisite grants were not 
released. The Committee are of view that a sound financial planning, timely 
allocation of available resources and diverting funds from non-essential 
activities to essential ones may obviate such scenario of projects/programmes 
stalling due to lack of funding. Therefore, the Committee recommend that 

42 
 
sufficient grants must not only be allocated but also released to prevent stalling 
of schemes/projects in future.  
 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
7. The Committee note that NITI Aayog is the nodal Institution for 
accomplishing 2030 Agenda of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). To 
achieve this objective NITI Aayog has developed monitoring tools like SDG 
India Index for monitoring  the progress of States and Union Territories towards 
achieving the SDGs and  National Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) to 
evaluate the performance of States\UTs. The Committee further note that the 
National MPI utilizes the monitoring mechanism and methodologies of the 
internationally acknowledged MPI to meticulously assess the national and sub-
national performance which offers a multi dimensional perspective on poverty. 
The Committee are happy to know that the alignment of National MPI with 
methodology used to compute global Multi-dimensional Poverty Index has 
offered a multi dimensional perspective on poverty and has helped reducing 
multidimensional poverty at National, State and District Level to a great length.  
The Committee note that localization of SDGs is a potent tool to give necessary 
impetus to the attainment of 2030 Agenda. The fact has been corroborated by 
the observations included in NITI Aayog, National MPI Report titled ‘National 
Multidimensional Poverty Index-A Progress Review 2023’ which mentions that 
India is moving fast towards SDG targets 1.2 which aims to reduce at least by 
half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages who are living in 
poverty by 2030. 
 
In addition to this SDG coordination Centers have also been established 
in some states to ensure effective implementation of the SDGs. The Committee 

43 
 
have been informed that in line with other initiatives NITI Aayog has also 
proposed the creation of Sustainable Development Goals Coordination and 
Acceleration Centres (SDGCAC) to support States/UTs in localizing SDGs. The 
Committee,  recommend Ministry of Planning to expedite the creation of 
SDGCACs for achieving faster localization of SDGs as the deadline of 2030 is 
approaching fast. The Committee in their previous Report had also emphasized 
the importance of localization of SDGs for achieving set 2030 target at faster 
pace. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
4 December, 2024 
13 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Bhartruhari Mahtab, 
Chairperson 
Standing Committee on Finance 
 
 
 
 
  

44 
 
Appendix-1 
 
Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-
25). The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29th October, 2024 from 1100 hrs. 
to 1245 hrs in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Arun Bharti  
3. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
4. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
5. Shri Kishori Lal  
6. Thiru Arun Nehru  
7.  Shri N. K. Premachandran  
8. Smt. Sandhya Ray  
9. Prof. Sougata Ray  
10. Shri P. V. Midhun Reddy  
11. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
12. Dr. K. Sudhakar  
13. Shri Manish Tewari  
14. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni  
15. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Sanjay Seth  
17. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
18. Smt. Darshana Singh  
19. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
20. Shri Pramod Tiwari  
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
3. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
  

45 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 
Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) 
 
1. Shri B.V.R. Subrahmanyam, Chief Executive Officer 
2. Shri Deepak Narain, AS&FA 
3. Shri Rajnath Ram, Additional Secretary  
4. Dr. Neelam Patel, Additional Secretary  
5. Shri Rajib Kumar Sen, Additional Secretary 
6. Ms. Nidhi Chhibber, DG (DMEO) 
7. Dr. Chintan Vaishnav, MD (AIM) 
8. Dr. Yogesh Suri, PD (GCS/Parl.) 
9. Shri Ch. P. Sarathi Reddy, PD (PPP/Island) 
10. Shri K.S. Rejimon, MD (SSM) 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the witnesses to 
the sitting of the Committee. After the customary introduction of the witnesses and 
their introductory remarks, the Programme Director(GCS/Parliament) made a 
PowerPoint Presentation before the Committee. The Committee then deliberated 
upon the Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) and 
the overall mandate and mission of NITI Aayog. The major issues  discussed during 
the sitting were related to the Budget allocations to NITI Aayog, allocation and 
utilization of budget grants under Aspirational Districts Programme, monitoring 
mechanism under Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework(OOMF), pilot initiative of 
Results–based financing i.e. the performance based allocations to Ministries, 
constituency-wise  network of Atal tinkering Labs and Atal Incubation Centres 
established under Atal Innovation Mission Programme, declining budget allocations 
towards Atal Tinkering Labs,  feasibility of providing research oriented atmosphere 
and facilities in Indian Universities apart from designated centers and Institutes, 
expansion of Atal Tinkering Labs to Universities, deteriorating educational standards 
of private institutions, Performance of Atal Incubation Centers in terms of forex 
savings and patents generated.  
 
3. Beside, above the Committee also discussed the impact and influence of 
Research activities of NITI Aayog over policy formulation and other legislations,  

46 
 
preparedness of India in terms of hardware and soft skills to surmount challenges 
brought forth by the third industrial revolution  to ensure smooth transition from third to 
fourth industrial revolution, shift towards clean energy and achievement of Net zero 
emissions by 2070 targets, implementation status of Sustainable Development Goals, 
proposal to increase number of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, 
supervisory and financial powers of NITI Aayog vis-a-vis OOMF, Role and mandate of  
DMEO, facilities and opportunities for research in Government  educational institutes 
as against Private Institutions, alignment of Multidimensional Poverty Index with 
international indices to ensure meeting of set targets, appropriateness of the 
expression ‘Competitive federalism’ over “Cooperative federalism” in case of a Union 
of States, usage of funds under Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), 
sensitizing the Members about Small Modular Reactors (SMRs), capacity building of 
Central & State Universities, steps taken to stop the ballooning of state debts, recent 
policies that have impaired the energy sector especially pump storages, provision of 
incentives or rewards for well performing Aspirational Blocks/Districts, authenticity of 
data relied upon to assess performing and non-performing Aspirational Blocks, extent 
of gestation period for any scheme/programme with NITI Aayog before transferring it 
to the organization concerned , assessment of the actual gains accrued from the 
investments in the funded projects etc. 
4. The witnesses responded to the queries raised by the Members and the 
Chairperson then directed the representatives of the Ministry of Planning (NITI Aayog) 
to furnish written replies to the points raised by the Members which could not be 
readily replied by them during the discussion within a weeks time to the Secretariat. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

47 
 
 Appendix-2 
 
Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on Finance (2024-25). 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 04 December, 2024 from 1500 hrs to           
1530 hrs in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri P. P. Chaudhary  
3. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu  
4. Shri Gaurav Gogoi  
5.  Shri Kishori Lal  
6. Shri Harendra Singh Malik  
7. Shri Chudasama Rajeshbhai Naranbhai  
8. Thiru Arun Nehru  
9. Shri N. K. Premachandran  
10. Dr. C. M. Ramesh  
11. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy  
12. Shri Prabhakar Reddy Vemireddy  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
14. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
15. Shri Sanjay Seth 
16. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
17. Smt. Darshana Singh 
18. Shri Pramod Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Gaurav Goyal    - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
 3. Shri Kuldeep Singh Rana   - Deputy Secretary  
 4. Shri T. Mathivanan    - Deputy Secretary  
 
 

48 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
 
i. First Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Departments of Economic Affairs, Expenditure, Financial Services, Investment 
& Public Asset Management and Public Enterprises).  
ii. Second Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Revenue). 
iii. Third Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs. 
iv. Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Planning. 
v. Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2024-25) of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
vi. Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in 59th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Cyber 
Security and Rising Incidence of Cyber/White Collar Crimes’. 
vii. Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
recommendations contained in 66th Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Performance Review and Regulation of Insurance Sector’. 
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Reports with 
minor modifications and authorised the Chairperson to finalise them and present the 
Reports to the Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

49 
 
Annexure I 
Demand No.77 – Ministry of Planning 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS i.e. PERCENTAGE INCREASE/DECREASE IN VARIOUS HEADS DURING THE LAST THREE YEARS 
             (Rs. In thousands) 
Sl. 
No
. 
Major 
Head Name of the Schemes BE         
2021-22 
 Actuals  
2021-22  
BE         2022-
23 
 Actuals  2022-23 %Increase/ 
Decrease of BE 
2022-23 over 
BE 2021-22  
BE    
2023-24 
 Actuals  
2023-24 
%Increase/ 
Decrease of BE 
2023-24 over BE 
2022-23  
BE         
2024-25 
% 
Increase/ 
Decrease 
of BE 
2024-25 
over BE 
2023-24 
    I. Establishment Expenditure                     
1 3451 Department of Planning (Revenue) 15000 13115 15500 14759 (+)3.33% 15900 15799 (+)2.58% 20376 (+)28.15
% 
1A 5475 Department of Planning (Capital) -- -- -- --   100 --   100 -- 
2 3451 NITI Aayog (Headquarters)[Revenue] 670000 1029661 1172900 1378512 (+)75.06% 1515000 
 
1317868 (+)29.17% 1592204 (+)5.10% 
2A 5475 NITI Aayog (Headquarters)[Capital] -- -- -- --   73400 53341   78700 (+)7.22% 
3 3451 Renovation and Alteration (Revenue)(#) 70000 42804 75000 67912 -- -- -- (-)100.00% --   
4 3451 Information Technology (Revenue)(#) 30000 24110 25000 31132 -- -- -- (-)100.00% --   
4A 5475 Information Technology (Capital)(#) 7800 -- 7500 2980 -- -- --   --   
5 3451 Economic Advisory Council to the Prime 
Minister(Revenue) 
30000 19387 30000 29781 -- 30000 34070 -- 43595 (+)45.32
% 
6 3451 Departmental Canteen 6000 5655 6500 5432 (+)8.33% 6500 5632 -- 6950 (+)6.92% 
7 3475/ 
3451 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation 
Office(Revenue) (@) 
160000 157288 170000 151377 (+)6.25% 166900 153640 (-)1.82% 193975 (+)16.22
% 
7A 5475 Development Monitoring and Evaluation 
Office(Capital) 
-- -- -- --   3100 5223   3700 (+)19.35
% 
    Total- Establishment Expenditure 988800 1292020 1502400 1681885 (+)51.94% 1810900 1585573 (+)20.53% 1939600 (+) 7.11% 
    II. Other Central Expenditure                     
1 3475 Grants-in-aid to National Institute of Labour 
Economics Research and Development (Revenue) 
96700 92600 98600 113000 (+)1.96% 113000 113000 (+)14.60% 113000 -- 
    Total- Other Central Expenditure 96700 92600 98600 113000 (+)1.96% 113000 113000 (+)14.60% 113000 -- 
    III. Central Sector Schemes                     

50 
 
1 3475 Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self 
Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU) 
(Revenue) 
3420000 3419649 1453100 1694291 (-)57.51% 1443000 967065 (-)0.70% 1443000 -- 
 1
A 
5475 Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self 
Employment and Talent Utilisation (SETU) 
(Capital) (*) 
-- -- 100000 -- --   107000 1291 (+)7.00% 107000 -- 
2  3475 State Support Mission (SSM) (%) [Revenue] -- -- -- -- --   397000 215762   399900 (+)0.73% 
 2
A 
5475 State Support Mission (SSM) (%) [Capital] -- -- -- -- -- 3000 --     100 (-)96.67% 
3 3475 Research and Study (&) 312200 34247 60000 33798 (-)80.78% 40000 25461 (-)33.33% 40000 -- 
 4 
3475 Official Development Assistance (ODA) from Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) for 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)((&) 
5810000 5809600 100 4968116 (-)100.00% 4330000 --   (+)4329900.00% 4330000 -- 
    Total: Central Sector Schemes 9542200 9263496 1613200 6696205 (-)83.09% 6320000 1209579 (-)5.62% 6320000 -- 
5 
  
 
Grand Total-  10627700 10648116 3214200 8491090 
 
(-)69.76% 8243900 2908152 
 
(+)156.48% 8372600 
 
(+)1.56% 
(@)  DMEO has been shifted under Major Head – 3451 from the financial year 2024-25 
(#) Two detailed heads namely 1. Renovation & Alteration 2. Information Technology (Revenue) has been shifted from Scheme to Establishment at RE stage during the FY 2020-21 
(&) An amount of Rs.25.22 crore was parked under Research and Study scheme which was re-appropriated to NITI Aayog- Headquarters during on 29.04.2021. 
(^) The scheme – Plan Formulation, Appraisal and Review has been discontinued from the financial year 2021-22. 
  
  
                                                                                                                                                                  (Rs. In thousands) 
Sl. 
No
. 
Major 
Head 
Name of the Schemes BE         
2021-22 
 Actuals  
2021-22  
BE         2022-23  Actuals  2022-23  %Increase/ 
Decrease of BE 
2022-23 over 
BE 2021-22  
BE    
2023-24 
 Actuals  
2023-24 
%Increase/ 
Decrease of BE 
2022-24 over 
BE 2022-23  
BE         
2024-25 
% 
Increase/ 
Decrease 
of BE 
2024-25 
over BE 
2024-24 
 1 3451 Deduct Recoveries   (-) 1587   (-) 246             
 2 3475 Deduct Recoveries   (-)5179   (-) 19469             
    Total actuals (After deducting 
recoveries):   10641350   8471375             
  

51 
 
Annexure II 
Ministry of Planning                                                                                                                  Demand No. 77 
Atal Innovation Mission (AIM) including Self Employment and Talent Utilization (SETU) (CS) 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators 
Targets 
2024-
25 
Outcome Indicators Targets 
2024-25 
 
 
300 
 
a. Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) 
1. To Build the 
platform for 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
in Academic 
Institutions/R&D 
and other 
Institutions 
1.1 Number of AICs 
established 
10 1. Promote a culture of 
entrepreneurship & 
innovation in India 
1.1 Number of start-ups incubated 
(physical and virtual) 
500 
1.2 Number of 
Incubator/Startup 
excellence sessions 
facilitated by AIM 
Incubators 
400 1.2 No. of jobs created by AIM 
startups (direct/indirect) 
3000 
1.3 Number of value-
adding partnerships 
established by AICs 
100 1.3 Leveraged external funding for 
startups through AIM 
incubators (x is amount of seed 
funding through AIM grant) 
8x 
1.4 Number of mentors in 
AICs 
120 1.4 Number of Intellectual 
Properties (IP) filed by AIC 
incubatees 
50 
1.5 Number of AACESS 
Centres (Atal 
Acceleration Centres 
for Scale-up of 
Startups) to be 
established* 
 
2 1.5  Number of early-revenue stage 
startups which were accelerated 
10 

52 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators 
Targets 
2024-
25 
Outcome Indicators Targets 
2024-25 
b. Atal Tinkering Lab (ATL) 
1. To Build the 
platform for 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
in schools 
1.1 Number of ATLs to be 
established 
500 1. Promote a culture of and 
ecosystem for 
entrepreneurship & 
innovation in India 
1.1  Number of students engaged in 
ATL innovation projects 
40000 
1.2 Number of school 
staff/teachers engaged 
in ATLs (in total 
schools) 
3000 1.2  Number of ATL student 
prototype innovations created 
4000 
1.3 Number of ATL 
Innovation 
Challenges/Events 
Initiated 
5 1.3  Number of Students recognized 
through SIP/SEP/Partnership 
Recognition programs 
400 
c. Atal New India Challenge (ANIC) 
1. To seek, select, 
support and 
nurture 
technology-based 
innovations that 
solve sectoral 
challenges of 
national 
importance and 
societal relevance 
1.1 Number of Sectoral 
innovation launchpads 
created in central 
government ministries 
and departments 
2 1. Products based on cutting 
edge technology relevant 
to the Indian context 
1.1 Number of innovation 
programs run through Sectoral 
Launchpads 
4 
 
1.2 Number of startups supported 
through Sectoral Launchpads 
20 
1.2 Number of 
International 
(Bilateral) Innovation 
Programs created 
1 1.3 Number of startups pilots 
conducted through Sectoral 
Launchpads 
10 
1.4 Number of startups supported 
through Bilateral Innovation 
Programs 
10 

53 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators 
Targets 
2024-
25 
Outcome Indicators Targets 
2024-25 
1.5 Number of startups pilots 
conducted through Bilateral 
Innovation Programs 
6 
d. Atal Community Innovation Centers (ACIC) 
1. To encourage a 
spirit of 
entrepreneurship 
in the 
underserved/ 
unserved regions 
of India 
1.1 No. of Atal Community 
Innovation Centres 
supported 
5 1. Create a culture of 
inclusive innovations 
through Atal Community 
Innovation Centres 
1.1 Number of ACIC start-ups/ 
social entrepreneurs supported 
(physical and virtual) 
100 
1.2 Number of Innovation 
knowledge sharing 
sessions conducted by 
ACIC 
50 1.2 Number of local community 
jobs created by ACICs 
300 
1.3 Number of Community 
outreach events to be 
conducted 
50 1.3 Number of Community 
Innovators Fellows to be 
supported 
30 
e. AIM Ecosystem Development Program (AEDP) 
1. To create an 
umbrella 
structure to 
oversee 
Innovation 
ecosystem of the 
country 
1.1 Number of new 
volunteers/mentors of 
change enrolled with 
AIM 
500 1. Creating Beneficiaries 
from Innovation 
Ecosystem created by 
AIM 
1.1 Number of sessions conducted 
by mentors 
500 
1.2 Number of LIPI Task 
Force Created 
5 1.2 Number of beneficiaries of 
knowledge sharing sessions 
conducted by LIPI Task Force 
50 
1.3 Number of LIPI 2 1.3 Number of Vernacular 20 

54 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators 
Targets 
2024-
25 
Outcome Indicators Targets 
2024-25 
Innovation Centres to 
be created 
Innovators supported by the LIPI 
Innovation Centres 
2. Strategic 
programs and 
partnerships to 
identify and fill 
the gaps in the 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship 
ecosystem of the 
country (i.e. 
programs open to 
AIM beneficiaries 
and beyond) 
2.1 No. of strategic 
programs 
ongoing/introduced 
across AIM 
ecosystem 
2 
 2.1 Connect different 
stakeholders of 
Innovation ecosystem 
such as Startups, 
Investors, Corporate, 
Academia & other 
enablers 
2.1 No. of Innovators /Startups 
supported (participation) under 
identified strategic programs 
30 
2.2 Facilitate showcasing of 
Innovative solutions by 
solution providers 
(students/ startups/ 
entrepreneurs) to 
solution seekers 
(investors/ corporate/ 
MSME/not-for-profits 
etc) 
 
 
2.2 Number of innovation solutions 
showcased at 
national/international forums 
across Innovation ecosystem 
10 
2.2 Total partnerships JSoI 
signed (new & 
renewed) across entire 
AIM ecosystem 
 
10 2.3 Provide strategic value 
to AIM and its 
beneficiaries through 
partners 
2.3Number of beneficiaries 
(Startups, Students, Innovators, 
Incubator/AIM team) 
benefitted through capacity 
development, knowledge 
modules developed, access to 
250 

55 
 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators 
Targets 
2024-
25 
Outcome Indicators Targets 
2024-25 
specialized infrastructure 
through the partners 
2.3  State Innovation 
Mission: Number of 
States/UTs with 
structured 
engagement with SIM 
(under State Support 
Mission) 
3 2.4 Engage with the 
Innovation/Entrepreneur
ship ecosystem across 
various states to build a 
network to exchange of 
ideas/best practices 
2.4 No of sessions conducted both 
in physical/virtual/hybrid mode 
5 
2.5 No of participants from entire 
ecosystem stakeholders 
(State/UTs and Central Govt., 
Incubators, Startups, 
Innovators, VC, and funding 
ecosystem players) 
250 
 
 
*This is an indicative list of indicators for AIM-OOMF FY 2024-25. The final indicators outlay may be changed subject to the approval of AIM Scheme Cabinet Note. 
 
  

56 
 
Annexure III 
2. Official Development Assistance(ODA) from Japan International Cooperation Agency(JICA) for Sustainable Development Goals (EAP-SDGs) 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY (Rs 
in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators Target 2024-25 Outcome Indicators Target 2024-25 
  
  
  
 433 
  
  
  
 Engagement with 
relatively 
underdeveloped 
Districts and Blocks 
for their Socio- 
economic 
development 
  
  
  
  
No. of projects 
submitted by 
districts and 
blocks 
  
No. of officials 
attended 
capacity 
building 
programs 
  
  
To finalize 75 project 
proposals  under 
ADP and 55 project 
proposals under ABP 
from districts and 
blocks 
  
To undertake 
capacity building 
measures/ training 
for district/block 
officials involving 
approx. 5000 
officials 
  
To sanction projects to 
districts/blocks 
addressing critical  
development gaps and 
thus accelerating the 
socio-economic progress 
of districts and blocks 
  
No. of projects 
sanctioned for 
districts and 
blocks 
  
  
To approve the 
projects (min 130) 
submitted by 
districts, by the  
Empowered 
Committee of 
Secretaries 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 
Annexure IV 
3. State Support Mission: 
FINANCIAL 
OUTLAY 
(Rs in Cr) 
OUTPUTS 2024-25 OUTCOME 2024-25 
2024-25 Output Indicators Target 2024-25 Outcome Indicators Target 2024-25 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
Engagement with 
states 
Total amount of funds estimated to be released 
to States for M&E systems, Studies, workshops 
and other admin exp 
 
 
 
Rs.30.36 Crores 
Number of 
States 
supported 
under SSM to 
develop their 
strategies and 
State Vision 
@2047 in 
alignment 
with India 
Vision 
@2047 and 
other national 
development 
priorities. 
 
 
Number of 
SITs formed 
 
 
7 
No. of workshops/ trainings/ conferences 
conducted 
8   
Deployment of Human resources in States - SITs Target 
amenable* 
 
 
 