 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
                                   
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 5 
 
                                                                                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
[ACTION TAKEN ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST 
REPORT (14TH Lok Sabha) ON “DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY 
OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS FOR THE YEAR 2004-2005”] 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 

FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken on the Recommendations contained in the 1st Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the  Ministry of External Affairs 
for the year 2004-2005] 
 
 
                Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.04.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.04.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 

 
 
COEA NO.47  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule  382 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and 
Printed by  
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
            
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2004-2005    
INTRODUCTION       
        
CHAPTER I.  Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER II. Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER III. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which replies of Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee and which  
require reiteration and also  
those recommendations/observations which 
 even though accepted by the  
Government, yet attract comments of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on  
31st March, 2005  
 
II.    Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
 Recommendations contained in the 1st Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(14th Lok Sabha) 
 
III. Statement of Recommendations/Conclusions 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2004-2005) 
Chairman - Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Omar Abdullah 
3 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
4. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
7. Shri Vinod Khanna 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
9. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
11. Shri Dinsha Patel 
12. Shri Somabhai Patel 
13. Shri Sebastian Paul 
14. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
15. Shri P .A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada  
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
20. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
21. Shri George Fernandes* 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. K. Maheshwari 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Dr. Karan Singh 
25. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
26. Shri Arun Shourie 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
29. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
30. Shri Fali S. Nariman 
31. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri P.D.T.Achary  - Secretary 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri U.S.Saxena  - Director 
Shri Shiv Kumar  - Under Secretary 
Shri Lalkithang  - Committee Officer 
 
* Shri Atal Bih ari Vajpayee ceased to a Member of t he Committee consequent upon his 
resignation w.e.f. 13.8.2004 Shri George Fernandes has been nominated to the 
Committee w.e.f. 1.10.2004  
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs having been 
authorised by the Committee to  submit the report on thei r behalf, present this 5 th 
Report (14 th Lok  Sabha) on action tak en by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 1st Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2004-2005. 
2. The 1st Report was presented to bot h the Houses  of Parliament on 20 th 
August, 2004. The Action T aken Replies of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations c ontained in the Repor t were received on 22 nd 
November, 2004.    
3. The Draft Report on the basis of Action Taken Replies was considered 
and adopted by the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2004-2005) at their 
sitting held on 31 st March, 2005. Minutes of t he sitti ng of the Committee have 
been reproduced as Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the ac tion taken by Government on the recommendations  
contained in the 1 st Report of the Standing Committ ee on External Affairs (14 th 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
5. For facilit y of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of 
the Report and have also been reproduced in consolidated form in Appendix-III. 
                
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                      Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
March, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 

 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
  This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations contained in the First report of the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs on “Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs 
for the year 2004-2005” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20
th August, 2004.  It 
contained 50 Recommendations/Observations.  
 
2. Action taken notes has been received on all the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report. These have been broadly categorized as follows: - 
Chapter - I 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 16, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49 and 50. 
Total – 31 
Chapter - II 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not des ire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 12, 20, 23, and 40 
Total – 04 
Chapter - III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by th e Committee and which require reiteration and also those 
recommendations/observations which even though accepted by the Government, yet 
attract comments of the Committee. 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25, 30, 36, 37, 42 and 48  
Total – 15 
 
3. Chapter-III of the Report deals with the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee in respect of which replies of the government have not been accepted by the 
committee and which require reiteration.  This chapter also includes some 
Recommendations/Observations of the Commi ttee, which even though accepted by the 
Government for implementation, yet these a ttract further comments from the Committee. 
Because while considering replies of the Government in respect of these 
recommendations, the Committee either desire some further action, continuation of 
action, timely completion of an action on certain points already suggested by them or 
desire to be apprised of the action ta ken/being taken by the Government.

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1(Para No. 20) 
1.1 The Committee are happy to note that t he unspent provision in  the financial year 
2002-2003 and 2003-2004 was Rs. 138.96 and Rs. 66.44 crore respectively – which 
reflects a decreasing trend and hope that this tr end will continue in coming years as well.  
The Committee feel that the apparent cause of unspent provision was due to the non-
materialization of projects/schemes envis aged at the time of  making the Budgetary 
provisions.  The Committee hope that assessm ent of expenditure under various Heads 
at the RE 2004-2005 stage are r ealistic and that there is no unspent balance and there 
will not be the need for surrendering any funds .  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to ensure timely materialization of all the schemes/projects envisaged at the 
time of making Budgetary provision. 
1.2 The Committee also feel that the practi ce of constitution of Committee every now 
and then over routine administrative matters is totally unwarranted especially when the 
Foreign Secretary himself being at the helm of affairs of the Ministry can look directly into 
such matters on his own and ask any Depar tment the reasons for not spending the 
allocated funds for the envisaged projects/sc hemes in a timely and  proper manner.  
Once the budget has been allocat ed and if the money is not spent by the respective 
Divisions in the Ministry in the desir ed way, the persons concerned may be held 
responsible therefore and taken to task for the same.  As such the Committee do not 
appreciate the creation of an Expenditu re Monitoring Committ ee to review the 
expenditure pattern in the Ministry.  In the opinion of the Committee this certainly is not a 
welcome trend.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to have a fresh look into the 
matter. 
Reply of the Government      
1.3 Every effort will be made to ensure timely  completion of projects/schemes to avoid 
the occurrence of unspent balances at the end of the Financial Year or surrender of 
funds.  
1.4 With regard to the setting up of an Expenditure Monitori ng Committee in the 
Ministry of External Affairs, it may be m entioned that an ‘Insti tutionalized Monitoring 

 
 
 
Mechanism’ for review of the utilization of  budgetary provisions in the Ministry of 
External Affairs (which subsequently has been called Expend iture Monitoring 
Committee) was set up vide  Office Memorandum dated 27 August, 2003.  The objective 
of setting up the said Committee was to regular ly review the expenditure pattern of the 
various spending Divisions and the progre ss of projects undertaken by them – and 
ensure utilization of the budgetary provisions by the various Divisions. It was thought that 
the Expenditure Monitoring Committee could br ing the salient features of its periodical 
review exercise to the notice of the Foreign Secretary, dul y highlighting the areas where 
appropriate corrective action could be taken under the instructions of the Foreign 
Secretary. 
1.5 The matter has been reconsidered, and it is  felt that this internal monitoring 
mechanism is useful and, therefore, shoul d continue for effective monitoring of 
expenditure and pr oper utilization of the overall bu dget allocated to the Ministry of 
External Affairs. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 21) 
1.6 The Committee note with concern that  under the six major Heads during March 
2002 and the last quarter of 2001-2002, the expenditure was rushed through to the tune 
of 13 to 65% and 31 to 67% under the major Heads respectively.  Although the Ministry 
have advanced many reasons for the rush of  expenditure and also submitted that, in 
2003-2004, through close monitoring, it has been possible to reduce the rush of 
expenditure during the last quarter and the last month of financial year, the Committee 
find themselves in total disagreement with  these reasons.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that rush of expenditure c ould be reduced by the distribution of work 
evenly – throughout the year – as it has  now been suggested by the Expenditure 
Monitoring Committee, appointed to  this effect.  The Committee recommend that, at the 
planning and preparation stage of projects/schemes, a det ailed time schedule should be 
drawn and all efforts should be made to complete the projects in the same manner, so as 
to reduce the rush of expendit ure in the last quarter of t he year and curb the perpetual 
trend of saving and surrender in the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government       
1.7 As recommended by the esteemed Commi ttee, all spending Divisions have been 
directed to draw up quarterly expenditure plans in respect of projects and schemes and 
also the time schedule for completion of  the same.  The Expenditure Monitoring 

 
 
 
Committee is already in the process of re viewing physical and financial progress of 
various projects/schemes being implemented by the Ministry  and other agencies, with a 
view to ensure that the expenditure is evenly spread through the financial year.    
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 22)  
1.8 The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have created two new 
Heads namely I) India-China Joint Stud y Group and ii) External Affairs Housing 
Complex, in the Budget 2004-2005.  While the Committee appreciate the thrust given by 
the Government to the India-China bilatera l cooperation, the reasoning given by the 
Ministry that this a new activity and the new Head will meet expenditure on Secretariat of 
the Indian component of t he Group is not acceptable to the Committee because the 
expenditure under this Head co uld have been clubbed with the existing minor Head viz. 
“India-China Eminent Persons Group”, which caters to similar kind of expenditure.  
Rather than creating another minor Head t he budgetary allocation under the latter may 
have been augmented to meet the expenditu re thereunder.  During the evidence, 
however, the Ministry were also candid eno ugh to concede to the wisdom of the earlier 
recommendation of the Committee regar ding non-creation of  unnecessary and 
unwarranted Heads of expendi ture and admitted to having tentatively decided that 
expenditure proposed in these new Heads of expenditure can be adjusted under some of 
the existing Heads.  The Committee appreciate  this action on the part of the Ministry, 
though taken as an after thought and recommend th at the Ministry should bear this fact 
permanently in mind and make every effort to streamline the Heads of Expenditure. 
Reply of the Government      
1.9 The observation of the esteemed Commi ttee regarding the opening of new heads 
has been noted for strict compliance and every effort will be made to streamline the 
Heads of Expenditure. 
1.10 The expenditure for acti vities of the India-China Joint Study Group will now be 
provided for under the head “Expenditure for Holding Seminars & Studies”.  As regards 
provisions under the head “Exter nal Affairs Housing Complex” , the same is proposed to 
be merged into a new head viz. “External A ffairs Hostels and Residential Complexes” 
along-with provisions under t he heads “External Affairs Ho stel “Old)” and “External 
Affairs Hostel (New)”.  The existing heads “External Affairs Hostel  (Old)”, “External 
Affairs Hostel (New)” and “External Affairs Housing Complex, Dwarka” will be deleted.   
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation No.4 (Para No.37) 
1.11 The Committee observed that the Act ual Expenditure on account of “Rents, 
Rates, Taxes” under the Heads Secretariat and External A ffairs: Passport and 
Emigration, has been less t han REs from the year 1999- 2000 onwards.  The reasons 
cited by the Ministry for pr ojecting high REs due to rising co st of property, electricity, 
maintenance and increasing outgo towards the r ental of properties are not convincing as 
the Committee feel that the Ministry have failed in making accurate estimation of 
requirement of funds even at the RE stage.  They are surprised to find that the unrealistic 
projection of budgetary requirements has become the order of the day in the Ministry and 
the reasons cited therefore too appear to be monotonous.  The assurances given by the 
Ministry in the last two years have not yielded any results as huge variations still 
continue. The Committee express their strong di spleasure over this continuing trend and 
recommend again that the Ministry should take concrete steps to avoid such variations in 
future while preparing the REs on the basis of actual trend of expenditure so as to avoid 
huge unspent balances towards the close of the financial year. 
Reply of the Government      
1.12 The Ministry has noted the observations  of the Committee for compliance. While 
the Ministry is already making projections  based on trend of expenditure, more care will 
be taken to make projections as accurately  as possible with a view to avoiding huge 
variations and unspent balances. 
 
Recommendation No.7 (Para No.40) 
1.13 From the Ministry’s submission the Committee have noted that a sum of 
Rs.13,37,12,600/- is being sav ed on account of rentals abroad due to shifting of 
offices/residences to Government owned properties  during the last three years.  This is 
less than 7% of the rental outgo under the Head “Embassies and Missions”.  Keeping in 
view the not so heartening perf ormance of the Ministry in reducing its rental outgo, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that the Mi nistry should without wasting any further 
precious time in the matter work out clear cut targets and deadlines for replacement of 
rental properties in the current financial year as also for the next three financial years. 
Reply of the Government      
1.14 The Ministry has already identified stat ions abroad where the r ental liabilities are 
the highest.  The Heads of these Mission s have been requested to urgently locate 
suitable properties so that, after due examination of the proposals, the Ministry’s decision 

 
 
 
for purchase of suitable properties/plots of  land for construction can be given during the 
current financial year.  The Ministry has also  been stressing from time to time to the 
Missions/Posts abroad to send viable proposals fo r consideration of the Ministry. Many a 
time, Missions have expressed inabi lity to locate suitable built up property that conforms 
to their specific space requirements in terms of office usage, and fulfill other criteria of 
easy accessibility, central location, structur al soundness, economic viability, etc. In other 
cases, the suggested properties require majo r expenditure on extensive remodeling and 
repairs to suit our needs. At present, the Mi nistry is in receipt of a few proposals for 
acquisition of property abroad which are being vigorously pursued. Efforts are also being 
made to locate suitable proper ties in other stations to fu lfill the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee. 
 
Recommendation No.8 (Para No.41) 
1.15 The Committee have gone into the explanat ion furnished by the Ministry in the 
matter of inordinate delay in the constructi on of Chancery Complex in Brazil, it is 
incomprehensible as to why the architect w ho had applied for the tender with the fair 
knowledge of terms and condi tions had been allowed to raise demands for different 
clauses in the Agreement.  The most galling par t is that the Ministry while catering to the 
whims and fancies of one individ ual has allowed such as impor tant project to be delayed 
inordinately.  In this cont ext, the Committee would like to know as to whether the 
possibility of appointing a different architect was explored.  Notwithstanding the Ministry’s 
inability to adhere to the time  schedule submitted earlier for the Brasilia project, the 
Committee would recommend this project to be completed on time – even if it requires 
extra efforts on the part of the Ministry of technical expertise to this effect. 
Reply of the Government       
1.16 The local Consultant selected for t he project through a design competition had 
raised the questions of quantum of consultancy fee even after having agreed to the basic 
terms of reference provided to him along wi th the design brief.  Subsequently, he also 
raised the question of the cu rrency in which the fee sh ould be payable and insisted on 
inclusion of an escalation clause  for his fees linked to the locally available inflationary 
patterns.  The Consultant raised these issues  on piece meal basis and  thus the Ministry 
having spent so much time in sorting out these issues could not abruptly terminate the 
appointment and look for alternative options.  This was especially not advisable as the 

 
 
 
Consultant could prove that these demands were as per the local practice and laws of 
the country.   
1.17 This Ministry has conveyed to the Cons ultant to make up for the lost time and 
expedite submission of revised designs conforming to t he changes suggested by the 
Jury and also urgently submit the cost es timates so that financial approval can be 
secured.  The Consultant has  also been advised that on appr oval of the revised design 
concepts, he should secure lo cal body approvals and also  shortlist contractors and 
prepare tender documents with detailed drawings, pending financial approval, so that the 
Ministry is able to make up for the lost time. 
 
Recommendation No. 10 ( Para No. 52) 
1.18 The Committee have noted that the non-utilization of allocated funds for 
Advertising and Publicity under the Head “Embassies and Missions” during all the 5 
years for which the information had been furn ished by the Ministry is largely due to 
reasons beyond the control of the Ministry. In  so far as the expenditure on Advertising 
and Publicity under the head “Secretariat” during the last financial year was concerned, 
the Committee observe that the BE for th e purpose was Rs. 23.50 crore which was 
scaled down to Rs. 21.36 cror e at the RE stage and the lik ely Actual Expenditure under 
the Head is expected to be in the vicinity of Rs. 13.30 crore. The Committee are not 
convinced by reasons advanced by the Ministry for the substantial under-utilization of 
funds under this Head. In fact, the Ministry’s  response in the matter contradicts their own 
replies to other queries where an increasing trend in the expenditure on Advertising and 
Publicity under Secretariat Head has been justified because of  increasing reliance of the 
Missions and Embassies on Advertising and Publ icity material from the Headquarters. In 
the opinion of the Committee, Advertising and Publicity provide the most important 
interface for projection of the country’s image as also for improving bilateral relations. 
Any under-utilization of funds meant for the purpose, therefore, is dire ctly indicative of 
the missed opportunities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
utilization schedules for this purpose are very carefully drawn and funds allocated for the 
purpose spent with due prudence.  
Reply of the Government  
1.19 As per the recommendations of the Commi ttee the External Publicity Division of 
the Ministry is drawing up ut ilization schedules in greater coordination with the Finance 
Division of the Ministry for both “Secreta riat” and “Embassies and Missions”. The two 

 
 
 
Divisions are working closely to avoid stacking of publicity projects toward the end 
of the year and to eliminate objections at t he initial stage of a project and not at a later 
time.  
1.20 At the Secretariat level a regular review , almost on a monthly basis, is being undertaken 
to keep a close watch on the expenditure and remedial action is taken to avoid under-utilization 
of funds. The Publicity Budgets of the Missions have also been allocated based on the details 
provided by the Missions in their Action Plans.   
 
 Recommendation No. 11( Para No. 53) 
1.21 The committee have noted that the Minist ry are utilising the services of one or 
another lobbying firms in USA to further the interest of the country. According to the 
Ministry, the efforts of the Lobbying Firm have yielded positive results. The Committee 
also recommend the Ministry to  explore the possibility of having assistance of NRIs, 
wherever they might prove to be beneficial for furthering the interests of the country. 
Reply of the Government      
1.22 The Ministry of External Affairs has  pro-actively roped in the India American 
community in the USA for furthering the intere sts of India. The co mmunity is one of the 
most powerful ethnic groups in the US. It is acti ve socially and culturally and, since some 
years, politically. Despite being a small voting bloc, the Indian- Americans constitute the 
wealthiest ethnic minority group in the US and have been targeted by both the 
Republican and Democratic parties for fund-raising. Indian-Americans have also held 
posts of Mayors and served on various St ate and City level committees overseeing 
different areas of public activity. Our Embassy in Washington has also kept in touch with 
Indian Americans and they have begun to come into prominence at the federal level.  
1.23 The efforts by some Indian American organizations to increase the political 
consciousness of the community have been aided by our Mission/Posts in the US. Some 
of these organizations have active lobbying oper ations on Capitol Hill. One of these is 
the US-India Political Action Committee (U SINPAC), which has nearly 30,000 members 
countrywide. Other organizations such as the Indian American Forum for Political 
Education (IAFPE) and the Indi an American Center for Po litical Awareness (IACPA) are 
doing important work in sensit ising the Indian- American comm unity to the importance of 
participating in political life in the US. 
1.24  Important leaders among the Indian- American community have been identified by 
our Mission/ Posts in the US. A number of t hese have helped in procuring the support of 

 
 
 
US lawmakers (members of the House of Representatives and the Senate). They 
have also helped in lobbying efforts to increas e membership to the India Caucus in the 
House of Representatives and in the Senate.  Officials of the Em bassy in Washington 
and the Consulates in Chicago,  Houston, San Francisco and New York are in close and 
constant touch with members of Indian- American community in the US.  
Recommendation No. 14  (Para No. 77) 
1.25 The Committee express their happiness over the fact that for this financial year 
the Ministry are proposing to open two c onsulates one each in Bi rganj, Nepal and in 
Melbourne, Australia.  In their 11 th Report (2003-04) the Committee had recommended 
that with a view to reducing the administ rative expenses, the Ministry should conduct a 
thorough review to assess the need and desir ability of opening and operating Indian 
Missions/Posts in different countries of the world.  The Committee hope that the Ministry 
have done a thorough study of the need for having these two consulates.  The 
Committee are in agreement with the Ministry  that there is an urgent need for CGIs in 
Birganj and Melbourne.  These two consul ates being proposed in two strategically 
important places will not only serve Indians but also help promoting tourism, furthering 
our bilateral ties and boosting economic cooperation with thes e countries.  Keeping this 
in view, the Committee recommend the Ministry to  take all necessary steps so that these 
projects take off as early as possible and are completed with in the time schedule 
outlined for them – in order to avoid any possible cost escalation at later stages. 
Reply of the Government      
1.26 The Ministry has already opened the Consul ate General of India (CGI) in Birgunj 
(Nepal) with effect from February 2004.  T he proposal for opening of the Consulate in 
Melbourne (Australia) is under active consideration.  As recommended by the 
Committee, the Ministry has initiated a re view to assess the nee d and desirability for 
opening of Indian Missions/Posts in different countries.  
 
Recommendation No. 16 ( Para No. 79) 
 1.27 The Committee observe that C&AG in their Report No. 2 of 2003 had made 
observations in Para 4.7 that repeated observations notwithstanding cash management 
by Overseas Missions continued to be deficient resulting in retention of cash balances in 
excess of actual requirements and consequent ial recurring loss of interest.  The 
Committee are shocked to observe that this has happened in spite of the Ministry issuing 

 
 
 
instructions from time to tome to I ndian Missions/Posts abroad reiterating the need 
to manage their cash requirements in such a way that an on time their cash exceeds six 
week’s requirement.  The Ministry have inform ed that last such instructions were issued 
vide the Ministry’s circular of 2.6.2003.  Th e Committee view such lapses seriously and 
recommend the Ministry to make sure that  the Missions/Posts take note of these 
instructions for strict compliance and adheren ce.  The Committee are of the opinion that 
computerization of cash accounts of Mission s/Posts in the Ministry through appropriate 
software system can lead to a better inter nal financial management and minimize such 
cases.  They, therefore, recommend that  computerization of cash accounts of 
Missions/Posts be undertaken at the earliest.   
Reply of the Government      
1.28 As already submitted by the Ministry of External Affairs, National Informatics 
Centre (NIC), Ministry of Information Technology has been commissioned to develop 
software for computerization of  the Accounts of its Missions /Posts abroad.  They (NIC) 
are currently in the process of studying the software requirements for the proposed 
system.    
 
Recommendation No. 21 (Para No. 107) 
1.29 The Committee are in agreement with t he Ministry that the present trend of 
Budget allocation in ICCR is not favourably ac tivity oriented as a lion’s share of the 
Budget is going for payment of  rents, salaries and allow ances, etc. and only a meagre 
amount remains with the Council to suppor t much larger activi ties.  The Committee 
welcome the idea about reversal of the trend regarding allocation of the Budget from the 
present practice and concur with the views expressed by the Foreign Secretary.  The 
Committee, therefore, sincerely hope that from now onwards the activity Budget of the 
ICCR will be substantially augmented as against its establishment Budget.  
Reply of the Government     
1.30 The expenditure incurred by the Counc il during the financ ial year 2003-2004 was 
Rs. 56.50 crores.  Out of this Rs.15.09 crores were spent on establishment costs 
including salaries, pension, rents and ot her establishment costs at headquarters, 8 
regional offices in India and 16 Indian Culture Centres abroad.  It will thus be seen that 
total expenditure on establishment costs in both India and Indi an Culture Centre’s 
abroad totals to Rs.15.09 crores or 26.71% of the total expenditure of Rs.56.50 crores.  
The expenditure on establishment of Indian  Culture Centres abroad includes salaries 

 
 
 
and allowances of the Director and the loca l staff, which amounts to Rs.8.45 crores 
out of the total expenditure of Rs.17.26 incu rred by the Council on these Centres.  The 
rest of the expenditure was on  programme activities, which also includes expenditure on 
salaries, allowances, accommodation etc. in  respect of India- based and local teachers 
working at these Centres). The Council wi ll endeavour to augment the budget meant for 
programme activities of Centres in the future.   
 
Recommendation No. 22 (Para No. 108) 
1.31 The Committee have been informed that the Council had already requested for an 
amount of Rs. 66.80 crore in  the BE 2004-2005, against whic h only Rs. 55.59 crore has 
been allocated, and as compared to Rs . 54.50 crore in RE 2003-2004.  The 
enhancement of Council’s budget during 2004-2005 by Rs. 1.09 crore over the previous 
year is not at all sufficient to meet the Council’s requirement.  The Committee with great 
concern are shocked to note that the Council had requested for an amount of Rs. 66.80 
crore and same had not been provided to them.  What further agitates the Committee is 
the fact that the projects/tasks assigned to the Council are not going smoothly and as per 
schedule.  Almost, all the projects, viz. opening of new Cultural Centres abroad or setting 
up of Regional Centres in India are not moving forward an in ch and are almost in a state 
of freeze.  The Committee fear that short age of fund can disturb the momentum of the 
Council.  The Committee, therefore, st rongly recommend that no impediment should 
occur due to paucity of fund and Ministry should be more vigilant over  the activities and 
requirements of the Council.  Keeping in vi ew the expanding activities and new schemes 
which are likely to be undertaken in the financial year 200 4-2005, the budgetary 
allocation to the Council should be subst antially augmented and th e incremental amount 
should be utilised to support much larger activities.   
Reply of the Government     
1.32 The need for augmenting t he Council’s budget to meet the requirements of its 
expanded activities including establishment of new Regional Offices in India and Cultural 
Centres abroad has been noted.  The Council has already ope ned a Regional Centre in 
Jaipur.  It is being manned out of the existing staff strength of the Council.  As regards 
other Regional Centres and Cu lture Centres abroad, action is being taken to secure 
requisite administrative and fi nancial approvals for creation of posts.  Depending on the 
number of approvals obtained from the Government and to meet the requirement of new 
initiatives/projects, additional funds will be sought in RE/FE 2004-05 and BE 2005-2006.  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 26 ( Para No. 112) 
1.33  The Committee agree with the views of the Ministry regarding the importance of 
cultural diplomacy.  Cultural  diplomacy certainly is a ve ry powerful weapon in the hands 
of the Ministry of External Affairs to prom ote relationship between people of this country 
and people of other countries.  ICCR is one of India’s ol dest bodies working for the 
promotion of this cause.  It has got a very fine tradition and its potential for spreading our 
cultural heritage is immense.  However as to the working of the ICCR, the Committee by 
their experience are constrained to take the view  that it is moving without any direction 
through having been controlled by the Ministry of External Affairs.  The Committee feel 
that the ICCR is groping in t he dark and as such is unable to fulfil its vision in a 
meaningful fashion.  The Committee would, ther efore, recommend that it is high time the 
Ministry made a thorough review of the working of  ICCR so that it really serves as an 
important and integral tool in achieving the objectives of our Cultural Diplomacy.   
Reply of the Government     
1.34 “The Ministry is considering the re commendations of the Standing Committee for 
a total review of functions and responsibilities of the ICCR in order to give more thrust for 
the cultural diplomacy”.  
 
Recommendation No. 27 ( Para No. 117) 
1.35 The Committee are of t he view that the Society for Research and Information 
System (RIS) for Non-aligned and Other De veloping Countries is  doing a good job and 
appreciate the jobs and appreciate the jobs undertaken so far by the Society.  As 
informed by the Government, the Society acts as a specialized ‘t hink tank’ on global 
issues in the field of international econom ic relations and development cooperation.  It 
provides analytical inputs also to India and other developing c ountries on the issues 
taken up at the international for a such as G-77, NAM Summits, IMF, WTO, ASEAN, 
IOR-ARC and BIMSTEC etc.  RIS is also mandated to function as an advisory body to 
the Government of India on ma tters pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues 
including regional & sub-regi onal cooperation arrangements,  as may be referred to if 
from time to time.   The Ministry have also informed that it is an autonomous organization 
registered in India under the Societies’ Act a nd receives the core grant from the Ministry 
of External Affairs.  It, however, generates its own revenue as well by receiving project 
grant from donor and multilatera l funding organizations for activities undertaken on their 

 
 
 
behalf.  The Committee also note that the RIS plays a catalyti c role in the formulation 
of India’s policy towards such regional groupings.  Keeping in view the significant role 
being played by RIS towards formulation of India’s foreign policy and in other matters, 
the Committee strongly feel and recommend that budgetary allocations should be 
augmented suitable so as to enable RIS to per form its role without encumbrances in a 
much larger perspective in this era of globalization. 
Reply of the Government      
1.36 As recommended by the Standing Committ ee on External Affairs, the action to 
provide additional assistance to RIS has alr eady been initiated.  It has been proposed at 
the Budget Estimate stage for the Finan cial Year 2005-06 to  enhance the present 
allocation of Rs. 1.37 crores to Rs. 1.50 crores.   
 
Recommendation No. 28 (Para No. 126) 
1.37 The Committee note that the Ministry themselves are candid enough to accept 
that the budgetary provision of Rs. 1.65 cr ore in BE 2004-2005 will not be sufficient 
enough to meet the requirement of ICWA.   Going by the declared objectives of ICWA, 
the Committee also feel that allocation of su ch small amount is really insufficient to 
achieve those objectives.  The Committee reco mmend that allocation to fund to ICWA at 
RE stage should be appropriately increased.  The Committee observe that the formation 
of the Governing Body of the Council is pendi ng for quite a long time and many of its 
activities can be undertaken only after t he formation of the Governing Body.  The 
Committee expect that the formation of t he Governing Body should be done within one 
or two months and other pending wo rk such as the filling of va cant posts, etc. should be 
undertaken by the Council immediately.  Th e Committee also hope that the renovation 
work at Sapru House be completed by t he end of the current financial year.  The 
Committee sincerely hope the ICWA to get ba ck to its past glory and touch new heights 
in the near future.        
Reply of the Government     
1.38 On the recommendations of the Stand ing Committee on External Affairs, the 
ICWA has projected RE 2004-2 005 at Rs. 2.05 crore. The Ministry has initiated the 
action for the formation of the Governing B ody.  As and when the Governing Body is 
formed, the pending work such as the filling of vacant posts will be undertaken.     
1.39 The renovation work at Sapru House is expected to be completed by the end of 
current financial year.    

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 29 ( Para No. 134) 
1.40 The Committee note with immense sa tisfaction that the VII World Hindi 
Conference gave an impetus for launching gr eater propagation and pr omotion of Hindi 
as was evident from the demand from a large number of  delegations for organizing 
Regional Hindi Conferences in different parts of the Worl d. The Committee are of the 
view that such Conferences should be or ganized more frequently and funds required for 
propagation of Hindi should be provided without any hesitation because the promotion of 
India’s national language is an important national concern. The Committee further note 
that there are so many c ountries where Hindi is being spoken and written by huge 
numbers of people. The Government, in the opinion of the Committee, should form an 
organization of countries where Hindi is be ing spoken and written. And in particular, 
when no constraints are being faced by the Ministry in their drive to make Hindi as official 
language of the U.N., the Committee recommend the Ministry to make vigorous efforts to 
achieve this target in a definite time-frame. 
Reply of the Government      
1.41 In addition to the World Hindi Conf erences, Ministry has been giving active 
support in organising Regi onal Hindi Conferences in differ ent parts of the world, from 
time to time. During the last two years, Regional Hindi Conferences have been organized 
at Budapest (Hungary -6-8 March 02), Port of  Spain (Trinidad & Tobago -17-19 May 02), 
Kathmandu (Nepal -1-2 Dec. 02), London (UK -21-23 March 03) and Bucharest 
(Romania -6-8 March 04). There are proposals to hold such conferences in Poland and 
Norway in the near future. The next World Hindi Conference is also being proposed to be 
held in 2005 or early 2006. Ministry has been allocating funds for these ventures in a 
timely manner. In addition to a regular annual budget of Rs.70 lakh for the propagation of 
Hindi Abroad, additional am ount is proposed at RE stage to fund Hindi Conferences 
whenever so required.  
1.42 The Committee’s recommendation, for form ation of an organization of countries 
where Hindi is spoken and wr itten, would be pursued vigorously .  As a follow up to the 
VII World Hindi Conference, the Ministry has already taken a view to form 5 Regional 
Hindi Propagation Centers, apart from World Hindi Secretariat in M auritius where Indian 
Diaspora is in large number. The Ministry is  making efforts to ma ke Hindi an official 
Language of the UN. To seek directions in this regard from the highest level, a high–level 
Committee under the chairmanshi p of the EAM has been formed.  Three meetings of the 

 
 
 
Committee have been held so far. Preparat ion of an Advocacy Paper to bring 
about awareness of Hindi on international level among PIOs worldwide is underway.   
 
Recommendation No. 31 ( Para No 140) 
 
1.43 The Committee appreciate India’s abiding  interests in providing assistance for 
developmental projects not on ly in neighbouring friendly co untries, but also in Africa, 
Central Asia and South-east As ia.  The Ministry have stated that one of the reasons for 
increase in total expenditure is the extension of the tenure of experts  who are already in 
these countries as in the event of extensio n though the expenditure towards final air fare 
and transportation of the baggage are borne by the host Government, the Government of 
India continues to pay their FA, CEA etc.  The increasing number  of requests from 
beneficiary countries have also entailed s ubstantially larger amounts of budgetary 
allocation to meet the variety of requirements in executing this programme.  Similarly, the 
number of experts who are s ent abroad has taken a quantum leap with more and more 
countries seeking India’s assistance by way of deputation of experts.   
1.44 The Committee are of the view that programmes imparting technical cooperation 
to friendly countries certainly generate considerable goodwill among them and need of 
the time is that we should be proactively  involved in promoting the same.   While 
developing countries by providing huge assistanc e and in the end exploiting them, India 
should make efforts to develop cordial rela tions with friendly countries; not for their 
exploitation, but for building up permanent friendly relations and promoting strong ties.  
And to achieve the same, if there is requirement of additional funds, the Government 
should provide the same without any inhibitions.  
 
Reply of the Government     
1.45 Ministry is endeavoring to promote goodwill and stronger ties with friendly 
countries by increasing slots of training, providing relief assistance in the event of natural 
calamity and giving project assistance and sending experts. 
1.46 In tune with this, over 3400 civilian training slots and 200 defence training slots 
have been offered to ITEC partner countries dur ing the year 2004-05.  Fresh experts are 
being deputed and new projects are also being undertaken.   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 32 ( Para No. 143) 
1.47 The BIMST-EC is a sub-regional ec onomic cooperation grouping of countries on 
the rim of Bay of Bengal.  At present, there are seven me mbers (Bangladesh, India, Sri 
Lanka, Thailand, Myanmar, Nepal and Bhutan) in this  sub-regional economic 
cooperation grouping.  The grou ping was largely formed due to a coalescing of Thai and 
Indian interests – Thailand’s desire to expan d its ‘Look West’ Policy and India’s desire to 
expand its ‘Look East’ Policy.  Although, a young grouping and,  therefore, it will need 
time to show results.  The Committee hope that the initiative taken so far will be helpful in 
developing the priority areas.  The initiatives,  which are still in f easibility study phases, 
will start taking shape soon and the BIMST-EC will bind a ll its countries together in 
seeking to advance their collective interests faster.   The Committee also hope that the 
eastern part of the sub-continent will have better environment for growth and 
development in the near future.  In or der to achieve the same, the Committee 
recommend that collective definite efforts and strategies need to be made to strengthen 
this newly born organization, wh ich in the long run, thus, ma y be quite useful for all the 
seven member countries.   
Reply of the Government   
1.48 At the First BIMST-EC Summit held in  Bangkok, Thailand on 30-31 July, 2004, the 
acronym BIMST-EC was changed to BIMSTE C and was renamed as ‘Bay of Bengal 
Initiative for Multi- Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperati on.  India made the 
following commitments at the Summit:-  
(i)  India will host the BIMSTEC Energy Mini ster’s Conference in the 2005.  Necessary 
action has been initiated to convene the meeting. 
(ii) Workshop of Tourism Ministers and Round Table with Tourism Trade and Industry 
Representatives. Ministry of Tourism has prepared a background paper on the subject.  
The preparations are on to convene the Round Table in the first quarter of 2005. 
(iii) BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate: The Centre has already been 
operationalized in its virt ual phase since August 19, 2004. A core group has been 
established to prepare the concept paper for future cooperation. 
(iv) Sharing of Remote Sensing Data with  BIMSTEC countries: A concept paper is being 
prepared on Remote Sensing applications in different fields. 

 
 
 
(iv) 150 additional ITEC  slots: The concerned Missions have already been 
informed about the additional slots.   
(v)  30 Scholarships for Courses in India systems of medicine:  The Department of 
AYUSH has prepared a prelim inary background paper on the modalities of scholarship 
and is presently discussing its implementation. 
(vi) Joint Working Group on Counter Terrorism : Dates for the first meeting of the JWG 
have been proposed to be December 9-10, 2004.  The BIMSTEC member countries 
have been approached to confirm the suitability of the dates. 
(vii) BIMSTEC Free Trade Area: First m eeting of the Trade Negotiating Committee 
(TNC) was held in Bangkok on September 7-8, 2004 to finaliz e the Terms of Reference 
(TORs) for future work. 
(viii) India will host the second BIMSTEC Summit in 2006.  Action has been initiated for 
the preparatory work.   
 
 
Recommendation No. 33 ( Para No. 148) 
 
1.49 The Committee observe that the Mek ong-Ganga Cooperation (MGC) was formally 
launched in 2000 at Luang Prabang in Lao PDR on the bank of Mekong.  During the first 
Ministerial meeting of MGC  a Declaration had been issued on MGC.  The Declaration 
covers cooperation in four se ctors, namely tourism, cultur al, education, transport and 
communication.  The leading countries for the four sector of cooper ation are: Thailand 
(Tourism) India (Education), Lao PDR (t ransport and communication) and Cambodia 
(Culture).  One of the main focuses of MG C has been on the reliab le transportation and 
tourism between India and member countries.  In view of the close cultural and historical 
links with member countries , the MGC mechanism provi des an additional forum to 
further strengthening cooperation with MGC member countries.  The Committee express 
their satisfaction over the development so  far.  The Committee, however, recommend 
that cultural and historical links with member countri es should be strengthened and 
possibility of further cooperatio n should be explored.   The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Government of India to extend all possible help to MGC and if required some 
additional budget may also be allocated to this cooperation to achieve its objectives.  
Reply of the government      
1.50 Culture: The project parameters towards setti ng up Museum of Traditional textiles 
of MGC countries, to be established at Siem  Reap, Cambodia are being firmed up.  The 
project is being implemented by ICCR. 

 
 
 
1.51 Tourism: India and Thailand are colla borating on preparing promotional 
brochures, as envisaged under the Hanoi Plan of Action.  MEA is extending assistance 
to Ministry of Tourism. 
1.52 Transport and Communications:  Structured programme of cooperation is yet to 
take off. 
1.53 Education: India has offered 50 cultural sc holarships (10 each to the member 
countries) for higher studies in areas of Musicology, Museology, Archeology, Dance, 
Study of Scriptures, and Sanskrit and Pali l anguage.  ICCR is identifying the institutions 
for these studies.  
1.54 Delhi-Hanoi rail link: Feasibility studies for the rail link Jiribam-Mandalay are being 
undertaken by RITES Ltd. The studies will be completed by end of December, 2004. 
1.55 Efforts are on to convene the Foreign Mi nisters’ meeting of MGC countries.  Our 
Mission in Thailand would be seeking convenient dates for the meeting.    
 
Recommendation No. 34 (Para No. 153) 
1.56 The Committee observe that allocati on of funds to Bangladesh under the Head 
“Aid and Loan” in BE- 2004-2005 is lower than BE -2003-2004.  As stated by the Ministry 
it was because a number of projects are under discussion between the two sides are yet 
to be finalised and provisions  will be suitably made once  there is bilateral agreement 
over these.  The Bangladesh Government has been appreciative of Indian Assistance 
and understand that both kind s of assistance is the key components of economic 
cooperation between the two countries.  The Committee also appreciate the commitment 
of Government of India to provide both grants and loan assistance to Bangladesh with a 
view to promoting and strengthening cooperat ion in the various areas of bilateral 
agreement.   The Committee recommend that the agreements which have to be 
negotiated may be negotiated sp eedily and projects which ar e under discussion should 
also be attempted to be finalised as early as possible. 
Reply of the Government 
1.57 Budget Provision and Expenditure under  head ‘Aid to Bangladesh’  & ‘Loan to 
Bangladesh’ - Year wise expenditure are given below:- 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Aid to Bangladesh                                                             (Rupees in Lakhs) 
Year BE RE Expenditure Any other 
     
2003-2004 20,00,00,000 2,00,00,000 60,47,965  
2004-2005 3,30,00,000 - 91,36,588  
Loan to Bangladesh                                                            (Rupees in Lakhs) 
Year BE RE Expenditure Any other 
     
2003-2004 20,00,00,000 20,00,00,000 20,00,00,000  
2004-2005 1,62,00,000 - 90,12,630  
 
1.58 The Ministry has noted the recomm endation for speedily negotiating agreements 
and early finalization of projects.   
 
Recommendation No.  35 (Para No.161) 
1.59 The Committee are happy to note that Indi a is playing quite a pivotal role in the 
modernisation of Bhutan, provid ing technical and financial assistance to Bhutan’s five 
year plans since 1961. As a consequence of our support to Bhutan’s development 
programmes, the overall rela tions between India and Bhutan have matured over the 
years to become a model for mutually beneficial cooperation in the region; providing 
immense benefit to the peoples of both countri es. While the bilateral relationship is 
multifaceted and diverse, encompa ssing political, security, econo mic, cultural and social 
fields, it is in the area of development c ooperation, that the mu tual benefits are most 
tangible. The concerted efforts by the tw o countries continue to draw upon the 
complimentrities and comparative advantages of the two economies – placing bilateral 
relations on the firm footing. The Committee recommend that while our policy towards 
Bhutan such as recognizing their legitimate aspirations and integrating the two 
economies should remain intact, at the same  time, the Government should ensure that 
our own vital national interests are not in any way compromised and efforts should be 
made in finding more mutually beneficial sectors like hydroelectricity and others.  
Reply of the Government      
1.60 Cooperation with Bhutan in  diverse areas, including in  the field of development 
cooperation, have contri buted significantly for the mutual  benefit of both countries and 

 
 
 
peoples. The cooperation in the field of hydropower has resulted in a win-win 
situation with India receiving electricit y and Bhutan gaining ad ditional revenue. GOI 
assisted projects cover a wide range of sector s, from roads, telecom and civil aviation to 
hospitals, education and culture. They have  a wide geographical spread and directly 
benefit the people of Bhutan. Our two countries  will continue to expand the areas of 
cooperation for mutual benefit.  
1.61 Our cooperation also extends to areas of vital national interest, such as security. 
Bhutan has demonstrated, in an exemplary manner, its sens itivity on security issues of 
importance to both countries. The successful op erations to flush out Indian insurgents 
from their territory under taken in December 2003 and January 2004 have sent a 
message throughout our region that terrorist and militant activities will not be tolerated.  
 
Recommendation No. 38 ( Para No. 166) 
1.62 The Committee are happy to note that the Economic integrat ion of Nepal with 
India, with specific focus on  Terai, is a key long-term st rategic goal of  the Indo-Nepal 
cooperation.  Strengthening of existing social, cultural, fa milial and economic linkages 
across the border would go a long way towards achieving this objective.  Projects in 
areas of infrastructure, health, water re sources, rural and community development, 
education, etc. are being u ndertaken to strengthen the I ndo-Nepal cooperation.  The 
Committee appreciate the Indian efforts whic h are being made to provide assistance to 
Nepal as to earn visibility and goodwill for In dia, the benefits are being made available to 
grass root level by implement ing projects in Nepal.  The Committee are also happy to 
note that several new projects have been launched to improve transport infrastructure 
and connectivity on the two sides of the bo rder including developm ent of border check-
posts, development of important  links road on both sides of the border and development 
of broad-gauge rail links bet ween important border town s and believe that once 
implemented, these projects  would contribute towards maintenance of security and 
development of trade and economic cooperation between India and Nepal.  The 
Committee also observe that vast scope is t here in the field of water resources and 
efforts are under way to develop cooperation in this field as has been elaborated by the 
Foreign Secretary during the co urse of evidence.  The Commi ttee, therefore, feel that 
this area should be explored earnestly on the lines of projects being executed in Bhutan.  
The Committee also believe that investment in Nepal will be certainly fruitful for India and 

 
 
 
Government should go ahead with this so that other countries in the region should not 
be allowed to take advantage in exploiting Nepal by providing mere assistance.    
Reply of the Government     
1.63 Efforts have been made inter-alia through high-level exchanges to further develop 
friendly relations between India and Nepal.  Recent visit of H.E. Mr. Sher Bahadur 
Deuba, PM of Nepal, has contributed significantly in widening and deepening of the on-
going cooperation between the two countries includ ing in the field of water resources.  
During the visit, the two Prime Ministers stressed the need for expeditious progress on 
various water resources projects currently under active consideration. 
1.64 Pursuant to the directive given by the two Prime Minister s, a comprehensive 
review of India-Nepal cooperat ion in the field of water resources was undertaken in  a 
series of meetings of bilateral institutional mechanisms including the meetings of the 
Joint Committee on Water  Resources (JCWR) in September-Oct ober 2004.  The two 
sides have worked out a definitive road map to move forward on various projects.   
1.65 Indian investment in Nepa l has increased substantiall y.  Indian Joint Ventures 
now account for over 40% of total Foreign Dire ct Investment in Nepa l.  These are in the 
hotel and tourism sector, tele com, food processing, cosmetic s, medicines, etc.  The 
India-Nepal Trade Treaty has been instrument al in development of bilateral trade and 
has also given a boost to Indian investment in Nepal.  With a view to improving the 
investment climate for Indian investment in Nepal, GOI has entered into discussion with 
His Majesty’s Government of Nepal for conc luding a Bilateral Inve stment Promotion and 
Protection Agreement with Nepal.    
 
Recommendation No. 39 ( Para No. 167) 
1.66 The Government have accepted that there are projects in t he pipeline that have 
not been implemented for example,  the Pancheswar project is about eight years old.  
Ever since, the agreement was signed t he Government are st ill nowhere near the 
implementation of project.  This is very unfortunate and projects considered or being 
considered in areas of pow er generation, flood control and irrigation between India and 
Nepal should be negotiated as early as possi ble, in order to guard  against the time and 
cost escalations.  
Reply of the Government      
1.67 During the recent visit of Nepalese Pr ime Minister H.E. Mr. Sher Bahadur Deuba 
to India in September 2004, the two Prime Ministers stressed the need for expeditious 

 
 
 
progress on various water resources projects  currently under active consideration 
including Pancheshwar.   
1.68 Pursuant to the directive given by the two Prime Minister s, a comprehensive 
review of India-Nepal cooperat ion in the field of water resources was undertaken in a 
series of meetings of bilate ral institutional mechanisms, in cluding the meetings of Joint 
Committee on Water Resources (JCWR) and the Joint Group of Experts on 
Pancheshwar, in September-October 2004.  T he two sides have worked out a definitive 
road map to move forward on various projects.  The Joint Committee on Water 
Resources would also be preparing a comprehensive strategy for flood management and 
control, including measures that can be implemented in the short to medium term.  
 
Recommendation No. 41  (Para No.179) 
1.69 The Committee are happy to note that  the ITEC progra mme and the Special 
Commonwealth Assistance for African Plan  (SCAAP) have generated goodwill for India 
and recognition by the developing countries  of India’s achievements in Science, 
Technology, Industry, Agriculture and Hum an Resource Development.  The Committee 
are of the view that being the hub of techni cal and economical activity, such as, IT 
SOFTWARE small Scale Industrie s, Industrial Estates, Civil and Public Administration 
machine tools, railways, etc., more and more fund will certainly be needed under this 
Head.  The Committee hope that in order to  fulfill our commitments, and to enable the 
ITEC to carry out its activities and execut e various projects, are required fund to TC 
division will be made avail able by the Ministry.  The Committee recommend that every 
aspect should be taken care of in order to bring India closer to other developing 
countries-all over the world.  
Reply of the Government      
1.70 The Committee noted with happiness that ITEC AND SCAAP have generated 
goodwill for India and recognition by the developing countries of India’s achievements for 
various fields.  The Committee expressed t he view that more and more funds will 
certainly be needed to fulfil l our commitments and to carryout  activities.  The Committee 
recommended that every aspect should be taken care  of in order to br ing India closer to 
other developing countries.  E fforts of the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs under ITEC and 
SCAAP programmes are towards these ends  and the Ministry have sought additional 
funds in RE 2004-05 and BE 20 05-06.  It is expected that higher allocation will be made 
available.  

 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 43  (Para No.181) 
1.71 The Committee had expressed their desire to know about the details of 
suggestions and recommendations made by the Advisory Group on Technical 
Cooperation and the action taken by the Go vernment. However, the Ministry have 
evaded the query and simply furnished a vague reply that they have taken note of the 
suggestions and recommendation made by Ad visory Group on Technical cooperation 
which met in 2001, and that most of  these have been accepted and are being 
implemented.  The Committee are shocked to note that the Ministry are still planning to 
appoint a Consultant for reform of ITEC programme.  The Committee recommend that 
the appointment of Consultant should be finalized as quickly as possible in order to bring 
about suitable reforms in the ITEC and SCAAP programmes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.72 Details of suggestions and recommendat ions made by the Advisory Group on 
Technical Cooperation are enclo sed (Annexure).  The Ministry accepted the need to 
develop ITEC programme to serve as more e ffective tool.  As suggested by the Advisory 
Group, an ITEC website has been developed to disseminate information on a wider 
scale. 
1.73 The Ministry have also taken note of other suggestions and recommendations 
made by the Advisory Group and have accepted most of these suggestions.   With aim 
to revamping the ITEC and SCAAP programmes so as to make these effective Overseas 
Development Programmes on the lines of su ggestions made by the Advisory Group and 
to make further preliminary in-house study so  that the scope of dutie s of consultant is 
made clearer and focused, the Ministry has  appointed a Joint Secretary designated as 
Joint Secretary (Overseas Development) to  undertake a study for the reform and up-
gradation of our Economic an d Technical Cooperation pr ogramme.  The Officer is 
expected to submit his report within one month.  After ta king into consideration the  
findings of the study, the Ministry will take  further step to appoint consultant to bring 
suitable reforms in ITEC/SCAAP programmes. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 
 
REVAMPING OF ITEC 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF ADVISORY GROUP 
 
 
S. No Item Advisory Group 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objectives ITEC Programme should be viewed as an effective 
medium for promotion of economic and commercial 
interest rather than a mere vehicle for the promotion of 
diplomatic and political and political gains to the country. 
In fact political spin offs are difficult to measure and they 
can evaporate in no time. Therefore, commercial spin 
offs for every singl e activity undertaken as part of this 
programme should be expected. (M. Dubey). 
2. Geographical 
Coverage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is essential to concentrate on a very carefully selected 
group of countries to expect any type of advantage on 
the implementation of the schem e. It will not be wise to 
scatter the programme t 150-160 countries with the 
modest resources at its disposal. South Africa should be 
given priority followed by South East Asian Countries 
including Countries in Gu lf Region and Countries/ 
Region with which we have traditional partnerships for 
logistic support and goodwill. (M Dubey). 
 
3. Management 
of Itec 
Programme 
i) This Programme should be entrusted to an 
autonomous organization like Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) with 
a Board of Directors Consisting of Persons 
from Industry, Scientific Community, 
Academies and Businesses Community. 
Expert from Private se ctor may be included 
invariably to ensure t he proper evaluation of 
projects and speed up the decision making 
process. (M. Dubey). 
ii) ITEC programme should be developed as a 
National mission to be achieved. There must 
be a task force with inter – ministerial 
representation to work out ways and means 
to coordinate and increase the ITEC 
cooperation qualitatively. (A.N. Ram). 
iii)     Disseminating information by developing an 
ITEC Portal 
 

 
 
 
4. Civilian 
Training 
i)    Training shall have a commercial objective and 
directly relate to a project or an activity. A knowledge 
and skill acquired under training must help the trainee to 
go back to his country and set up / execute the project. 
(A. N. Ram). 
ii)    Senior level official may be targeted for short 
duration training as they serve as permanent assets 
while dealing with those countries. (Shashank). 
iii) CSIR can be utilized to the optimum limits in the 
field of training as only three laboratories are seriously 
involved in this project. (Dr. Mashelkar). 
vi)     Experts from priv ate / corporate sector may be 
selected rather than solely  dependent on Government 
Agencies. (Another Speaker). 
 
5. Fields of 
Training:  
i) The broad areas  identified for training include 
IT, Pharma, Agriculture production / technology, Animal 
husbandry, Small Scale Industry, Setting up of Industrial 
Estates, Renewable Energy etc. which constitute our 
areas of strength. (Another Speaker). 
ii) ITEC should focus at exporting knowledge as 
it has much more value than any other. Physical 
commodity. (Dr. Mashlekar). 
 
iii) CIEFL has suggested for the setting up of 
India-English Centers in the non-western world on the 
lines of Maxmuller Bhawan to impart communicative 
skills in English for specif ic purposes. Involvement of 
corporate sector in this scheme can also be though of to 
make them self- financing ac tivities. ( Prof. Pramod 
Talgeri). 
 
iv) It will be cost effective if our trainers are 
deputed abroad so that they can train large no of 
trainees in one go and IIM s can provide requisite 
support. (Another Speaker). 
 
6. Terms & 
Conditions of 
training 
The payment package offered under ITEC has to 
undergo an upward change to attract good quality 
trainers. (Another speaker) 
 
7. Defense 
Training 
i) Focus should be on Central Asian Countries, our 
neighboring countries and c ountries formed out of 
former USSR. 
 
ii) Economic spin-offs in the field of defense exports 
cannot be ignored altogether. (Mr. Devre).  
 
 
8. . Projects Ability to absorb and provide necessar y infrastructure 

 
 
 
should be the guiding principal involvement of local 
entrepreneurs including ITEC trainees is essential for 
making project a success,  
(Another Speaker). 
 
9. Humanitarian 
aid 
This programme should not be used as an 
instrument of Grant and even if grant is to be given, 
it should necessarily lead to commercial spin-offs. 
To illustration it will be advantageous to gift a 
machine, which will give  scope for repeated orders 
from the recipient countries rather than giving items 
like rice/wheat, which will end up in consumption. 
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation No. 44  (Para No.187) 
 
1.74 The Committee note that there is subs tantial increase in BE 2004-2005 against 
the RE of Rs. 71.62 crore in 2003-2004 and the Actual Expenditure upto 31.3.2004 was 
Rs. 81.42 crore.  Bills amounting to Rs. 41,82,85,452 still, however, remain outstanding 
for the aid already provided during 2003-2004.   The Committee feel that India can do 
much more for African countries in order to  build up better relations by paying more 
focused attention on granting aid to these co untries.  There is a feeling amongst African 
countries that we do not consistently engage with them.  Anot her problem area in 
engaging with Africa is that quite often we are out – spent  by some of our neighbouring 
countries.  India is unable to provide aid to certain countries in Africa because they have 
large outstanding and there is likelihood of this money being recovered.  The Committee 
hope that the Government will make positive effo rts to improve our re lations with African 
countries and also work in the direction of solving all these problems which come in the 
way of extending loans credits to the African countries or in other words our engagement 
with these countries.  The Committee will highl y appreciate, if relations with the African 
countries are strengthened. 
Reply of the Government      
1.75 Ministry of External Affairs is cons istently trying to im prove and strengthen our 
relations with African countries.  It is full y conscious of the economic difficulties being 
faced by many countries of this region.  Go vt. of India has already waived govt.-to-govt. 
loans for most countries of this region.  Moreover, lines of credit on liberal terms have 
been extended to many African countries.  These credit lines are being utilized to finance 
our project exports as well as for import of goods from India. Every effort is being made 
to establish a strong relationship with c ountries of Africa, to promote economic and 
commercial interaction with them as well as to maintain a steady di alogue with them in 
various arenas. 
1.76 To give a further impetus to our relations with the Afric an countries, Hon’ble 
President recently visited Tanzania and South Africa.  During the visit, India’s ‘Focus 
Africa’ policy was reiter ated and India’s desire to work wi th African partners in areas of 
their core competence was emphasized.  An agreement was signed with Tanzania for 
waiver of loan granted to it earlier.  Agreements for cooperation in the field of Information 
Technology were signed with both Tanzania  and South Africa.  We  also offered to 

 
 
 
provide India’s satellite and fibre-optic connectivity for creating a network of e-
education and tele-medicine centers across African States. 
1.77 The fact that during the year 2003-2004,  the actual expenditure was more than 
the budgeted amount is an indicator of the efforts made by this Ministry to substantially 
increase our aid to the African countries.  The Ministry would continue to make all efforts 
to further strengthen our relati ons with the African countrie s and would try to resolve all 
problems that come in the way of extending loans/ credits to them.   
Inputs from West Africa Division  
1.78 The Ministry has been making and will continue to make positive efforts to 
improve our relations with Afri can countries.  The recent initiative of TEAM-9 aims at 
bringing together eight countries of West Africa in a Techno- Economic collaboration with 
India.  We have allocated US $ 500 million as line of credit to TEAM-9 countries.  In 
addition, lines of credit of around US $ 40 milli on to Angola, US $ 15 million to Senegal, 
US $ 42 million to Ghana have been earmarked.  The US $ 200 million line of credit for 
NEPAD is also being used in West Africa Ai d is being given to countries like Cote 
d’Ivoire, guinea, chad, Republic of Congo etc.    In addition,  India is considering large- 
scale investment in acquiring oil fields in Angola. Cote d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Chad 
etc.  India is also looking at investing in Phosphoric Acid plants in Togo and Guinea 
Bissau.  There is a proposal to set up Te chnology Demonstration Centres as well as 
Entrepreneurship Development Centers in many West African countries.   
  
Recommendation No. 45 (Para No.190). 
1.79 The Committee express their great pleasur e to note that two cooperation projects 
are under active consideration for implem entation under the a egis of COMESA viz. 
imparting training to COMESA personnel on harmonization of drugs and pharmaceutical 
standard and registration proced ure and deputing experts to det ermine the feasibility of 
the great lakes irrigation projects.  The Committee note that countries like Egypt, 
Mauritius, Kenya, Sudan, Ethi opia and Zambia are important markets for India’s exports 
in these sub-regions and welcome th e Memorandum of Understanding between 
COMESA and India which focuses on the potential for bilateral cooperation between 
India and the COMESA states through incr eased trade and investment flows.  The 
Committee hope that Government will explore more possibilities of  export to these 
countries and our export will  be mobilized by cordial rela tions which are developing by 
way of bilateral cooperation – between India and COMESA States. 

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government      
1.80 The Ministry of External Affairs is making concerted efforts to give impetus to 
bilateral relations with COMESA States.  We are in the process of formulating a plan of 
action to increase bilateral trade with each me mber country of the COMESA.  Under this 
plan of action, thrust areas for growth in expor ts will be identified and growth targets will 
be specified for the years 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and 2006-2007.  The steps needed to 
be taken to achieve these targets will be sp ecified and action will be taken accordingly to 
meet the targets.  To strengthen our relationship with COMESA we are seeking 
accreditation of our Mission in Lusaka to the COMESA.  
 
Recommendation No. 46 (Para No.206) 
1.81 The Committee are surprised to note t he declining trend which has shown over 
the years in the allocation under  the Head Capital Outlay on pu blic works.  The Ministry 
have submitted that they had planned and prov ided funds for successive years in the 
hope that several of the construction proj ects under planning would mature to 
construction stages and that this could not materialize due to reasons beyond the control 
of the Ministry.  The Committee find themse lves totally unsatisfied over the progress 
made by the Ministry regarding the execution of various proj ects under this Head.  The 
Committee recommend that if the Ministry ar e unable to implement the projects due to 
non-feasibility, they should not project funds at  the stage of Budgetary allocation itself.  
More funds may be needed only at the advance stage of finalisation of projects.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry will be able to complete some of the ongoing 
construction projects under this Head and t he anxiety of the Committee will come down 
to some extent. 
Reply of the Government      
1.82 The Ministry has noted the recommendat ions regarding projection of funds under 
the Capital Outlay Budget Head.  Accordingly,  the projection of funds for projects for 
which CNE approvals are pending, have been altogether deleted while preparing the 
Revised Estimates for the current financial year and the estimates have also been toned 
down to the minimal possible level for the next financial year.  Planning for all the 
existing projects, to be funded from the Capital Outlay Fund, is progressing smoothly and 
the Ministry is hopeful that with the due financial approvals these will progress to the 
construction stage.  The projects current ly under construction are Foreign Service 

 
 
 
Institute in New Delhi, Headquarter building for Asian Afro Legal Consultative 
Organization besides some major renovation works for which funds are being met out of 
the Capital Outlay Fund.  Ministry is hopeful of making expenditure as per budget plans.   
 
Recommendation No. 47 (Para No.207) 
1.83 The Committee are also shocked to observe  the fate of Doha construction Project.  
As per the Ministry a new location of plot is being processed.  The Mission was asked to 
take up the matter with the foreign office as the construction project had got delayed on 
26th April 2004 and the Mission conv eyed allotment of a fresh plot, giving details of the 
same.  However, the plot in question has still not been formally handed over to the 
Mission.  The Committee hope that after a high drama, now the Minist ry will be able to 
formally acquire the plot.  The Committee strongly recommend that Doha construction 
project should be completed in a time bound manner without any further precious loss of 
time. 
Reply of the Government      
1.84 The Ministry has been putting pressure  on the Qatar government at the highest 
level through our Mission in Doha to expedite al lotment of new plot of land.  The Foreign 
Office has informed that the designing work of  the infrastructure of  the New Diplomatic 
Area will be finished by the Public Wor ks Authority by February 2005. Work on the 
infrastructure including engineering works, roads and pav ements shall commence from 
May 2005 and it will take at least one year for completion of the works. Once the new 
plot is available the Ministry will make all efforts to complete the project in a time bound 
manner. 
 
Recommendation No.49 (Para No.209) 
 
1.85 In regard to Videsh Bhav an Project, the Ministry have submitted that the Videsh 
Bhavan has now been named Jawaharlal Nehr u Bhavan and it has been entrusted to 
CPWD.  A detailed presentation comprising an explanation of the concept design model 
had been presented to the Minister  of External Affairs on 3 rd July, 2004 and same has 
been approved.  The preliminary cost estimates have also been approved by the Minister 
and preparation of Memo for seeking appr oval of the Committee for Non-Plan 
Expenditure is underway.  The project proposal, the approximate cost of which is 
expected to be around Rs.180 cr ore, will require approval of the Union Cabinet also.  
The Committee strongly recommend that a time schedule should be prepared at an early 

 
 
 
stage, monitoring of developments shoul d be made each quarter of the year and 
Officials causing any undue delays should be held responsible.  The Committee expect 
that taking a lesson from past experience, the Ministry will not repeat the same mistakes 
again and take steps for timely completion of this project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.86 The Ministry has already submitted a proposal for approval by the CNE.  The 
proposal has been examined and certain comm ents have been made by the Ministry of 
Finance.  The needful is being done in consul tation with the concerned authorities so as 
to expedite the proposal. 
 
Recommendation No. 50 ( Para No. 210)  
1.87 Last but not the least, the Committee w ould like to make a general observation 
about the Budgeting process – as obtaining in the Ministry of  External Affairs.  The 
replies to the List of Points sent by the Committee on various subject in the course of 
examination of the Dem ands for Grants of the Ministry were furnished by the Ministry to 
them on 6.8.04, which means mo re than 4 months, after close of the last financial year.  
Surprisingly, however, in some cases only li kely estimations in the Actual Expenditure 
have been furnished.  In many cases, the Committee have come across major 
discrepancies in figures furnished by the Ministry .  In the opinion of the Committee, such 
careless approach and attitude towards an important exercise  like Budget is highly 
deplorable.  More so, when every data can be made available by t he Ministry at the 
veritable click of a mouse.  From this, the Committee can interpolate as to what kind of 
inputs may have gone into – while the Dem ands for 2004-2005 were being finalized in 
the absence of Actual Expendit ures.  The Committee, therefor e, desire the Ministry to 
put in place a more quick and efficient accounting mechanism, so that, the exact 
financial data, which is the most essential i nput in the preparation as  also analysis of a 
Budgetary exercise is availabl e – in time – for any mid-course corrections and proper 
planning. 
Reply of the Government       
1.88 The Monthly Accounts of Ministry of External Affairs are computerized and the 
figures of actual expenditure  incurred within the country  are available promptly.  
However, in respect of the Missions/Posts abroad, there is a time  lag as the monthly 
cash accounts are received through diplomatic  bags.  Further expenditure of the Ministry 

 
 
 
of External Affairs being incurred by other  Ministries/Departments and vice-versa are 
subject to periodic reconciliation. 
1.89 As per the time schedule prescribed by the Ministry of Finance, the annual 
accounts of all Ministries/Departments ar e to be finalized by the end of June and 
submitted to the Ministry of Finance and Audit.  While provisional figures of expenditure 
are available by the end of June, these ar e subject to audit and the final audited figures 
are available by the end of September. 
1.90 However, necessary efforts are already on to put in place a mechanism to report 
timely and accurate figures.  The National Informat ics Centre of Ministry of Information 
Technology has been commissioned to develop software for computerization of Mission 
Accounts.  They are currently in the proces s of studying the software requirement.  It is 
expected that the software will be ready by the second half of 2005-2006.  
***** 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 58-59) 
2.1 The Committee find gross underutilisatio n of funds by the Ministry under the 
Professional Services Head in the year  2001-2002, the BE for the purpose was Rs.40 
lakh which was halved to just Rs.20 lakh in  the RE.  The actual spending, however, was 
a meagre Rs.3.66 lakh.  In the next year, the BE and the RE remained constant at Rs.20 
lakh and the Actual Expenditure was Rs.10 lakh only.  The Committee are constrained to 
note that in 2003 –2004, the BE and RE were  again pegged at Rs.20 lakh – Rs.15.50 
lakh meant for CPV Division and Rs.4.50 lakh  meant for BSM Division.  However, out of 
this, only a paltry sum of Rs.73,160/- could be spent.  The Actual Expenditure figures for 
BSM Division were, however, not furnished to the Committee.  
2.2 The Committee are not happy with the al ibi extended by the Mi nistry that the BE 
figures have been kept at  a higher level than Ac tual Expenditure due to the 
recommendations of the previous Committee for having a separate panel of advocates 
for court cases, particularly of  extradition proceedings.  To put the record straight, the 
Committee’s recommendation was given almost two-and-half ye ars back and the list of 
advocates from the Ministry of Law & Justic e was also received by the Ministry more 
than a year back.  All this time, the Mi nistry have been sitting over the matter while 
precious funds have been kept blocked in antici pation.  The Ministry’s delay has also led 
to the expiry of the panel sent by the Minist ry of Law & Justice a nd naturally there is a 
wait for a new panel.  The Committee do not agr ee with the Ministry’s reply that it is 
difficult to give specific time frame for comp leting this exercise and the Ministry would try 
to complete the finalisation of the panel of  advocates in 6-9 months period.  The 
Committee feel that the reasons for the delay are mainly of the Ministry’s mown creation.  
They, therefore, recommend that  a decision in the matter ma y be taken within the next 
three months so that realistic Budgetary Estimates are made under this Head for the 
next financial year and the funds are not kept  blocked in anticipation without making any 
headway in achieving the desired objectives. 
 

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.3 Para Nos.58-59-Professional Services – Professional Services in respect of BSM 
Division pertain to preparation of India- Bangladesh passports and miscellaneous visa 
works. Details of Year-wise Budget provisi on and expenditure in respect of three states 
West Bengal, Meghalaya and Assam for agency f unction, i.e. issue of India-Bangladesh 
passports and miscellaneous visa works are given below:  
  
                                                               (Rupees in Lakhs) 
Year BE RE FE Expenditure 
2001-02 2,38,64,000 2,38,64,000 1,99,06,000 1,99,06,129 
2002-03 1,23,57,000 98,57,000 - - 
2003-04 1,00,00,000 1,00,95,000 1,00,95,000 - 
2004-05 98,60,000 - - - 
 
2.4 The Expenditure of Rs.1,99,06,129/=  shown during the year 2001-2002 is an 
amount which was reimbursed to Government  of West Bengal for functioning of the 
State Secretariat for Passport and Visa work on behalf of the Ministry.  Ministry is at 
present processing claims of Rs. 61,26,324/- fo r reimbursement to Government of West 
Bengal pertaining to period 2002-2003.  Claims for t he year 2003-2004 would be 
received later. Therefore, the figures at expenditure for period 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 
are not booked.   
2.5 As per recommendation/observation of the previous Standing Committee, the 
proposal containing names of a few la wyers (who have been engaged as special 
counsels in various ongoing extradition cases)  was referred to the Ministry of Law and 
Justice for approval.  Ministry of Law and Justic e in turn requested this Ministry to make 
the request after taking approval from the Admi nistrative Minister of this Ministry.  
Subsequently, this Ministry called an inter-m inisterial meeting in May, 2003.  In that 
meeting besides representatives  of CPV Division, represent atives of Legal and Treaties 
Division and Finance Division of Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice 
and CBI were present.  During the meeting Mini stry of Law & Justice conveyed that it 
would send its list of advocates to help in the finalisation of names for the proposed 
panel of advocates for extradition cases.  It wa s also decided that this Ministry would 

 
 
 
request the Ministry of Law & Justice for approval of a separate panel of advocates 
to represent the Government of India, i.e Ministry of External Affairs, whenever the 
requests for extradition are received from the foreign countries.  Keeping this into mind, 
the Ministry proposed some anticipated expenditu re, expecting that with the formation of 
the panel of advocates, the ex penditure will increase.  However, meanwhile the 
advocates in the panel of Ministry of Law & Justice changed during the current year, 
causing delay in selection.  A new list has been obtained from the Ministry of Law & 
Justice and with the approval  at  Ministerial level shor tly a proposed panel of advocates 
for extradition cases with appropriate terms and conditions will be sent to the Ministry of 
Law & Justice for approval.  The exercise is likely to be completed within six months.  
 
Recommendation No 20 (Para No. 95)  
2.6 The Committee express their happiness ov er the creation of Central Database for 
all the passports, that are i ssued by the passport office in the country.  The Committee 
note that such a database is really an import ant tool because if the passport of a person 
is lost while travelling abroad, this database will enable the concer ned authority to verify 
the original passport details instantly.  The Committee hope that creation of this Central 
Database will certainly facilitate the proce ss of issue of Duplicate Passport to a great 
extent.  The Committee desire that Database  facility should be made fully operational 
and put into service forthwith.  The Committ ee further desire that this Database should 
be constantly updated for quick retrieval of pass port details for the issue of a Duplicate 
Passport. 
Reply of the Government      
2.7 The Central Database facility is fully operational, and is regul arly updated.  It is 
being used extensively by Passport Offices in India and Indian Missions abroad while 
providing various services to a passport-hol der including issue of a duplicate passport.  
NIC is the concerned agency for maintaining th is database.  This Ministry interacts 
closely with NIC for constant improvement in the Central Database system.   
 
Recommendation No. 23 (Para No. 109) 
2.8 The Ministry have furnished various reasons for increase in BE 2004-2005 over 
BE 2003-2004 some of which are as, opening of Cultural Centres abroad, maintenance 
of building of Cultural  Centre which was earlier being done by the Ministry of External 
Affairs, renovation of Nehru Centre, London and its art gallery, opening of New Regional 

 
 
 
Offices in India, renovation of ICCR property (Jinnah House, Mumbai and Africa 
House, New Delhi) establishment of co mputer kiosks in Cambodia and increase in 
number of scholarship being administered by ICCR etc.  The Committee are constrained 
to note that the ICCR have increased the number of scholarship s to foreign students 
desiring to study Indian Performing Arts li ke dance and music.  The Committee note that 
the track record of the ICCR in respect of utilisation of scholarships given to foreign 
students by them during the previous years has not been very encouraging as during the 
year 2003-2004 out of a total of 1093 scholarship  on offer, only 779 could actually be 
utilised.  Again, most of the projects undertaken by the ICCR themselves have not 
progressed well and are in no way in a position to be completed within time schedules.  
The Committee wonder as to why the ICCR are taking the additional burden of 
maintenance of Cultural center buildings onto their shoulders.  The Committee are of the 
clear view and recommend that only those tasks which the ICCR can accomplish should 
be undertaken by them and the Council concentrate  on making efforts to fulfill the vision 
and mission which have originally been assigned to them.     
Reply of the Government      
2.9 The Council’s annual Plan of Action whic h includes activities to be undertaken are 
compiled every year and approved by its statut ory bodies.  Additionalities not contained 
in the original Plan of Action are considered on the basis of their relevance and 
importance before seeking the approval of competent authority.   
2.10 As regards low utilization of scholarships, the Co mmittee may kindly note that 
during the academic year 2004-2005, 945 adm issions to foreign scholars have been 
confirmed against a total number of 1076 scholar ships offered.  The actual number of 
scholars who join their respective course s, however, are lower than the admissions 
confirmed.  This is due to various reasons which are not in  the Council’s control - these 
are: no provision of internat ional airfare; candidate not being offered the courses of 
his/her choice; and scholars securing admission/scholarship elsewhere namely in the 
West.  However, it is mentioned that as a special case Council has  decided to provide 
airfares to a few developing countries.  During the year 2004-2005, 30 return airfares 
have been provided to 5 C entral Asian countries to encourage better utilization of 
scholarships.  ICCR scholarships for learning  Indian Dance and Musi c are very popular.  
It was, therefore, decided to enhance their number from 60 to  100 annually.  However, to 
make our scholarship scheme more attractive, it was decided to enhance stipend, house 
rent allowance, contingency etc. during the academic year 2004-05.  

 
 
 
2.11 The Council has noted Committee’ s observation regarding the Council 
undertaking the repair and ma intenance of Indian Culture Centres abroad.  In this 
connection Council would like to stress t hat the repair and maintenance work of Indian 
Culture Centres abroad was transferred to ICCR on the specific instructions of the 
Foreign Secretary and of Jinnah House by the Hon’ble External Affairs Minister.   
2.12 The Council would also like to stre ss that the Computer Kiosk Project being 
undertaken by ICCR in Cambodia has been near ly completed without any time or cost 
over run.  The work on the Museum of Tr aditional Asian Textiles in Siem Reap in 
Cambodia will commence as soon as financial allocations have been made. 
 
Recommendation No. 40 (Para No. 170) 
2.13 The Committee observe that there is a decrease in Actual Expenditure under the 
Head “Aid to Myanmar” in comparison to 2002-2003.  Although, several projects were 
finalized after consultation between the Go vernments of the two countries, the 
implementation of all these projects is stil l awaited.  The Ministry have informed the 
Committee that the attention of the Myanmar Government on bilateral projects with India 
appear not to have been given priority due to thei r internal situation and every effort was 
made to finalise agreements as well as facili tate implementation.  Since, the bilateral 
nature of these projects required implementation from Myanmar, the Committee 
recommend that all possible efforts should be m ade by the Ministry at the earliest in 
respect of these projects and assurance regarding timely and pr oper implementation 
should be secured from the Government of Myanmar forthwith.     
Reply of the Government      
2.14 The Ministry of External Affairs is making efforts at the highest possible level for 
expediting the implem entation of the Projects to be funded under the head “Aid to 
Myanmar”.  These efforts are expected to impr ove the utilization of  the allocated funds 
under this Head.  However, the projects being of bilateral nature, there always remain an 
element of uncertainty in terms of meeting the expected schedules. 
******* 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION AND ALSO THOSE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH EVEN TH OUGH ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT, YET ATTRACT COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1 The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken replies of the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations. 
A. RENTS, RATES, TAXES 
Recommendation No.5 (Para No.38) 
3.2 The Committee in their First Report (14 th Lok Sabha) had expressed that while the 
Committee could understand t he slippages taking place in the physical and financial 
performance of the Ministry in projects abr oad because of location specific laws, rules 
and regulations, etc. on which they had no control, the Committee had taken a serious 
note of the laxity in case of  projects even at domestic fr ont.  While the Ministry had 
reported savings under the Head “Secretariat” in respect of rental liabilities for Akbar 
Bhavan for which rentals were being paid at ol d rates, awaiting Fair Rent Certificate, at 
the same time, it had been stated that prov ision had been made to  meet payment of 
enhanced rents and arrears.  The Committee were  at a loss to understand as to why this 
issue had been allowed to drag on for so long, specially when the matter had to be settled 
between the two agencies of the Government of  India.  The net result was that the 
Ministry had been having a surp lus of 30 to 45 per cent ev en in the Revised Estimates 
during the last three years.  The Committee,  therefore, recommended that the Ministry 
should now focus on this issue with a view to sorting it out forthwith. 
3.3 The Reply of the Go vernment is as under:  
“Payment of rent at enhanced rate and arrears accrued thereupon to the NDMC, 
in respect of Akbar Bhawan Building could not be made becaus e the Ministry of External 
Affairs was not agreeable to the quantum of rent demanded by  NDMC and various 
clauses of Lease-Deed suggested by the latter . Govt. of India has its norms for payments 
and unless proper justification was given for the enhanced rental, it was not possible to 
make the payment, which had resulted in surrender of funds. Ministry of External Affairs, 
on its part, made every effort possible to sort out the issue, so that the amount of rental 
could be settled, but there was no response from NDMC other than routine demand of 

 
 
 
higher rental and arrears. Re vised Fair Rent Certificate was requested from CPWD in 
order to reach a mutually acceptable amount. 
3.4 Ministry of External Affairs, on its part, had been requesting for a meeting with the 
Chairperson of NDMC since 18.11.2003, which could materialize only on 11.10.2004 after 
several reminders. At the meet ing, it was decided that a Committee would be formed 
which would deliberate on  quantum of rentals as  well as interest payable by the MEA to 
NDMC. No further response has been received from NDMC in this regard so far.” 
3.5 The Committee find that the issue of settlement of  rent has been delayed 
inordinately. It should not be very  difficult for the Mi nistry to organise meetings with the 
officials of the NDMC and so rt the matter out. Therefore, the explanation given by the 
Ministry is not convincing. The Committee desire  that the issue of re nt should be settled 
within three months and the Committee be informed about it. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Recommendation No 6 (Para No. 39) 
 
3.6 The Committee had observed that the BE for Major Head 2061(for Embassies 
and Missions) for the last financial year  (2003-2004) was Rs. 195.02 crore.  The RE 
were scaled down by almost 10 percent to Rs. 177.02 crore.  The Actual Expenditure 
submitted to the Committee subsequently was, ho wever, Rs. 198.18 cror e.  In all, the 
Ministry’s calculations had gone awry by more than 20% under that particular Head.  
This clearly showed an imprudent handling of financial resources by the Ministry and the 
Committee desired that they would definitely li ke to be apprised of the reasons behind 
that flip-flop. 
3.7 The Government have replied: 
 “It may be mentioned that the projecti ons for the Rents, Rates and Taxes Head 
under Major Head 2061 at the Revised Estimates (2003-2004) stage was Rs. 199.17 
crore which is marginally higher than the Actual Expenditure ev entually booked under 
the Head during the financial year 2003-2004. 
3.8 The Non-Plan allocation of the Mini stry for the financial year 2003-2004 had been 
scaled down by the Ministry of Finance by Rs. 110.00 crore at the Revised Estimates 
stage. Non-Plan allocation of Ministry of External Affairs under various Heads of 
Accounts including the Rents, Rates a nd Taxes head under Ma jor Head 2061 were 
consequently reduced.    
 

 
 
 
 
3.9 However, later, the allocation under  Rents, Rates and Taxes head required 
augmentation at the Final Es timates stage.  This coul d be done as savings had become 
available under other Heads at the Final Estimates stage.”  
 
3.10 The Committee note that the projections under Major Head 2061 at RE stage 
(2003-2004) was actual ly to the tune of Rs. 199.17 cr ore, whereas the Ministry had 
earlier at the time of examin ation of Demands for Grants for the year  2004-2005 stated 
this figure as Rs. 177. 02 crore.  This shows the figure furnished earlier by the Ministry 
under this Head was wrong. The Committee ha ve taken a serious no te of this.  The 
figures/information furnished to  the Committee, should be accurate and authentic.  The 
Committee would also advise t he Ministry to ensure proper and apt handling of their 
financial resources. 
 (Recommendation No. 2) 
Recommendation No.9 (Para No.42) 
 
3.11 The Committee had stated that  in spite of the clarificat ions given by the Ministry, 
the Committee still had their apprehensions about  the status of the land being acquired 
for Chancery-cum-residences at Ulan Bator.  While in the fi rst instance, it was pointed 
out by our Mission that the property was not  encumbrance-free as t here was a structure 
on the land rented out to another organizati on, the Mission had s ubsequently informed 
that it was a separate building having independent entry.  The Co mmittee had expressed 
that they would, therefore, like  the Ministry to make it abso lutely sure that the land being 
acquired was really free from encumbrances and that there wi ll be no problems in future 
vis-à-vis the party which had raised a stake on the land. 
 
3.12 The Government informed: 
“The matter regarding an early evaluati on of the property rented from the 
Mongolian government has been taken up by our Ambassador at the highest level.  
Once this issue is resolved, the Ministry proposes to purchase this property at the 
earliest while ensuring that the property is free from any encumbrances.” 
 
 

 
 
 
3.13 The fact that the Minist ry has already taken too much time in evaluating 
the property for Chancery -cum-residences at Ulan Bator makes the Committee 
apprehensive that the Ministry i s  l i k e l y  t o  t a k e  e v e n  m o r e  t i m e  i n  p u r c h a s i n g  t h e  
property.  The Committee has been conti nuously expressing thei r anxiety over the 
extremely slow pace of implementation of va rious projects underta ken by the Ministry 
and feel that this project may not be an exception. The Committe e reiterate that the 
Ministry should make all out efforts to accomplish this pr oject and make it absolutely 
sure that the property is purchased without any further loss of time.  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 66) 
3.14 During the examination of Demands fo r Grants of the Mini stry (2003-2004), the 
Committee was assured that t he Foreign Service Institute will be moving to its own 
complex some time in July 2004.  The new  complex will have the state of the art 
facilities.  On line mid-career training prog rammes for the officers of the Indian Foreign 
Service were being designed and would be implemented as soon  as possible.  Now the 
Ministry maintain that the ne w premises of the Foreign Serv ice Institute was still under 
construction and the process was expected to be completed in the calendar year 2005.  
The Committee taken a serious view of the reply forwarded by the Ministry.  Lingering on 
with projects, setting new target dates and deadlines have become a routine with the 
Ministry, as was evident in the case of Wash ington Cultural Centre, the Brasilia Project, 
Videsh Bhavan Project, Doha Project and so on and so forth.  The Committee, once 
again, recommended  the Ministry to take nece ssary steps for expediting the completion 
of the Foreign Service Institut e Building Complex in the current year itself, because they 
felt that the Institute could work  more effectively – if it will start functioning from this new 
complex which had got the stat e of the art facilities – with full backup of cyber 
technology. 
3.15 The Government has  replied as under,  
“ CPWD has informed that the first phase civil construction work, comprising 
Foreign Service Institute and hostel build ings, would be completed by 31.12.2004. 
Structural work for these buildi ngs is already complete and fi nishing work is in progress. 
Works relating to services and interiors will  be undertaken as soon as the civil work is 
complete”. 

 
 
 
3.16 The Committee note that the constr uction work of Foreign Service 
Institute complex could not be  completed within the targeted date. Changing of target 
dates shows some laxity on the part of the Government in this case. The Committee 
recommend, therefore, the Ministry to take necessary steps for the completion of the 
Foreign Service Institute building within target dates set therefor.   
(Recommendation No. 4) 
Recommendation No.15  (Para No. 78) 
3.17 The Committee in their Eleventh R eport on Demands for Grants had observed 
that there was an apparent need for evaluatio n of the functioning of the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad with a view to bringing improvement  in their working.  The 
Committee were informed that the Ministry had already set up a body i.e. the Foreign 
Service Inspectorate to this effect, which had already started func tioning.  Further, the 
Ministry were also in the process of drawing up a detailed schedule for carrying out 
inspection of our Missions/Posts abroad.  The Committee had appreciated the action 
taken by the Ministry in this regard.  They had further recommended that apart from 
undertaking inspections of our Missions from  time to time, this Foreign Service 
Inspectorate should work as a standing body  for constantly monitoring the working of 
Missions/Posts and reporting on any deficienc ies found so that necessary corrective 
measure could be taken.  The Committee also desired that they ma y be apprised of the 
details of the Inspection Reports as carri ed in all the Missions and the action taken 
thereon. 
 
3.18 The Government: have replied as under: 
“A Foreign Service Inspectorate, now  called the Directorate General of 
Inspections (DGI), has been set up in the Mi nistry from February 2004.  The above body 
is headed by Additional Secretary (AD) in the Ministry, who has also been designated as 
Director General of Inspections. 
3.19 As per its mandate, DGI serves as an independent and objective  evaluator of all 
activities, functions and operations of Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The inspection team 
assesses all aspects of Mission’s functioning, including assessment of the overall work 
done by the Mission/Post vis-à-vis the foreign policy objectives, review of the human 
resource management in the Mission/Post, evaluation of economic and commercial 
activities undertaken, assessment of the effe ctiveness of press, in formation and cultural 
work, examination of the efficiency of  delivery of consular services and 

 
 
 
interaction/contact with NRIs/PIOs, review of internal administration and control, 
assessment of utilisation of communication  and information technology tools, efforts 
made by Missions/Posts in propagating Hind i, steps taken by Missions/Posts to 
implement security measures and assessment of the general mo rale of the officers/staff 
obtaining response/feedback from Missions.    
3.20 Till now, inspections have been carried out in five Missions i.e. Ulaan Batar, 
Islamabad, Nicosia, Kabul and CGI Jalalabad. These inspections were carried out 
keeping in mind the above par ameters. Pursuant to the inspections, inspection reports 
were submitted and specific recommendations were made as appropriate. These 
recommendations included sug gestions and guide lines on optimum human resource 
management, assessment of the constraint s faced by the Missions and suggesting 
solutions for the same and instructions for further improving internal control.”  
3.21 The Committee desire that in the first in stance, a round of inspection of those 
Missions and Posts which are strategically important in se rving and str engthening our 
social, cultural and ec onomical interests, be carried out and for the purpose a detailed 
schedule be drawn up by th e Ministry. The Commi ttee had desired that they may be 
apprised of the details of th e Inspection Reports as carried  in all the Missions and the 
action taken thereon.  However, the Ministry has not supplied the required information to 
the Committee.  The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterate that they should be apprised of the 
contents of the Inspection Reports of these Missions including action taken thereon. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
C. PASSPORT AND EMIGRATION 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 92) 
 
3.22 The Committee noted with satisfaction t hat out of 18 district s in West Bengal, 
District Passport Cells were functional in 14 districts since January 2004.  Keeping in 
view the importance of the DPC scheme, t he Committee had expressed that they would 
like the Ministry to cover the remaining four districts of the State at the earliest.  The 
Committee were also of the view that the p ublicity efforts with regard to DPC scheme in 
the States not appeared satisfactory for which the success rate of this scheme was quite 
low.  Therefore, the Committee urged the Ministry to further enhance their efforts in that 
direction and give wide publicity to that scheme through newspapers and other media. 
3.23. The Government have replied as under: 
“District Passport Cells have also been opened in the remaining four districts of 
West Bengal.  On Ministry’s instructi ons, Passport Offices have been giving wide 

 
 
 
publicity to the District Passport Cell scheme by holding press conferences and 
through press releases on regular basis.  Mi nistry has finalised an advertisement about 
the scheme and given it to DAVP for publication in over 70 newspapers all over India.  It 
is expected to be published shortly.”   
3.24 The Committee observe that though the passport offices were giving wide 
publicity to the District Passport Cell scheme by holding press conferences and through 
press releases on regular ba sis and the Ministry has finalised an advertisement about 
the scheme and given it to DAVP  for publication in over 70  newspapers all over India, 
yet, in the opinion of the Commi ttee, the efforts made in this direction do not suffice.   In 
a country like India where th e reach of newspaper is only to 20 to 25% of the entire 
population, the dependency on newspaper s alone is not enough. The Committee 
recommend that efforts to publicise the scheme to the common people need to be 
intensified a great deal through  local newspapers, Regional language Radio/Television 
as also through pamphlets etc.in regional languages.   
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Recommendation No 18 (Para No 93) 
 
3.25 The Committee were happy to note that th e efforts of the Ministry had borne fruit 
and DPCs were proposed to be opened in the st ates of Bihar and Rajasthan shortly.  
The Committee had desired that the Ministry should ensure a regular follow up in respect 
of these two States. 
3.26 The Government have informed: 
 “As a result of Ministry’s constant and persuasive efforts, Government of Bihar 
has opened DPCs in 12 distri cts (total 38 districts) and Government of Rajasthan has 
taken steps to open DPCs in 9 districts (total 32 districts).” 
3.27 The Committee are happy to note that as a result of the Ministry’s efforts the 
Governments of Bihar and Rajasthan have sinc e opened District Passport Cells in some 
districts. The Committee would however like th e Ministry to continue  with its constant 
and persuasive efforts, so that  more District Passport Cells are opened in other districts 
also. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Recommendation No. 19(Para No. 94) 
3.28 The Committee had found that the Ministry’s plan to ultimately shift all RPOs from 
rented premises to owned premises was no t making much headway. Though a concrete 
action in that regard was apparent in case  of Bhubaneswar, Bangalore, Jaipur and 

 
 
 
Guwahati, the Passport Offices in Jaland har and Mumbai had ke pt silent after 
informing the Ministry about the availability of  land almost a year ba ck. Recently, Trichy 
had also informed the Ministry about the availability of land.  As regards the large 
number of Passport Offices which were st ill functioning from rented premises, the 
Ministry, on their part had, however, merely kept on reminding such passport offices from 
time-to-time - without any concrete response from other side. The committee viewed that 
as insensitivity and irresponsibility on the part  of the subordinate offices in carrying out 
directions from the nodal Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the 
Ministry should convey in no uncertain te rms to the non responding Passport Offices 
about the urgent need to complete those proj ects expeditiously and in case of further 
delay in the matter they should be held directly responsible for the same. The Committee 
had expressed their desire to be apprised of t he action taken by the Ministry in that 
direction. 
3.29 To this, the government have replied: 
“Trichy:- Proposal is with Director ate of Defence Estates. They are yet to inform the 
Ministry  of their decision. We have already reminded them for their early decision. 
 
Mumbai:- AS(ER) & JS(CPV) visited Mumbai and held meetings with the concerned 
official of MMRDA. They have already sent t heir offer. Space area requirements of RPO, 
Mumbai is being finalized at present. 
 
Jallandhar:-JS (CPV) to visit Jallandhar shortly to l ook at the land for the possible site of 
the RPO.”   
3.30 The Committee feel that merely reminding the Passport Offices fr om time to time 
without any specific time frame and response fr om them to this effe ct is an exercise in 
futility.  What the Ministry really needs to do is to try hard and motivate the non-
responding Passport O ffices about the urg ent need to comple te these projects 
expeditiously and most important ly hold them respons ible in case of non-compliance, as 
delay in implementation of these projects  is causing huge mo netary loss to the 
exchequer.  Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs should also co ordinate with concerned State 
Governments, CPWD for allocation of land/finalising Building plans, etc. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 

 
 
 
 
D. INDIAN COUNCIL FO R CULTURAL RELATIONS 
 
Recommendation No. 24 (Para No. 110) 
 
3.31 The Committee had expressed their deep anguish at the reply given by the 
Ministry with regard to the establishment of Cu ltural Centre in Washington.  The 
Committee in almost all their meetings and  Reports presented to Parliament had been 
emphasising that the Ministry  must go ahead to buy a property, in order to set up a 
Cultural Centre in Washingt on.  However, it was utterl y deplorable on the part of the 
Ministry that they had once again lost the opportunity to acquire a suitable property in 
Washington.  Time and again, properties had co me in hand, and by t he time the Ministry 
of External Affairs and Minist ry of Finance got their act t ogether, the property got sold.  
As a result of all that, the Committee f ound to their utter amazement and shock that 
Government were back to square one and l ooking for a suitabl e property.  The 
Committee strongly recommended that  the Cultural Centre at  Washington should be 
established at the earliest at any cost.  Si milarly, all the necessary arrangements with 
regard to establishment of a Cultural Centre in Fiji, should be made by the Ministry so as 
to ensure that a full fledged Cultural Centre was operational there in time.    
3.32 The Government have again replied: 
“Washington - The Joint Team of Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of 
Finance had visited Washington in 2003 and had advised the Mission to make a 
tentative offer through a non-binding Letter of Intent of US$ 6.55 milli on for the identified 
property and examine it from other relevant aspects.  The deal, however, could not go 
through, as MEA’s proposal to make a deposit  in Escrow Account in connection with the 
purchase of the propos ed property did not meet with t he approval of the Ministry of 
Finance.  The MoF ruled that the purchase proposal be processed without resorting to 
Escrow Account payment. In the meantim e, Embassy was informed by the property 
agents handling this transaction that the seller was not willing to wait any longer as the 
local authorities were taking too much time in giving permission from zoning angle for the 
intended use of the property as a Cultural Centre. 
3.33 The Mission was subsequently asked to ex amine the possibility of developing and 
utilizing the vacant land behind the Chancery Annexe from the point of view of zoning, 
engineering design and likely investment for either supplementing or housing the 
proposed Cultural Centre indepe ndently.  A feasibility study conducted for this purpose 

 
 
 
has revealed that the required additional s pace needed for the Indian Cultural Centre 
cannot be realized at the existing premises as only marginal addition of space would be 
possible through fresh construction due to applicable local regulations 
3.34 Recommendation of the St anding Committee with regard to the Establishment of 
a Cultural Centre at Washington has been  noted for compliance.  The Mission has been 
making concerted efforts for locating a suitable building for the India Centre.  As soon as 
a suitable property is located,  the Ministry will make all efforts to purchase the same 
expeditiously.  
3.35 Fiji – Teachers have already been sele cted to man the Cultural Centres in 
Suva/Lautoko.  The Mission has been asked to expedite the hiring of suitable residential 
accommodation for these teachers. 
3.36 The Committee in their ea rlier Reports had continuously expressed their 
displeasure and anguish over the lapses committed by the Mi nistry in establishment of 
Cultural Centre in Washington and recommen ded that it should be established at the 
earliest. The Committee once ag ain strongly reiterate that action should be initiated on 
the project on top priority so t hat a Cultural Centre  is opened in Wash ington  positively 
by the end of 2005.  
3.37 As regard establishing a Cult ural Centre in Fiji is conc erned, the Ministry in their 
replies have been repeatedly sayi ng that ‘teachers have alre ady been select ed to work 
in the Cultural Centre in Su va/Lautoko’ i.e., the same thin g since the last one-and-a-half 
years and yet nothing concrete in this regard could material ise so far.  The Committee, 
therefore, want the Ministry to redouble their e fforts for hiring of a suitable residential 
accommodation for the teachers, who are to work in the Cultural Centre in Fiji. 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
Recommendation No. 25(Para No. 111) 
3.38 The Committee noted that Advisory Committ ees were being set up for each of the 
Regional Offices of the Coun cil.  The Council was in the process of identifying 
distinguished personalities in the field of  art and culture as members of Advisory 
Committees.  Each Committee would consist of  3 to 5 members out of which one or two 
members would be from among the members of statutory bodies/eminent personalities 
in the field of art and culture from the concerned region.  These Advisory Committees 
would submit reports for placing before the statutory bodies for their consideration and 
further recommendations.  The Committee also noted that Regional Offices were 

 
 
 
proposed to be opened in Bhubanes war, Bhopal, Srinagar and  North East (Shillong 
and Imphal).  The Committee observed that similar reply was being furnished by the 
Ministry with regard to the establishment of Regional Cultural Centres in the country time 
and again, while no progress had been achieved in  this direction.  The Committee had 
recommended that Constitution of Advisory Committee should be done at the earliest 
and all the necessary formalities in this r egard should be completed.  As far as the 
opening of the Regional Centres in Bhubaneswar, Bhopal, Srinagar and North-East were 
concerned, these should be ope ned without losing an y further precious time to remove 
the regional imbalances.  
3.39 The Government have informed: 
“Inputs have been received from the Region al Offices for constitution of the 
Advisory Committees.  These have been processed and required approvals are being 
obtained.  These Advisory Committees are ex pected to start functi oning in early next 
year.  Regarding opening of new Regional Offices, proposal for creation of posts in these 
Regional Offices is being processed.” 
3.40 The Committee would like to know the r easons for delay in constituting Advisory 
Committees for regional offices and desire that  Advisory Committees for all the Regional 
Offices should be constituted forthwith.  Similarly, the cr eation of posts for the proposed 
new Regional Offices should also be processed without any further delay.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
E. PROPAGATION OF HINDI 
Recommendation No. 30 (Para No. 135) 
3.41 The Committee were shocked to note t hat out of more than 160 Missions/Posts 
only six Missions and Posts abroad had appo inted six Hindi O fficers and only one 
translator. It was a pity that where more  than 50 crore people speak Hindi at least two-
three hundred people were not avai lable to save the national pr ide. If, it was due to non-
provision of funds then in the opinion of th e Committee, it was trul y unsatisfactory. The 
Committee recommended that at least one Hi ndi officer should be appointed in each 
Mission/Post for the propagation of Hindi. Each and every Mission and Post should be 
well equipped with equipment like Hindi soft ware, dictionaries, magazines, etc. to serve 
the purpose of propagating Hindi. The Committ ee were of the consi dered view that no 
nation can develop without devel opment of its national  language. As rightly said by the 
great scholar Babu Bhartendu Harish Chan dra “Nij Bhasha unnati ahai, sub unnati ko 
mool” (it means development of  our own Language is the root  of all development), the 

 
 
 
Committee had expressed hope t hat world wide propagation of Hindi should be done 
as effectively as possible through our Missions/Posts as also through the ICCR. 
3.42 To this, the Government have replied: 
“The Committee has recommended that at least one Hindi officer should be 
appointed in each Mission/Post for the propagati on of Hindi. Hindi so ftware, dictionaries 
and other teaching aids are bei ng provided by the Ministry  to most of the Missions. 
Ministry is also providing financial support to HCI, London for bringing out Mission’s Hindi 
magazine “Bharat Bhawan”.  Hindi magazines are also brought out from our Missions in, 
Yerevan and Kathmandu.  We are also maki ng adequate number of copies of 15 noted 
literary Hindi magazines available to the Missions for dissemination to local Hindi lovers.  
3.43 It may be mentioned that the Indian Mi ssions/Posts abroad do undertake work 
relating to propagation and promoti on of Hindi, apart from the Hindi promotion activities 
undertaken by the Indian Council for Cultural  Relations (ICCR).  ICCR has established 
10 Hindi chairs worldwide, which have been cate ring to the need of Hindi teaching and 
propagation among the foreign st udents in the respective countries.  A few Missions 
where there are large number of  PIOs, Ministry posts Hindi officers specifically to 
undertake Hindi propagation and promotion activities. “  
3.44 The Committee are dissatisfied to note that  the Ministry posts Hindi Officers only 
where there are large number of PIOs and only 10 Hindi chairs  have been established 
world wide so far.  The Committee find that  the number of chairs are not sufficient to 
cater to the need of te aching Hindi and its propagation.  They, therefore,  desire that for 
wider propagation of Hindi wo rld-wide through ou r Missions/Posts a nd also through the 
ICCR, at least one Hindi Office r should be posted in all t he Missions and the number of 
Hindi chairs worldwide should also be raised. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
G. FINANCIAL ALLOCATIONS TO BHUTAN 
 
Recommendation No.36  (Para No.162) 
3.45 The Committee had also noted that as part of Government of I ndia assistance to 
Ninth Plan of Bhutan, Tata Energy Research Institute wa s preparing an Energy Master 
Plan for Bhutan. The Master Pl an would form the basis of c ooperation in this sector. 
Under Government of India assistance for B hutan’s Ninth Plan, Feasibility Studies of 
three projects with total expected potential of 2000 MW would also be undertaken. These 
projects were Punatsangchu II (Punakha District), Daglia (Zemgang District) and 

 
 
 
Kholongchu (Tashiyangse). The Committee re commended that keeping in view our own 
national interests, feasibility studies of projects with to tal expected potential of 2000 MW 
should be undertaken on urgent basis. The Commi ttee trust that effort and money put 
into these projects would not go waste and ultimately benefit both the countries, in the 
coming years. 
3.46 The Government have informed: 
“Hydroelectricity is an important pillar of economic cooperation between India and 
Bhutan. The success of Chukha and Kurichu Projects which export most of the electricity 
to India and upcoming Tala Project, which is also expected to export all surplus 
electricity to India testify to  the close and fruitful mutually  beneficial cooperation in this 
sector. India is committed to further strengthen this cooperation by undertaking additional 
projects. Preparation of Detailed Project Repor t of Punatsangchu-I Project and feasibility 
studies for the three stated projects reflects our continuing interest in this sector. The 
Energy Master Plan of Bhutan would help us identify and prioritize projects in this sector. 
“ 
3.47 The Committee note that the upcoming Tala project (Bhutan) which is expected to 
export all the surplus electricity to India, testifies to the close and fruitful mutually 
beneficial cooperation in this sector. Preparation of De tailed Project Report of 
Punatsangchu–I  and feasibility studies for the three stated  projects also reflects India’s 
continuing interests in this sector. They desire these proj ects to be pursued vigorously 
and completed without the time and cost overruns.  
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Recommendation No.37  (Para No. 163) 
3.48 The Committee noted with surprise t hat the Dungsum Cement Plant was in a 
state of suspension. Although request had been received from the Royal Government of 
Bhutan for its reactivation, the Ministry had submitted that the decision could be taken 
only after a review of the se curity situation of the area and detailed discussions between 
the two sides on other aspects of the Pr oject. The area had also faced unprecedented 
floods this year causing damages to th e roads, which was expected to delay the 
reactivation of the Project. The exact ti me schedule of the Project can be worked out 
only after detailed consultations between Government of India and the Royal 
Government of Bhutan on reactivation of  the Project and reappointment of the 
Consultant. The Committee had said in this regard that security problems and floods 
were not permanent problems and due to t hese problems the project should not be 

 
 
 
allowed to remain in a state of suspension. And especially when a request for 
reactivation for the project had been received from the Royal Government of Bhutan, the 
situation should be studied for reactivation of the project at the earliest. 
3.49 The Government have replied as under: 
“Following the successful eviction of Indian insurgents groups from Southern 
Bhutan, the security situati on in the area of location of the Dungsum Cement Plant has 
improved. A decision has therefore been taken, in principle to reactivate the Dungsam 
Cement Plant. At present, we are engaged in discussions with Royal Government of 
Bhutan on modalities for reactivation of the Project.” 
3.50 The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the outcome of discussions 
being held with the Royal Gove rnment of Bhutan on modalities for r eactivation of the 
project and hope that the Dungsum Cement Plant would be reactivated at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
 
H. INDIAN TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COPERATION (ITEC) AND SPECIAL 
COMMONWEALTH  ASSISTA NCE  FOR  AFRICA PLAN  (SCAAP)  
PROGRAMMES 
 
Recommendation No. 42  (Para No.180.) 
3.51 The Committee had pointed that there wa s gross under-utilisation of the slots and 
expenditure made under the Head “ITEC-SCAAP programme”.  As stated by the Ministry 
earlier the total number of civilians trained in the financial year 2002-03 and 2003-04 was 
2001 and 2130 respectively.  In this respect t he Ministry informed later that the slots 
actually utilized under ITEC during 2003-04 was 1652 against the allotted slots of 2559.  
The Committee were not satisfied with the c onfusing replies furnished by the Ministry at 
various stages and expressed hope that this kind of replies would be avoided in future.   
As the Ministry had said, under the Head ‘civil ian training’, the procedure entailed in the 
first instance was allotment of slots as per requirements of our Missions abroad, the 
Committee had recommended that before forwardi ng demands for allotment of slots, 
Missions should objectively examine the requirements of the concerned partner 
countries. 
3.52 The Government have stated that: 
 “Undoubtedly there is no full  utilization of slots an d expenditure under “ITEC- 
SCAAP programmes”.  As regards actual utilization of slots under ITEC in the financial 

 
 
 
years 2002-03 and 2003-04, number of civilians trained were 2001 and 2130 
against allotted slots numbering 2203 and 2891 respectively.  As regards actual 
utilization of slots in the year 2003-04, no contradictory figures have been furnished by 
the Ministry.  Total number of slots actually utilized were 2130 out of which 1652 were 
under ITEC programme and 478 under SCAAP pr ogramme.  At one stage the combined 
figure of slots under ITEC and SCAAP programmes have bee n indicated and at some 
other stage, the total number of slots actually  utilized under ITEC only were furnished 
causing the confusion which is regretted. 
3.53 As regards suggestion of the Committee to objectively examine the requirements 
of the concerned countries before forwarding the demand, it is submitted that the 
Missions take into consideration the demands  of the country/countries of accreditation 
and concurrent accreditation and after satisf ying themselves of the requirements, the 
demand is forwarded to the Ministry.  Sincer e efforts to forward sufficient number of 
applications are made so that slots actually allotted to the country concerned are fulfilled.  
However, it is our experience that due to unforeseen reasons such as administrative 
requirements, personal requirem ents (as ill health, death in the family and other urgent 
reasons), some of the nominated candidates do not utilize the offer resulting in under-
utilization of the slots.  Mor eover, other countries e.g. Japan,  U.K., U.S.A. and Australia, 
etc., also offer scholarships.  Some of the candidates who hav e option to choose 
between the offers from India an d other countries do not avail of the offer from India.  
This results in cancellation in the eleventh hour and under utilization.” 
3.54 The Ministry by its own admission, has conce ded that there is no full utilization of 
slots and expenditure under “ITEC-SCAAP Programmes”. The Committee, too, while 
noting this fact with concern would, therefore, recommend full utilization of slots as also 
the funds allotted under the ITEC-SCAAP programmes. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
I. CAPITAL SECTION 
Recommendation No. 48  (Paragraph No. 208) 
3.55 The Committee were shocked to see the functioning of the Government in the 
matter of establishment of a second diplom atic Enclave which had been sandwiched 
between the Ministries of External Affairs and Finance and could not be materialised in 
the last 34 years due to stringent and cu mbersome bureaucratic procedures.  The 
Committee had strongly recommended that the other projects which were lagging behind 

 
 
 
schedule due to bureaucratic problems shoul d be identified and executed at the 
earliest.    
3.56 The Government have, however, replied: 
“The Ministry of External Affairs has la id importance to the establishment of a 
Second Diplomatic Enclave so as to allot suitable land to those Diplomatic Missions 
which desire to build their Chanceries/Emba ssy Residences here.  The matter is being 
pursued  actively by the Ministry. The Ministry had conveyed its agreement for land 
south of Vasant Vihar (Vasant Kunj, Phase-II)  in February, 1991 for the project  but the 
same could not materialise.   
3.57 Again, in March, 1992, the Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation 
proposed to accommodate the second dipl omatic enclave in a new area being 
developed at Papan Kalan (Dwaraka).  The proposal was not found suitable for a 
number of reasons  e.g.  prox imity to the airport, distance from the existing diplomatic 
enclave and security considerations.  In  September, 2000, the Ministry of Urban 
Development offered some land in Rangpuri but  it was also not f ound acceptable to us  
after a visit to the site.  The approach road to it from the Mahipa lpur side was far too 
congested and the site itself was not free fr om encumbrances.  With further requests 
from diplomatic Missions, the requirement of land  swelled to 75 acres. 
3.58 The plot of land for the Second Diplom atic Enclave has to be selected carefully 
keeping in view its access, availability of utility services and security as also acceptability 
for foreign missions who will eventually have to pay the assessed value of the land for 
acquisition.  This matter has been raised by this Ministry at the level of Committee of 
Secretaries and a request for allotment of suitable land for this purpose had been made 
at the level of Minister for External Affairs to the Minister for Urban Development. 
3.59 Redevelopment plan of t he area surrounded by Netaji Nagar, R.K. Puram, Moti 
Bagh, Shanti Path and Safdarjung Railway Station is under consi deration and present 
indications are that provision for Second Di plomatic Enclave in this area would be 
considered. 
3.60 In its latest communication (No. L-II-9( 76)/04/105 dated 27.4.04),  the Ministry of 
Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation have informed this Ministry that the proposal 
for “establishment of a Second Diplomatic Enclave at the area surrounded by Netaji 
Nagar, Moti Bagh, R.K. Puram, Shanti Pa th and Safdarjung Railway Station has been 
under active consideration of this office in consultation with CPWD” and that this 
proposal would require “change of land use from Residential and partl y Govt. Offices to 

 
 
 
Partly Diplomatic Enclave and Partly Residential which is  under pr ocess and  
further development in this rega rd shall be intimated in du e course of ti me.” Forei gn 
Secretary has written to Secretary, Mi nistry of Urban Development and Poverty 
Alleviation in August 2004 and r equested that the 34 years old pending matter may be 
finalised early.  
3.61 In this connection it may be mentioned th at the decision on the allotment of land 
for the Second Diplomatic Enclave rests entirely with the Ministry of Urban Development 
and Pov erty Alleviation, as it is the sole decision mak ing authorit y in this regard. The 
Ministry of External Affairs, despite its best i ntentions of meeting the requirements of the 
diplomatic missions in New Delhi can only r ecommend allotment of land to the missions,  
after the land has been granted for the purpose by the land owning agency. “   
3.62 The Committee find the Mini stry’s argument that des pite its best intent ions of 
meeting the requirements  of  the diplomat ic m issions i n New Delh i they  can only  
recommend allotment of  land to the missions, after the land has been granted for the 
purpose by the land owning agency, as totally unconvincing and casual. The very fact 
that this project  has been pending for  over three decades  only  goes  to prove that the 
Ministry has not been making concerted efforts in this dire ction. The Committee strongly  
feel that the m atter needs to be pursued by  the Ministry more seri ously and vi gorously 
with the land owning agency at the highest level. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
 
              
NEW DELHI;                                                     Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
March, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 

 
 
 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 31st March, 2005  
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1730 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri Vinod Khanna 
5. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
6. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
7. Shri Dinsha Patel 
8. Shri Somabhai Patel 
9. Shri Sebastian Paul 
10. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
11. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
12. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
14. Dr. Karan Singh 
15. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K 
16. Smt. S.G. Indira 
17. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
18. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Director 
2. Shri Shiv Kumar - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
4. After that, the Committee also took up for consideration the draft 5 th Report on 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 1 st Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants of the Minis try of External Affairs for the year 2004-
2005. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report.  The Members suggested minor modifications. 
5. The Committee desired that modifications suggested by the Members be suitably 
incorporated in the body of the Report. 
6. The Committee then adopted the Report and authorized the Chairman to finalise 
the Action Taken Report and present the same to Parliament.  
  The Committee then adjourned. 

  
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIRST 
REPORTOF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total Number of Recommendations                 50 
II. Recommendations/Conclusions whic h have been acc epted                      
by Government 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16, 21, 22,  
26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47,49 & 
50 
 T otal                   31 
Percentage                           62.00% 
 
III Recommendations/Conclusions which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 12, 20, 23 & 40 
   
Total                     4 
 Percentage                         08.00% 
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by  
the Committee 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 9,  13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 24, 25, 30,  
36, 37, 42 & 48 
   
 Total                      15 
 Percentage               30.00% 
 
V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are 
 still awaited 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. Nil  
   
Total               Nil 
 P ercentage             Nil 
 
 

  
APPENDIX  III 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Ministry Observations/Recommendations 
1. 3.5 External Affairs The Committee find that the issue of settlement 
of rent has been delayed inordinately. It should 
not be very d ifficult for the Ministry to o rganise 
meetings with the offici als of th e NDMC a nd 
sort the m atter out. Therefore, the explanation 
given by th e Minist ry is not convin cing. The 
Committee desire that the  issue of rent should 
be settled within thre e months a nd the 
Committee be informed about it. 
 
2. 3.10 External Affairs The Committee note that the proj ections under 
Major Head 2061 at RE stage (2003-2004) was 
actually to the tune of  Rs. 19 9.17 crore,  
whereas the Ministry had  earlier at the time of 
examination of Deman ds for Grant s for the  
year 2004-2005 stated this figure as Rs.  
177.02 crore.  Thi s shows the figu re furnished 
earlier by th e Mini stry u nder this Head wa s 
wrong. The Committee h ave taken a  serio us 
note of this.  The figures/i nformation furnished 
to the Committee, sh ould be  a ccurate and  
authentic.  T he Committee would  al so advise  
the Ministry to en sure proper and apt handling 
of their financial resources. 
3. 3.13 External Affairs The fact that the Ministry has already taken too 
much time in evaluatin g the prop erty for 
Chancery-cum-residences at Ulan Bator makes 
the Committe e ap prehensive that the Ministry 
is li kely to  ta ke even mo re time i n purchasing 
the pro perty.  The Co mmittee ha s been  
continuously expressing th eir a nxiety over the  
extremely sl ow p ace of  impleme ntation of 
various projects undertaken by the Ministry and 
feel that this project may not be an exception. 
The Co mmittee reiterate  that the Ministry 
should ma ke all out  ef forts t o a ccomplish t his 
project a nd make it ab solutely su re that the 
property is p urchased wi thout any fu rther l oss 
of time. 
4. 3.16 External Affairs The Committee note that the co nstruction work 
of Foreign Service In stitute complex could not  
be co mpleted within the targete d date.  
Changing of target dates shows some laxity on 
the pa rt of t he G overnment in thi s case. The 
Committee recommend, therefore, the Ministry 
to take ne cessary ste ps f or the compl etion of 
the Fo reign Service In stitute buildin g withi n 
target dates set therefor. 
 

  
5. 3.21 External Affairs The Committee desire that in the firs t instance, 
a ro und of i nspection of  those Mi ssions an d 
Posts which  are strate gically impo rtant in  
serving a nd strengthening our so cial, cultural 
and e conomical inte rests, be ca rried out and 
for the pu rpose a d etailed schedule be drawn 
up by the Ministry. The Committee had desired 
that they ma y be app rised of the d etails of the  
Inspection Reports a s carried in  all the 
Missions a nd the action ta ken there on.  
However, t he Minist ry h as not su pplied the 
required info rmation to th e Committee .  Th e 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that they should 
be ap prised of the co ntents of the In spection 
Reports of t hese Mi ssions i ncluding actio n 
taken thereon. 
 
6. 3.24 External Affairs The Committee ob serve that thoug h the  
passport offices were giving wide pub licity to 
the Di strict Pass port Cell schem e by  holdin g 
press conferences and through press releases 
on regular basis and the Ministry has finalised 
an advertisement about the schem e and given  
it to DAVP for publication in ov er 70 
newspapers all over India, yet, in the opinion of 
the Committ ee, the efforts ma de in this 
direction do not suffice.   In a country like India 
where the reach of n ewspaper is only t o 20 to 
25% of the entire pop ulation, the depe ndency 
on newsp apers al one i s not enoug h. The 
Committee recommend that efforts to pu blicise 
the scheme to the com mon people need to be  
intensified a great d eal throug h local 
newspapers, Re gional l anguage 
Radio/Television as al so through pa mphlets 
etc.in regional languages. 
 
7. 3.27 External Affairs The Committee a re hap py to note th at as a 
result of the Ministry’s efforts the 
Governments of Bihar an d Raja sthan have  
since opened District Passport Cells in some 
districts. Th e Commit tee would ho wever like 
the Mini stry to co ntinue with its con stant and  
persuasive efforts, so that more District 
Passport Cel ls are ope ned in other di stricts 
also. 
 
8. 3.30 External Affairs The Committee feel that merely re minding the 
Passport Offices from time to time without any 
specific time frame and response from them to 
this effect is an exercise in futility.  What the 
Ministry really need s to do is to  try ha rd a nd 
motivate the non-responding Passport Offices 
about the urgent n eed to compl ete these  
projects exp editiously and most imp ortantly 
hold them responsible in ca se of  non-
 

 
 
 
compliance, as delay in implementation of 
these projects is causing huge monetary loss 
to the exchequer.  Ministry of External Affairs 
should also coordinate with concerned State 
Governments, CPWD for allocation of 
land/finalising Building plans, etc. 
 
9. 3.36 and 
3.37 
External Affairs The Committee in their earlier Reports had 
continuously expressed their displeasure and 
anguish over the laps es committed by the 
Ministry in establishment of Cultural Centre in 
Washington and recommended that it should 
be established at the earliest. The Committee 
once again strongly reiterate that action 
should be initiated on the project on top 
priority so that a Cultural Centre is opened in 
Washington  positively by the end of 2005.  
 
As regard establishing a Cultural Centre in Fiji 
is concerned, the Ministry in their replies have 
been repeatedly saying that ‘teachers have 
already been selected to work in the Cultural 
Centre in Suva/Lautoko’ i.e., the same thing 
since the last one-and-a-half years and yet 
nothing concrete in this regard could 
materialise so far.  The Committee, therefore, 
want the Ministry to redouble their efforts for 
hiring of a suitable residential accommodation 
for the teachers, who are to work in the 
Cultural Centre in Fiji. 
 
10. 3.40 External Affairs The Committee would like to know the 
reasons for delay in constituting Advisory 
Committees for regional offices and desire 
that Advisory Committees for all the Regional 
Offices should be constituted forthwith.  
Similarly, the creation of posts for the 
proposed new Regional Offices should also 
be processed without any further delay.  
 
11. 3.44 External Affairs The Committee are dissatisfied to note that the 
Ministry posts Hindi Officers only where there 
are large number of PIOs and only 10 Hindi 
chairs have been established world wide so far.  
The Committee find that the number of chairs 
are not sufficient to cater to the need of 
teaching Hindi and its propagation.  They, 
therefore, desire that for wider propagation of 
Hindi world-wide through our Missions/Posts 
and also through the ICCR, at least one Hindi 
Officer should be posted in all the Missions and 
the number of Hindi chairs worldwide should 
also be raised. 
 
12. 3.47 External Affairs The Committee note that the upcoming Tala 
project (Bhutan) which is ex pected to ex port 

 
 
 
all the surplus electricity to India, testifies to 
the close and fruitful mutually beneficial 
cooperation in this sector. Preparation of 
Detailed Project Report of Punatsangchu–I  
and feasibility studies for the three stated 
projects also reflects India’s continuing 
interests in this sector. They desire these 
projects to be pursued vigorously and 
completed without the time and cost overruns.  
 
13. 3.50 External Affairs The Co mmittee desire that they may be 
apprised of the outcome of discussions being 
held with the Royal Government of Bhutan on 
modalities for reactivation of the project and 
hope that the Dungsum Cement Plant would 
be reactivated at the earliest. 
 
14. 3.54 External Affairs The Mini stry by its own admission, has 
conceded that there is no full utilization of slots 
and expenditure under “ITEC-SCAAP 
Programmes”. The Committee, too, while 
noting this fact with concern would, therefore, 
recommend full utilization of slots as also the 
funds allotted under the ITEC-SCAAP 
programmes. 
 
15. 3.62 External Affairs The Committee find the Ministry’s argument 
that despite its best intentions of meeting the 
requirements of the diplomatic missions in 
New Delhi they can only recommend 
allotment of land to the missions, after the 
land has been granted for the purpose by the 
land owning agency, as totally unconvincing 
and casual. The very fact that this project has 
been pending for over three decades only 
goes to prove that the Ministry has not been 
making concerted efforts in this direction. The 
Committee strongly feel that the matter needs 
to be pursued by the Ministry more seriously 
and vigorously with the land owning agency at 
the highest level. 
 
 
 
 