  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
                             FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
16 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2007-2008) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26  April, 2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on     26  April, 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

(i) 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-2007) …………………….      (ii)  
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………….      (iii) 
REPORT 
 
I. Implementation of the Committee’s recommendations……………….           1   
II. Budgetary Allocation and Utilisation …………………………………          2  
III. Emigration Services        
A.  Exploitation by Recruiting Agents (RAs)..…………………...            9 
B. Bilateral Labour Agreements...………………………………..          14 
C. Computerization/ E-Governance………………………………          15 
D. Pre-Departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation …………….          16 
E. Social Security Agreement…………………………………….          18 
F. Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment ……………..          19 
IV. Other Services 
A. Financial Assistance for women deserted by overseas 
Indian spouses………………..…………………………………          21   
B. Overseas Indian Centers ..………………… ..………………….          22 
C. PIO University..………………… ..………………… ..…….….          23 
D. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) ..………………………………..         25     
(i) Overseas Indian Facilitation Center (OIFC)..…………………        28 
(ii) AAPI-India Rural Health Initiative..………………………….        30    
 
 
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee                                                  32                     
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 13.04.2007………………       37 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 25.04.2007………………       39 

(ii) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
7. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
9. Shri L. Rajagopal * 
10. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
11. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
12. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
13. Shri P.A. Sangma 
14. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil 
15. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
16. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
17. Shri M. Shivanna 
18. Shri Vanlalzawma 
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
24. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
25. Smt. S.G. Indira 
26. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K. 
27. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
29. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
30. Dr. Karan Singh 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C.V. Gadgil - Director 
4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 16th January, 2007 

(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairm an of the Standing Com mittee on External Affairs, having been 
authorised by the Com mittee to present the Re port on their behalf, present this Sixteenth 
Report of the Standing Com mittee on External Affairs (2006-2007) on Dem ands for 
Grants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
 
2. The Com mittee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on 13th April, 2007.  
 
3. The Com mittee considered and adopted this report at their sitting held on 25 th 
April, 2007. Minutes of the sittings held on 13 th and 25 th April, 2007 are given in 
Annexure I and II to the Report. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks  to the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs f or placing bef ore them  the m aterial and inf ormation which they wanted in 
connection with examination of the Demands for Grants (2007-2008).  They also wish to 
thank in particular the representatives of  th e Ministry of Overseas  Indian Affairs who 
gave evidence and placed their considered views before the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
25 April, 2007                                                         Chairman,  
5 Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)                Standing Committee on External Affairs 

CHAPTER I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
The 10 th Report of the Standing Comm ittee on External Affairs on 
“Demands for Grants- 2006-2007 of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs” was 
presented to the Lok Sabha on 18 th May, 2006. The Report contained 12 
recommendations/ observations. 
 
1.2 In compliance of the Direction 73-A of  the Directions by the Speaker, the 
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs made a statement in the House on 13 th 
December, 2006 giving the status of the implementation of various 
recommendations/ observations made by the Committee in their 10 th Report. An 
analysis of the Minister’s statement show ed that the Government has accepted all 
the 12 recommendations. Out of these, 3 recommendations (Nos. 1, 2 and 9) were 
implemented by the Government and 9 recommendations (Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
11 and 12) were under process for implementation. 
 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken rep lies received from the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on the above-mentioned Report, the Committee presented 
their 12
th Report (Action Taken Report) to Parliament on 18 th December, 2006. 
The Committee in their 12th Report have commented on the Action Taken Replies 
furnished by the Ministry in respect of recommendations Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6 
contained in the 10th Report. The final replies have already been received from the 
Ministry which will be laid in Parliament. 

 2
CHAPTER II 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND UTILISATION 
 
 
The Ministry of Overseas Indian A ffairs, established in May 2004 as the 
‘Ministry of Non-Resident Indians’ A ffairs’ was renam ed the ‘Ministry of  
Overseas Indian Affairs’ (MOIA) in September 2004. The em igration division of 
the Ministry of Labour and Em ployment was attached to the new m inistry in Dec 
2004. The erstwhile NRI division of the MEA now functions as the Diaspora 
division in the Ministry is organized into four functional service divisions: 
Diaspora Services, Financial Services, Employment Services, and Social Services. 
The Budget of the MOIA is primarily Non-Plan in nature.  
 
2.2 The Dem and for Grants of the Minist ry Of Overseas Indians Affairs  
(Demand No. 66) for the year 2007-2008 is as under:  
 
                                                                          (Rs. in crore) 
Section  Revenue Capital Total 
Charged - - - 
Voted 40 10 50 
Total 40 10 50 
 
 
2.3 The total budgetary allocation of the MOIA in 2006-2007 was Rs.38 crore 
which was reduced to Rs.26 crore at RE stage. The proposed allocation of Rs.50 
crore for 2007-08 is an enhancem ent by Rs.24 crore over the Revised Estim ate of 
2006-07. 
 
2.4 When asked why program me/scheme-wise details are not shown in the 
Detailed Demands for Grants except for celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, 
the Secretary, MOIA responded during ev idence by saying that at present the 
Demands for all programmes/schemes except for celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya 

 3
Divas are being presented in one generic head  and that they are trying to give the  
break-up of it this year.     
 
2.5 Budget allocation and actual utilizati on by the Ministry during the last 3 
years are as follows: 
      (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals  Shortfall in utilization of RE
2004-05 7.00 10.00 6.16 3.84 
2005-06 35.00 19.10 17.46 1.64 
2006-07 38.00 26.00 25 1.00 
 
2.6 When asked the reasons for shortfa ll in utilization of even the revised 
estimates during 2005-2006, the Ministry in their written reply stated that the 
Ministry was in its formative stage and the programmes and activities of the 
Ministry were under formulation, which took some time. During 2006-2007, 
however, as against the RE of Rs. 26 crores  the actual expenditure is estimated at 
Rs. 25 crores. 
 
2.7 On being asked as to what necessitated reduction of the budgetary 
allocation from Rs. 38 crore to Rs . 26 crore during 2006-2007 and how actual 
utilization compared  with revised estimate, the Ministry submitted in a written 
reply as follows: 
“During the review of supplementary estimates, though several 
programmes/ schemes including the Skill Up gradation 
Programme, the Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children, 
Overseas Citizenship Scheme, Know India Programme, etc were 
under implementation the revised es timates were fixed at Rs. 26 
crores by the Ministry of Finance.The actual expenditure as at the 
end of the year is estimated at  Rs. 25 crores. The shortfall in 
expenditure of Rs. 1 crore is in the following two heads: 
i) Construction of PBK – The funds could not be utilized 
for want of adequate number of Expression of Interest from 
the firms in the field. 
ii) Celebration of PBD – Pendi ng finalization of the audit 
of the bills submitted by Confederation of Indian Industries 

 4
(CII), Rs. 62 lakhs have been withheld from  final 
payment.” 
 
2.8 When asked about the program mes which were adversely affected due to 
reduction in allocation at the Revised Estimates stage in 2006-2007, the Secretary, 
MOIA, responded as under: 
“……Though there has been a little b it reduction in the allocation, 
it has not af fected our activities th at m uch because even in the 
Revised Estim ate, we have sp ent Rs. 25 crore.  After a 
considerable discussion, the Minist ry had agreed to RE of Rs. 26 
crore against the allocation of Rs.38 crore because we had a m id-
term appraisal that we would be able to spend only this m uch in 
respect of certain Schemes, and we were able to formalize it in the 
middle of the year.  That is why, we were not able to spend it but it 
has not in any way affected the Schemes of the Ministry.” 
 
 
2.9 When asked to furnish the pattern of release of funds by the Ministry 
during each quarter of the last two financia l years, the Ministry stated in a written 
reply as under: 
     (Rs. in lakhs)                      
 
 
2005-2006 2006-2007 Major Heads 
1st 
Quarte
r 
2nd 
Quarter  
3rd 
Quarter 
4th 
Quarte
r 
1st 
Quarter 
2nd 
Quarter 
3rd 
Quarter 
4th 
Quarte
r 
2052-Secretarial-
General Services 
13 147 98 520 134 198 419 492 
2061-External 
Affairs 
00 05 374 568 15 62 267 900 
4059-Capital 
Outlay on Publ ic 
Works 
00 00 00 21 00 00 00 04 
Total 13 152 472 1109 149 260 686 1396 
2.10 It may be seen from  the table above that substantial am ounts were being 
released only during the last quarter duri ng the last two years. Asked about the 
reasons, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“As m ost of the schem es of the Ministry are to be im plemented 
through the State Govts./Indian Mi ssions etc., it was necessary to 

 5
consult the various stakeholders before launching these schemes to 
ensure the benefits of the schemes reach the target groups.  For 
example, a meeting with the concerned State Govt. was held 
regarding orientation program a nd skill upgradation for emigrant 
workers.  After taking into acc ount the deliberations during the 
meeting, the program was launched.  The consultation process took 
time and funds could be released only towards the last quarter of 
the year. It may also be mentione d that Pravasi Bharatiya Divas is 
held in January each year, hence e xpenditure in the last quarter is 
considerably higher. As regards the capital outlay on public works, 
an amount of Rs. 4 lakhs was released to the CPWD for 
construction of fencing of the land allotted for the PBK.  Money 
was placed at the disposal of CPWD on 12.6.2006 and the work 
was executed immediately thereafter. However, the CPWD 
submitted their accounts towards the last quarter of the year.  
Therefore, booking of this expenditure has been done in the last 
quarter, even though the work had been done much earlier.” 
 
2.11 The programme-wise details of the a llocations made and actual utilization 
during the last 3 years as observed from a written reply of MOIA are as follows:  
 
Allocation of Funds for Schemes/ Programmes and utilization during 2006-2007 
(Rs. In lakhs) 
 Name of the Scheme Funds 
allocated  
Actual 
utilization  
Remarks 
1 Pre departure Orientation & 
skill upgradation for 
Emigrant Workers 
400 400 Being implemented by the 
State Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala 
and Punjab. 
2 Legal assistance for Indian 
women facing problems in 
NRI marriages 
100 0 Funds placed at the 
disposal of Missions. 
Information on utilization 
awaited. 
3 Scholarship Scheme for 
Diaspora Children 
100 66.93  
4 Overseas Citizenship of India 50 101.63  
5 Know India Programme 25 27.71  
 Total 675 596.27  
 
 
2.12 The Committee were also informed that during 2004-2005 and 2005-2006, 
no significant expenditure was incurred by the Ministry on Schemes as the 
Ministry was in the process of setting up its  infrastructure in the formative stage. 

 6
The schemes were being planned and the actual expenditure during the two 
financial years under ‘Other Schemes’ were approximately Rs. 2 lakhs and Rs. 60 
lakhs respectively. Funds utilized were ma inly in Schemes like OCI, Know India 
Programme (earlier known as Internship  Programme for Diaspora Youth) and 
setting up a unit of Migration Research at the Centre for Development Studies. 
  
2.13 On being asked as to when the Migration Centre was set up and the actual 
expenditure incurred thereon dur ing the Years 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and 2006-
2007, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Migration Research Center as a unit of Center for Development 
Studies (CDS) was set up at Th iruvananthapuram in June 2006. 
The budget of the unit for the five  years was projected as Rs. 
219.65 lakhs.  Out of the MOIA share of Rs. 146.75 Lakhs for a 
period of 5 years, MOIA made a payment of Rs. 26 lakhs as 
advance to Center for Development Studies (CDS) in the financial 
year 2005-2006.”  
 
2.14 When enquired if utilization certificat e has been obtained from the Center 
for Development Studies, the Ministry responded as under: 
“Center for Development Studies has not submitted utilization 
certificate as the Migration Research Unit was set up only in May 
2006 after signing of a agreemen t between MOIA and CDS and 
CDS would be liable to give the utilization certificate for the work 
done during the Financial Year 2006-07 in the next Financial Year 
i.e. 2007-08, starting from Apr il, 2007. However, pending the 
submission of Utilization Certifi cate no further funds have been 
released to the CDS.”  
 
2.15 When further enquired about its present status, the Ministry submitted that 
the Migration Research Unit is active in conducting the research works and 
studies on Indian Emigrants and other relevant issues in various counties. 
 
2.16 The Ministry has also informed th e Committee that to ensure effective 
monitoring of the implementation of the programmes and schemes during the 
course of the year and to review physical and financial progress the Ministry  

 7
 
ensures regular multi-leve l reviews. The functional Division Heads review 
Scheme implementation on a monthly basis based on the expenditure statement of 
the Principal Chief Controller of Accounts.   A bi-monthly review of the physical 
and financial progress of the various sc hemes vis-à-vis the BE allocation is 
undertaken at JS (FS) level and a Quarterl y Budget review is done at the level of 
Secretary, MOIA. 
 
2.17 A provision of Rs. 3 crore was ma de in the budget of 2005-2006 and Rs. 
2.50 crore in the budget of 2006-2007 primarily for establishing the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Kendra (PBK). Again a provision of Rs.5 crore has been made for PBK 
in the budget of 2007-2008. Against thes e allocations only Rs. 20 lakh was 
utilized in the year 2005-2006. The PBK would become the hub of various 
activities aimed at harnessing the tale nt pool among the Indian Diaspora and 
developing a sense of pride in the achievements of India and the Diaspora.  
 
2.18 The Proposed construction of the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) has 
inordinately been delayed during the last two years despite the budgetary 
allocation made for the purpose. It has been stated in the outcome Budget 2007-
2008 that the construction of the Kendra is expected to commence in 2007-2008 
and will be completed in 3-4 years. Th e Ministry of Urban Development is 
reported to have recently allotted land in New Delhi for the PBK. 
 
2.19 When asked about the utilization of the allocated funds for construction of 
PBK during 2006-2007, the Ministry subm itted that the utilization during 2006-
2007 against the allocation of Rs. 2.5 crore was only Rs. 4.10 lakhs on account of 
wire fencing and watch and ward staff.  
 
2.20 On being asked as to what was the original cost of the project and 
expected date of completion and whether there was any cost and time overrun on  
 

 8
the project on account of delay in commencement of construction, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
 
“As the Detailed Project Report (DPR ) is yet to be prepared and 
the project is yet to be formally approved, there are no original cost 
estimates and therefore, the question of cost and time overrun does 
not arise. The Consultant will prepare the DPR.” 
 
2.21 When asked the reasons for allocating Rs. 5 crore during BE 2007-2008 
towards construction of PBK even though DPR of the project is yet to be 
prepared, the Ministry responded by stating that Rs. 5 crore have been allocated 
for activities such as Cost of prepar ation of DPR, Cost of Organizing 
Architectural Competition, Architect’s fees, Consultant’s fees, Ground work etc. 
 
2.22 When further enquired if the cons ultant for the project has been 
appointed and the time by which the DP R is likely to be prepared and 
approved, the Ministry in their reply submitted as under: 
 “Action for appointment of consu ltant is already in progress and 
the consultants are likely to be appoi nted in the first quarter of the 
financial year. Thereafter, it would take about 6 months to finalize 
DPR and get necessary approval for the project.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 9
CHAPTER III 
EMIGRATION SERVICES 
 
A. Exploitation by Recruiting Agents: 
 One of the functions of the Ministry for Over seas Indian Affairs is to look 
after all emigration under the Emigrati on Act, 1983 from India to overseas 
countries. The Emigration Act, 1983 seeks to  protect emigrants from exploitation 
by unscrupulous agents and foreign empl oyers and provides the framework for 
regulating recruitment and emigration of Indian workers seeking employment 
overseas on a contractual basis. 
 
3.2 The Act does not fully address the problems faced in emigration in the 
present day such as exploitation by recruiting agents and foreign employers and ill 
treatment of emigrants by foreign employers etc.  
3.3 According to the Outcome Budget, there is an urgent need to convert the 
Emigration Act into an effective instrument for promotion of employment related 
migration, prevention of irregular migra tion and graduation of Indian workers up 
the wage chain.  
3.4 The Government has proposed amendment to Emigration Act, 1983 to 
address the present day concerns in emigration management and to provide for the 
promotion and regulation of overseas employment and the protection and welfare 
of the emigrants. 
3.5 The Ministry submitted that, the draft amendment Bill is being finalized in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice. The salient features as 
proposed by the Ministry in the amendments are as follows: 
1. The duties of the Protector General of Emigrants will be laid down. 
2. A new chapter has been proposed in the Bill on protection and welfare 
of emigrants. A specific provisi on has been made laying down the 
powers and functions of the Centra l Government in promotion of 
overseas employment and protection and welfare of emigrants. 

 10
Similarly, a provision has been made to lay down the functions of the 
Indian Missions abroad. 
3. The eligibility criteria for registration of recruiting agencies will be 
strengthened and the minimum-security amount to be deposited by the 
recruiting agencies will be raised. A provision has been added to the 
specific duties and performance sta ndards in respect of Recruiting 
Agencies. The grounds for cancellation of registration certificate will 
be expanded. A provision is propos ed for imposition of fine on 
Recruiting Agencies for malpracti ces or violation of terms and 
conditions of the registration. 
4. A provision to specify the duties of the employer has been proposed. 
5. The penalty for violation of the Act under section 24 will be enhanced 
and a new offence under the title “hum an smuggling” will be added to 
deal with intermediaries and recruiting agencies assisting or abetting a 
person’s illegal entry into a country and/ or his illegal residence. 
Enabling provisions for speedy redre ssal of grievances of emigrants 
through an Ombudsman and for constituting an Enforcement 
Directorate have been proposed. 
 
3.6 As regards the present day position relating to the amendment of the 
Emigration Act, 1983, the Secretary, MOIA, stated during evidence as under: 
“….we have firmed up our proposal  and this proposal has been 
sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice. The main feature of the 
Bill is that we intend to enhance the punishment to violators of the 
provisions of this Act. We will al so increase the fine and even in 
the case of recruitment stringent conditions are being laid down so 
that whosoever violates this law, punitive action is strongly taken. 
We will introduce this Bill in this Session and if it is not 
introduced in this Session, we will try to introduce it in the next 
Session.” 
 
3.7 The Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) administers the Emigration 
Act, 1983. He overseas the field offices of the protectors of emigrants.  
 
3.8 The registration of Recruiting Ag ents under the Emigration Act, 1983, 
commenced from January, 1984, and upto 31 st December, 2006 Registration 
Certificates were issued to 4915 Recru iting Agents. However, at present about 

 11
1600 Recruiting Agents are reportedly active in this business. Major 
concentration of Recruiting Agents is at Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai and Kerala. 
 
3.9 Complaints are received from various quarters, regarding non-payment/ 
delayed payment of wages, unilateral ch anges in the contracts of workers, 
changing the jobs arbitrarily etc. In ex treme cases, the workers are not given any 
employment at all and are left in the lurch in the foreign country. In such 
instances, the Protector-General of Em igrants (PGE) steps in and asks the 
concerned Recruiting Agent to get the work ers repatriated at his expense. If he 
fails to do so, his Bank Guarantee is forf eited and the amount utilized to pay for 
the repatriation expenses. 
 
3.10 According to MOIA, as per information received from some of the 
Indian Missions in countries with la rge population of expatriate Indians, 
the number of workers, who were not given any employment on reaching 
in the country of employment during the last three years is as follows: 
Year No. of 
workers 
2004 762 
2005 1152 
2006 1013 
 
3.11 The Ministry further submitted that, whenever such cases are reported to 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affa irs, the Recruiting Agent concerned is 
directed to help the workers in either ge tting the promised job or in repatriation to 
India. If the Recruiting Agent fails to re spond, action is taken to suspend/ cancel 
his Registration certificate and forfeits his security deposit available in the form of 
Bank Guarantee. In the meanwhile, the concerned Indian Mission is asked to 
arrange repatriation of the stranded workers. 

 12
 
3.12 It has also been stated that the co mplaints against Recruiting Agents (RAs) 
are enquired into with the help of POEs and the concerned Indian Missions and 
appropriate action, in each case in accordance with the provisions of the 
Emigration Act, 1983 and Rules framed th ere under is taken. Complaints against 
foreign employers are taken up with the Indian Missions and if need be the 
employer is blacklisted. Further , Departmental action is taken against the erring 
agents by way of suspension and cancellation of Registration Certificate and 
forfeiture of Bank Guarantee. 
 
3.13 When asked to indicate the number of  complaints received during the last 
two years against Recruiting Agents/ foreign employers and the action taken by 
POEs thereon including the number of co mplaints where final action is pending, 
the Ministry in their written submission stated as under: 
“During the last two years num ber of registration certificate 
suspended/ cancelled and Bank Guarantee (BG) forfeited is as 
under: 
Year No. of 
complaints No. of 
RCs 
cancelled 
No. of 
complaint/ 
dropped/ 
settled 
Cases 
pending 
final 
action 
2005 41 24* 17 Nil 
2006 167 28** 106 33 
*  Bank Guarantee forfeited in 5 cases 
** Bank Guarantee forfeited in 3 cases 
 
3.14 The Ministry further submitted that, the POE is asked to file a report 
urgently and in any case within a fortnight. However, in certain cases, more time 
is taken due to the complexity or nature of the case. 
 

 13
3.15 During the evidence of the Ministry, the Secretary, MOIA, in this regard, 
submitted that: 
“….The Ministry is aware of it (the problems of agents and 
recruiting agents who are harassing the innocent workers) and has 
been considering an amendment to the Act for a couple of years. In 
2000 itself, a proposal was mooted and even a Bill was drafted and 
introduced in Lok Sabha. Since the Lok Sabha got dissolved, the 
Bill lapsed. After that, we had again further examined the whole 
issue de novo. Now, we have finalized a proposal. It has gone to 
the Law Ministry’s Legislative Wing to draft the Bill….” 
 
3.16 When pointed out  about the malprac tices of the corrupt officials who are 
encouraging those agents, the Secretary, MOIA, responded as: 
“….I accept that there is a nexus between the recruiting agents and 
my officials working at that level.  That is why such malpractices 
are there. Whenever such cases are coming to our notice, we are 
taking action against our officers.  There are a number of officers 
under suspension. The CBI had raided the office in Trivandrum. In 
Hyderabad also there was a case in which an official was 
absconding. Now, he has been arre sted. So, we are taking very 
drastic action against the officers whenever complaints are being 
received by us.” 
 
3.17 When asked further if  such corrupt officials having a nexus with the 
recruiting agents have ever been dismi ssed from service, the Secretary, MOIA, 
responded as under:  
“In most of these cases the officers are being prosecuted by the 
CBI, and the court has to take a view on all these cases…. In most 
of the corruption cases CBI charge-sheets the officers. The cases 
are taken to the court, and if he is found guilty, then he 
automatically loses the job. The official is kept under suspension 
till the case is pending in the court. Further, some of these officers 
who are facing departmental pro ceedings are here on deputation 
basis. Therefore, we chargesheet them, and the concerned Ministry 
takes action against them.”  
 
3.18 In the context of malpractices by RAs,  the Secretary, MOIA, during the 
evidence also submitted as under: 

 14
“….for violation of any provision of  the Act, the penalty has been 
increased substantially in the B ill, which is under drafting, from 2 
to 7 years. Similarly, the fine has been enhanced from Rs. 2,000 to 
Rs. 1 lakh. This is a proposal whic h is presently being considered. 
Our endeavour is to place it in th is Session itself, if possible; 
otherwise, we will introduce this  Bill definitely in the Monsoon 
Session….” 
 
B. Bilateral Labour Agreement 
3.19 At present, India has bilateral labour agreements with two countries – 
Qatar and Jordan. These agreements were signed in the later eighties. The 
Ministry is pursuing bilateral agreements or MoUs with all major labour receiving 
countries for the promotion of overseas employment of Indian workers and for 
their protection and welfare. An MoU was signed with the UAE in December 
2006. The Ministry has initiated the process with five other countries – Malaysia, 
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman and Bahrain. 
3.20 Referring to the bilateral agreement signed with the UAE Government, the 
Secretary, MOIA said: 
“…. The scope of the terms of this  bilateral agreement is that both 
the Governments are agreeing that they will protect the rights of 
the workers in the country where they are working. Presently, they 
have no right at all by virtue of which they could proceed against 
their employer. Now they have formally accepted it. Under the 
system, we are setting up a mechan ism, where they will review it 
on quarterly basis, which will consis t of officers from the Ministry 
as well as officers from th e Labour Department of UAE 
Government. If any complaint comes from the workers or there is 
any other issue, that mechanism will discuss it and take appropriate 
action. Now, the Ambassador will have the right to take up 
formally the issue if any worker’s right is violated there. Earlier, 
this provision was not there. This bilateral agreement ensures that 
both the Governments have agreed to see that the workers’ rights 
are protected and the legal provisions  have been made that if any 
employer has recruited the worker a nd if there is any violation of 
the contract which he has signe d, he can be legally proceeded 
against in the country where the worker has gone….”  
 
 

 15
3.21 The Secretary, MOIA, further added: 
“….The Minister of Labour of UAE, during his visit, mentioned 
that they have strengthened their regulatory mechanism because of 
this type of an agreement, so that if there is any violation, then they 
will take action against their employers. They were mentioning 
that they were recruiting about 800 inspectors who will visit the 
factory and inspect the premises of the factories. If they find that it 
is not as per the law, then th ey will shut it down. They have 
mentioned to us that they have already shut down a certain number 
of factories because they were not satisfying the law of that 
land….” 
 
C. Computerization/ E-Governance 
3.22 In order to bring greater transparen cy efficiency and accountability in the 
emigration process and to support the legislative framework, the  Ministry has 
planned comprehensive computerization of its emigration function. This initiative 
comprises two projects: automation of Pr otector of Emigrants (POE) offices and 
e-governance in emigration. 
 
3.23 When asked to what extent the pr ocess of automation and e-governance to 
bring about transparency in the function of the emigrant offices and by when the 
projects are scheduled to be completed, the Ministry submitted that: 
“The process of automation and e-governance will create day to 
day database which will be available on line to the Protector 
General of Emigrants to ascertain the authenticity of the clearances 
given by the POE offices. The auto mation process will also create 
a single pool of information of in terest to the Ministry, general 
public, Recruiting Agents (RAs) and International Organization. 
The pilot project for automation of POE, Delhi office is expected 
to be operational very soon. Afte r assessing the outcome of the 
pilot project, the project will be rolled out at other offices of POEs. 
The online processing of emigrati on clearances is expected to 
provide desired transparency in the system.” 
 
3.24 In this context, the Secretary, MOIA, submitted during the evidence as 
under: 

 16
“….about E-Governance, we have already sanctioned 
computerization of the entire POE set up. That is the only office 
working under this Ministry’s control. Delhi office may be 
completed by today or tomorrow. Depending upon how successful 
it is, we want to replicate it so that the entire system comes online 
so that complaints can be minimized. After this, we want to take up 
the smart card project also. I think we will complete the entire 
computerization of the POE Office this year….”   
 
D. Pre-Departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation 
3.25 The demand for unskilled workers is rapidly declining in the overseas 
employment market. The future belongs to those who have skills, preferably 
multiple skills and are willing to upgrade their skills. Hence, it is extremely 
important for India to take immediate steps for preparing its young workforce to 
meet the challenges of future needs in the overseas employment market. 
 
3.26 The Ministry has therefore launched a scheme in order to bring the skill 
level of Indian emigrants at par with the overseas market requirement and to 
equip them with a basic knowledge about laws, language and culture of the 
destination country.  The scheme is being implemented through State 
Governments, Small Industries Service In stitutes (SISIs), tool rooms and other 
technical training centers. The sche me finances a week-long module for 
refreshing the skills of potential emigrants compatible with the needs of different 
countries and for familiarizing them w ith good working practices, safety norms 
and use of tools. There are inputs on hum an behavior, recruitment, visa and 
emigration procedures as well as elementary inputs in bookkeeping.  
 
3.27 Under this scheme, the Ministry bears 75% of the expenditure on training, 
upto a ceiling of Rs One crore per state. During 2006-07 about 40,000 workers 
were to be trained on a pilot basis in 5 states at a cost of Rs. 4 crore to the 
Ministry. Funds have been released to the state governments of Tamil Nadu, 
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and Kerala and Ka rnataka. The scheme will be expanded 
to cover other major states in the ensuing financial year.  
 

 17
3.28 Asked if, the modules for the training programme have been prepared and 
any skill up-gradation and pre-departure orientation programme for emigrant 
workers was conducted by the five States dur ing the last year, the Ministry in its 
reply has submitted that: 
“The training modules have been drawn up in consultation with the 
Development Commissioner, Small Industries Service Institutes 
(SISIs), and the State Governments and has been designed to cater 
to the needs of overseas employment. Training programmes are 
organized for trades like electricians, plumbers, carpenters, 
welders, fitters and machine operators in existing training 
institutions/centers.  
The training programme would i nvolve vocational and technical 
training for a period of one week of 40 to 50 hours as per details 
given below: 
 
 
S. No. Programme No. of Hours 
1. Familiarization with good working 
practices 
20 
2. Use of Tools 10 
3. Safety & Standard Norms 4 
4. General needs of overseas countries 2 
5. Human Behaviour 4 
6. Procedural requirements 2 
7. Basic Accountancy & Book Keeping 8 
 
Subject to the above guidelines, the implementing states are at 
liberty to design the training module as per market requirements.” 
 
3.29 Regarding up-gradation of skills and re-orientation programme, the 
Secretary, has submitted during oral evidence as under: 
“….We did this programme in consultation with the State 
Governments. This year we want to further increase the scope of 
the programme because the response has been very good. Workers 
are getting educated about their ri ghts and that is why it is being 
appreciated very much. This year we propose to do it along with 
NGOs and some of the reputed i ndustrial organizations. Some of 
the industrial organizations like FICCI and CII have shown 
considerable interest. We are already in dialogue with them. If it 
goes through, expenditure on this would substantially increase. The 

 18
main focus of the Ministry is to  look after the interests of NRIs 
who are remitting a huge amount of money back to India....” 
 
E. Social Security Agreement 
3.30 The Ministry signed the pioneering So cial Security Agreement (SSA) with 
Belgium in 2006-2007 and similar agreements with other countries are proposed 
for the near future. The agreement provide s for reciprocity in its application. The 
Ministry also singed an MoU on labour with UAE and Kuwait. 
 
3.31 When asked about the salient features  of the Social Security Agreements 
(SSA) and the benefits that would accrue to emigrant workers in Belgium after  
signing of the SSA, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“On 3rd November 2006 the Ministry has signed a bilateral social 
security agreement with Belgium, which provides for the following 
benefits to Indians working in Belgium: 
i) Those working on a short-term contract of up to sixty 
months will be exempted from social security contributions 
under the Belgian law provided they continue to make 
social security payments in India. 
ii) Those who live and work in  Belgium for periods longer 
than sixty months and contribute under the Belgian law will 
be entitled to the export of th e social security benefits 
should they relocate to India or a third country on 
completion of their contract or on retirement. 
iii) Periods of employment in both the countries will be 
considered in order to determine the admissibility and the 
quantum of pension. 
iv) As a result of this bilateral agreement Indian companies 
will become more competitive in Belgium since exemption 
from social security contribution in respect of their 
employees substantially reduces costs.” 
 
3.32 When asked about the number of Indi an workers who are likely to benefit 
from the signing of the SSA between Indi a and Belgium, the Ministry submitted 
as under: 

 19
“The Indian community consists of nearly 7,000 in Belgium and 
most of them are in software, the diamond business and a few local 
industries. All these Indian professionals and self-employed 
persons would be benefited as per the provision of the agreement.” 
 
3.33 The Ministry also submitted that the Indo-Belgian model is being adopted 
for signing similar agreements with ot her members of the European Union. 
Process has been initiated in respect of the Netherlands, France, Sweden, 
Germany and Norway. 
 
3.34 With regard to the Bilateral Labour Agreement, the Secretary,  submitted 
during evidence that: 
“…..The Ministry has signed such agreements with UAE and 
Kuwait and discussions are on in an advanced stage with Qatar and 
Bahrain. These bilateral agreements envisage that both the 
Governments will take initiatives to protect the rights of the 
workers. The major feature of the Bill is that the contract signed by 
the parties would be honoured. The contracts will be initialed by 
the concerned Governments a nd Missions and nobody can change 
the contract thereafter. Presently, there have been complaints that 
the contracts have been altered to  the disadvantage of the workers. 
So, on the one side, we are making a formal type of bilateral 
agreement with these countries and on the other side we are 
tightening the grip on the recruiting agencies also. I am sure that 
this step will considerably stop the malpractices and the 
exploitation of the workers will come down….” 
 
 
F. Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment 
 
3.35 Although the Emigration Act, 1983 lays down the regulatory framework 
for protecting the worker, it does not provide an institutional mechanism for 
promotion and facilitation of overseas employment. In order to make Indian 
workers globally competitive, the Ministry has initiated a proposal for 
constituting a Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment.  
 

 20
3.36 A provision of Rs. 150 lakhs has also  been provided towards constituting 
the council during BE 2007-2008. 
 
3.37 When asked to give details about the proposed Council for Promotion of 
Overseas Employment (CPOE) and to indicate how soon the Council will be 
constituted, the Ministry replied that the proposal to constitute the Council is still 
under consideration.  
 

 21
 CHAPTER IV  
OTHER SERVICES 
 
A. Financial assistance for women deserted by overseas Indian spouses 
 In their bid to assist Indian wome n who have either been deserted or 
divorced by their overseas Indian spouses  within two years of marriage, the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has introduced a scheme in February 2007 to 
provide them financial assistance for obtaining legal and counseling services, 
through Indian Missions abroad. 
 
4.2 The scheme has been introduced as a welfare measure to provide free 
counseling and legal services to women of Indian origin deserted by their 
overseas Indian spouses and facing divor ce proceedings. The scheme has been 
implemented through credible Indian Women Organisations and NGOs 
empanelled by Indian Missions in USA, UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and 
the Gulf, which are countries from where several such cases are being reported.    
 
4.3 It is observed from the outcome Budget that Rs. 2 crore was made for the 
scheme during the year 2006-2007 and a budgetary allocation of Rs. 3 crore has 
been made for 2007-2008.  
 
4.4 When asked to furnish the details of the funds provided under the scheme 
Mission-wise, the Ministry replied as follows: 
“Under the scheme to provide legal and counseling assistance to 
Indian women deserted or divorced by their Overseas Indian 
spouses through Indian Missions, the Ministry had placed Rs. 
40.00 lakhs each at the disposal of  Indian Missions in USA, UK, 
Canada and Australia and Rs. 8.00 la kh each at the disposal of the 
Missions in New Zealand, UAE, Qa tar, Kuwait and Bahrain. The 
Indian High Commission in Australia has reported that they have 
released funds totaling to A$  12,847/- (equivalent to US$ 10,000/- 
or Rs. 4,58,821/-) to the  Federati on of Indian Association of 
Victoria for providing legal and counseling assistance through their 
welfare wing, Indian Welfare a nd Resource Centre (IWRC). The 
feedback from other Missions on the implementation of the 
scheme is yet to be received.” 

 22
 
4.5 Elaborating further on the scheme , the Secretary, MOIA, during the 
evidence submitted that: 
“….some of the NRIs marry the women folk here and after their marriage 
they leave their wives back here a nd do not take them along with them. 
Consequently most of them are left behind and they get ex parte divorce 
from those countries. The Government is  very keen to correct this social 
evil and provide remedial measures to  those girls who cannot afford such 
expenses, particularly from the vulnerable sections of the society. The 
Ministry has provided a sum of Rs . 2 crore under this scheme. This 
scheme was launched recently in February 2007. Under this scheme, we 
are placing limited funds under the dispos al of Indian Missions in some 
selected country. Under the scheme a sum of 1,000 dollars per case is 
given and the Missions have been authorized to short list suitable NGOs 
through which they can help such women. Dollar 1,000 is only for the 
documentation, etc. because the fee ot herwise of the advocates in these 
countries is very high and it is not possible to afford that. We are sure, this 
year, the scheme will make headway. Some cases have already been 
sanctioned, particularly, from Australia.” 
 
 
B. Overseas Indian Centres 
 
4.6 The Ministry has approved setting up one  Overseas Indian Centre at Dubai 
to provide medical, legal and financial c ounseling to the overseas Indian workers 
in the Gulf countries. The Centre headed by a Counsellor will provide 
professional assistance and requisite guidance to the needy workers. 
 
4.7 When asked as to when the Overseas Indian Centres is expected to be set 
up in Dubai and whether there is any pr oposal for opening such centres in other 
countries having substantial Indian emigrant workers, the Ministry in their written 
submission stated that the Cabinet has approved setting up one Overseas Indian 
Centre at Dubai to provide medical, lega l and financial counseling to the overseas 
Indian workers in the Gulf countries. The Centre would be set up during the 
financial year, 2007-2008. A proposal for posting of counselor, Overseas Indian 

 23
Affairs in our Missions at Washington (U SA) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) to 
deal with matters relating to overseas Indians is under examination. 
 
C.  PIO University 
 
4.8 The High Level Committee on Indi an Diaspora, appointed by the 
Government in 2000 visited various countries with large concentration of Indian 
Diaspora and recommended, among other things, the setting up of new 
Universities and professional institutions offering courses of international 
standards in Management, Information Technology, Media, Agricultural 
Research, Medicine, Food processing, etc.    
 
4.9  Further, the policy framework to set up a NRI/PIO University within the 
Special Educational Zone (SEdZ) in th e Special Economic Zone (SEZ) is being 
examined and will be finalized shortly.  
 
4.10 Elaborating further on the setting up of PIO University, the Secretary, 
MOIA, submitted during evidence that: 
“….Another pending issue of the NRIs has been to set up a 
university for their wards studying in  India. This has been pending 
for some time. You will be happy to know that the Government 
has approved the setting up of this university in India. We have 
received the Cabinet approval last week and we will start working 
on this very soon. We will be notif ying the guidelines so that the 
interested parties could apply to the Government and their 
approval thereafter will be examined by the Government and 
suitable parties will be selected. Th e focus of this will be basically 
that the wards of the PIOs who are there and who cannot afford 
their children to be sent to some  of the advanced countries for 
higher studies can study here. This is a long felt need of the PIOs, 
which the Government has taken to fulfill it….” 
 
4.11 When enquired as to whether this university is going to be a physical 
university set up in India to which the Overseas Indians will come or will it be an 

 24
Open University like the Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), the 
Secretary, responded to the query as under: 
“….what we have envisaged is that presently, it will be a physical 
location in India. It would be a full-fledged university having 
campuses of its own, of medical, engineering, management and 
other new specialties. Universitiy may be located in a place, but 
the campuses can be in other part s of the country also. Like, a 
medical college can be in one part of the country and the 
engineering college can be in the other part of the country. We 
have broadly conceived that. But we  are leaving the final choice to 
the investor, who is going to invest as to what type of a structure 
he would like to have. We are going to call an offer from the 
prospective investor as to what he has in his mind. It is because 
land is going to become a very critical issue. Availability of land, 
the size of the campuses etc.are to be seen….”  
 
4.12 The Secretary, further submitted on th e issue during the evidence as under: 
“…. What we have proposed is that 50 per cent students will be 
from abroad, NRI, PIO and 50 per cent will be from India as per 
the approval of the Cabinet within the parameter. He has to prepare 
a project, which should be acceptable to the Ministry. There is an 
Inter-Ministerial Group, chaired by the Secretary, Overseas Indian 
Affairs, who will decide finally as to which offer meets the 
requirement of the country, and then take it to the Cabinet.” 
 
4.13 When asked, if the Ministry have worked out details of the proposal and 
consulted experts/intellectuals etc on the subject, the  Secretary, MOIA, responded 
as under: 
“….we are aware that this is a very complex issue. That is why this 
issue has been under debate for a number of years. The 
Government has not laid a very ti ght type of a structure for this 
university. We have left it to the prospective investor because there 
are a number of offers, which th e Ministry has already received. 
And, it is not that the Ministry or the Government has laid down 
certain structure that you fix it. I want to further submit that an 
extensive discussion has already gone with the concerned 
Ministries and with the concerned institutions. Even I have 
discussed it with the Chairman, UGC . We have said that it has to 
be the best in the world. They can  benchmark to the best in the 
world. I have seen the proposal of the SAARC University also. 
The Government approval is only in principle. We are already on 
the lookout for appointing a suitabl e consultant, who will conceive 

 25
the whole project, which the Mini stry will keep it in mind while 
giving the approval of the project….” 
 
4.14 The Secretary, MOIA, further submitted on the issue as under: 
“….The issue here is that the Government is not investing or 
funding here. The entire funding has to come from the investor. 
The Ministry is acting only as a catalyst agent to see that the 
project goes through. There is an  Inter-Ministerial Group, which 
consists of all the concerned Ministries, all the concerned 
institutions, and it will be head ed by a renowned academician. No 
bureaucrat is there. We are already on the lookout for the 
renowned academician. The Chairper son of that Group will screen 
this and go ahead with it. I submit that an in-depth discussion has 
gone into this since a long number of years. Only the principal 
approval is there, which will be put on the website; the investor 
would give the contour of this. So, everything has to come from 
the prospective investor….” 
 
D. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) 
 
 4.15 The fifth edition of Pravasi Bharatiy a Divas was held in New Delhi from 
7-9 January 2007.  Ministry of Overseas I ndian Affairs organized the conclave of 
the Indian diaspora in partnership with the Confederation of Indian Industry and 
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi as the State partner . 1200 
Overseas Indians from over 50 countries participated in the event.  
  
4.16 The theme of the Fifth edition of PBD was ‘Rooting for the roots – 
Meeting India’s Social development Cha llenges’ with the objective of inspiring 
Overseas Indians to be part of the so cio-economic development of India. The 
focus areas were Education, Healthcare, Women, Youth, and Investment.   
 
4.17 The outcome/ recommendations of the discussions held on the issues of 
education, health, women, youth and investment  during PBD-2007 are as under: 
• Extend a wider range of benefits to overseas citizens of 
India including allowing overseas Indian doctors to practice in 
India. 

 26
• Establish an overseas Indian Facilitation Center to provide 
need based services to overseas Indians. 
• The NRI community must become a knowledge partner in 
India’s development. To facilitate this, the government should 
establish an institutional mechanism to receive such knowledge. 
• Establish a PIO University. 
• Design appropriate financial instruments and products to 
promote Overseas Indian investments over the long term. 
• Different locations around the wo rld should be selected to 
hold mini PBD conferences where the lesser-privileged PIOs could 
participate. 
• There is a need to engage talented Overseas Indians youth 
in the task of knowledge acquisition, knowledge imparting, 
knowledge creation and knowledge sharing. 
• To address the issue of abandoned brides, aspects of private 
international law to bring justice to the victims are to be focused 
and the procedure of NRI marri a g e s  i s  t o  b e  m a d e  m o r e  
transparent. Capacity building of women through training and 
skilled-development programmes to be initiated and the process of 
child adoption facilitated. 
• An interactive website to be built through which the Indian 
Diaspora could relate with women organizations and ministry 
officials in India. This website would serve as a major 
empowerment tool and platform  for sharing of knowledge and 
experiences.  
 An MoU was reportedly signed between MOIA and AAPI 
(Association of American Phys ician of Indian Origin) on 7 th 
January 2006 at Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2006 for initiating pilot 
projects in two Indian States – Andhra Pradesh and Bihar in the 
filed of primary healthcare in the rural areas. The initiative will 
help in extending the primary healthcare and creating a health hub 
around the cluster of villages for better health facilities. AAPI will 
provide technical and financial support to implement these projects 
with the help of the State Governments. 
 
4.18 The outlay for PBD celebration has been  increased from Rs. 4 crores in 
BE 2005-2006 to Rs. 6 crores in BE 2006-2007 and BE 2007-2008, while the 
actual expenditure in 2005-2006 was Rs. 8.83 crores. When asked about the 
actual expenditure incurred on the celebration during 2007, the Ministry 
responded as under: 
“The auditing of the expenditu re made during PBD 2007 is under 
process and the finalized expenditure will be ascertained after the 
audit. The Finance committee has however, decided that no 

 27
payment over and above the approved budget of Rs. 4.75 crores 
would be made to CII. Similarly the expenditure on the PBSA 
awards will be well within the budge t of Rs. 1 crore. The Ministry 
has generated Rs. 3.85 crores as revenue for PBD 2007.” 
 
4.19 When asked about the quantum of revenue generated by way of 
sponsorships etc. during PBD 2005, 2006 and 2007, the Ministry submitted the 
following details: 
 
Particulars PBD 2005(Rs. 
in Lakhs) 
PBD 
2006(Rs. in 
Lakhs) 
PBD 
2007(Rs. 
in 
Lakhs) 
Revenue 
Generated 
388.63 357.30 384.82 
Revenue 
received by 
MOIA 
Nil (as per revenue 
sharing agreement 
with FICCI) 
357.30 384.82 
 
4.20 When asked the reasons for the Mini stry not receiving anything from the 
revenues generated during PBD 2005 the Ministry responded as under: 
“During PBD 2005 FICCI was the institutional partner.  Under the 
then existing arrangement which was in place from the first PBD 
held in 2003 the total expenditure on PBD 2005 was shared 
between MOIA and FICCI.  However, under the same arrangement 
FICCI was permitted to take full revenue generated for PBD 2005 
to meet its expenses and agency cost.” 
 
4.21 On being asked about the details of revenue sharing agreement made with 
its institutional partners during PBD 2006 and 2007, the Ministry responded as 
under: 
“Under the arrangement made for organizing PBD 2005 FICCI, 
which was the institutional partner,  was to bear 50% of the cost 
incurred on organization of the event excluding the expenditure on 
PBSA and the Road shows, which was to be borne by the Ministry. 
FICCI was permitted to keep all the revenue generated to meet its 
expenses and agency cost..…PBD 2006 was organized by the 
Ministry, by engaging event managers who were to be paid the 
event management fee and there was no revenue sharing with the 
event manager. PBD 2007 was organized by the Ministry with CII 
as the institutional partner.  Under the sharing arrangement with 

 28
the institutional partner CII was allowed 15% of the revenue 
generated as agency fee.”   
 
 
(i) Overseas Indians Facilitation Center (OIFC) 
4.22 The Ministry stated that India is  already the highest recipient of 
remittances from overseas Indians ($23bn in 2005).  However, given the profile of 
the Indian Diaspora, the investment by ove rseas Indians has been far short of its 
potential.  While there is high interest amongst overseas Indians to invest in India, 
there is a need for a market driven ins titutional platform that will facilitate a two-
way flow of overseas Indian investment into India as well as promote B-to-B 
partnerships of Indian businesses with overseas Indians. 
 
4.23 When asked to briefly explain th e initiative taken by the Ministry in 
promoting investing by Overseas Indians, the Ministry in their replies submitted 
as under: 
“The Ministries of Commerce, I ndustry and Finance have put in 
place a liberal and progressive FDI policy. Most sectors have been 
placed under the automatic route. To supplement these efforts, the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has published a compendium 
of policies, incentives and investment opportunities for Overseas 
Indians and the handbook for Overseas Indian providing 
information on investment opport unities.  The compendium and 
the handbook was released by the Prime Minister during Fifth PBD 
held in New Delhi from 7-9 January 2007.” 
 
4.24 On the issue of overseas Indian i nvestments in India, the Secretary, 
MOIA, during evidence submitted as under: 
“….So far as NRI subject is c oncerned, they are handled by 3-4 
Ministries; it is not the exclusive domain of this Ministry; 
consequently, as far as our system goes, the investment policy is 
handled by the Ministry of Industr ies and the Ministry of Finance 
and presently, the investment policy is not handled by this 
Ministry; and even for the Diaspor a which is working abroad, we 
are operating through the Missions which are under the direct 
control of the Ministry of External Affairs….”  
 

 29
4.25  A need has been felt for a trusted and neutral body with state of the art 
facilities to provide a host of investment advisory services efficiently and on a 
real time basis. The Ministry of Overseas  Indian Affairs is in the process of 
establishing such a center as a not-for-profit trus t, in partnership with one of the 
apex industry associations in the country. The center will serve as a “one stop 
shop” for the Indian Diaspora.   
 
4.26 An outlay of Rs. 30 lakhs has been made during BE 2007-2008 for the 
purpose of setting up the Overseas Indians Facilitation Center(OIFC). 
 
4.27 With regard to the establishment of  Overseas Indian Facilitation Center 
(OIFC), the Ministry submitted as under: 
“The proposal of the Ministry to establish a not –for- profit trust 
titled ‘Overseas Indian Facilitation Center’ in partnership with 
Confederation of Indian Industr y (CII), as a single stop shop for 
dissemination of investment rela ted information and for providing 
handholding services to the potentia l overseas investors, has been 
approved by the Cabinet.  The Ministry in partnership with the UTI 
Bank also launched an electronic investment information service 
for Overseas Indians on taxation, real estate and capital market.” 
 
4.28 When further enquired from if a ny assessment has been made of the 
potential and pattern of investments by Over seas Indians, the Ministry in their 
written submission stated as under: 
“The proposed ‘Overseas Indian Facilitation Center’ will 
undertake studies to understand the potential and pattern of 
investment by the Overseas Indian s.  It may be mentioned that 
India is the highest recipient of remittances estimated at US$ 23.6 
billion during 2005.  The challenge is  to transform these savings 
into investment.”   
 
4.29 In this context, the Secretary, MO IA, further submitted during evidence as 
under: 
“….the aspirations of this Mini stry are much more than the 
instrument available at our dis posal; unless it is given certain 
infrastructure, it may not be possible to deliver its objective. It is 
agreed that in 15-16 countries wh ere Indian Diaspora is having a 

 30
large population, we will be positioning our office, after the 
Cabinet approves it and in these countries, to take care of the 
interests of the Diaspora. It may take some time. Till then, the 
Ministry is working with very limited resources – though 
aspirations are very high, we are making sincere effort with our 
limited resources. I agree that there is problem. The Ministry was 
set up just two years before and with the type of system that we 
have, developing this type of infrastructure is difficult; it should 
have been done, no doubt; I am not saying that we could not have 
done, but we are making sincere effo rts to set up the infrastructure 
and to remove the handicaps….” 
 
 
(ii) AAPI-India Rural Health Initiative 
 
4.30 The Ministry signed a MoU with Association of American Physicians of 
Indian Origin (AAPI) in 2006 to take up initiatives in healthcare all over the 
country starting with pilot projects in tw o States i.e. Andhra Pradesh and Bihar. 
The partnership with AAPI and the States  provides a framework to tap Diaspora 
knowledge resources to promote and impl ement innovative and best practices in 
healthcare in Indian States.  The objective of  this project is to create a template in 
rural healthcare through pilot projects, wh ich can then be replicated in other 
States. The States of Andhra Pradesh and Bihar are the pilot States. 
 
4.31 When enquired about the progress in regard to implementation of this 
project, the Ministry in their written submission stated as under: 
“The pilot projects which are to be implemented in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh and Bihar under the MoU signed between MOIA 
and AAPI, have now been prepar ed by the AAPI in consultation 
with the two State Governments and are ready for implementation. 
MOIA has taken up the issue of  funding of the projects with 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare who have indicated their 
willingness to provide necessary funding. Details of the estimates 
have been forwarded to Ministry  of Health and as soon as the 
funding is confirmed the projects will be implemented.” 
 
4.32 Elaborating further on the project, the Secretary, MOIA, during the 
evidence as stated under: 

 31
“….we have launched a pilot proj ect with AAPI of the USA. We 
have sought funds from the Health  Ministry. We have discussed it 
with the Health Secretary and sought funds from the Health 
Ministry. We are awaiting their approval. The moment their 
approval comes, that pilot project will move. Once this project 
goes through, we may be taking similar projects with such 
Associations abroad, who can par ticipate in this programme. They 
are willing to participate by pr oviding their knowledge, but they 
say that they cannot do much on funding. We have insisted that 
they should also bear some cost and the Indian Government cannot 
bear the entire cost. Depending upon the success of this 
programme, we will try to extend it to other States which are 
interested….”  
 
4.33 On being asked about the rough estimates of the expenditure on the 
two pilot projects as assessed by the Ministry and the amount of funding 
sought from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Ministry 
responded to the queries of the Committee as under: 
“(i) The rough estimates of th e expenditure on the two pilot 
projects are as follows:-  
 
Currency  GOI Contribution 
(Equipment & Int. 
Travel) 
AAPI Contribution 
(In the form of 
expertise, skill, man 
hours) 
State Contribution 
(Local hospitality 
and awareness) 
US $ 477, 000 157, 500 140, 000 
INR 2,14,65,000 70,87,500 63,00,000 
 
(ii) Ministry of health and Fa mily Welfare has been requested 
to fund the Cost of equipments required to implement the project 
which is estimated as Rs. 1,65,60,000/-. 

 32
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The assertion of the Ministry of Overseas India Affairs that no 
scheme or activity of the Ministry wa s affected due to the downward revision 
of the original budget estimates from Rs.38 crore to Rs.26 crore during 2006-
07 clearly points to the fact that the initial demand for grant for the year was 
far in excess of actual requirement.  The Committee hope that the current 
year’s demand for grant of Rs.50 crore is  based on realistic estimates. The 
Committee expect the Ministry to ensu re effective implementation of all 
programmes and activities without su rrendering funds and depriving the 
beneficiaries of the intended benefits.  
 
2. The Committee regret to observe that there has hardly been any 
progress regarding construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK), the 
proposal of which was mooted in 2004 and for which funds were earmarked 
in 2005-06 and 2006-07. All that the Ministry could do so far was wire 
fencing of the land allotted for PBK in New Delhi. Action for appointment of 
consultant is stated to be still in progress. Such slow progress reflects poorly 
on the Ministry. It is essential to ensure in the formative years of the 
Ministry that an efficient and dynamic administrative system is in place to 
speedily achieve its main objectives . The Committee hope that necessary 
action will be taken in this regard. Co nsidering that two precious years have 
already been lost without any substant ial progress on the work of PBK, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to focus on accomplishing the establishment 
of PBK in a reasonable time frame with a view to harnessing the talent pool 
among the Indian Diaspora.  
 
3. It is a matter of concern that with  the creation of a separate Ministry 
having a key function of preventing  irregular migration, the number of 
workers who were not given any employment on reaching in the country of 
employment has sharply increased from 762 in 2004 to 1152 in 2005 and to 

 33
1013 in 2006. Similarly, the number of complaints against recruiting agents 
has shot up from 41 in 2005 to 167 in  2006. The Secretary, MOIA was candid 
enough to admit that, there has been  a nexus between the recruiting agents 
and officials of the Ministry. It is  a sad reflection on the quality of 
supervision of the Ministry over its o fficials. It is not clear whether the 
Ministry have evolved any mechanism for taking effective preventive 
measures, including frequent surprise checks followed by swift and deterrent 
action against delinquent officials to break the nexus between officials and 
recruiting agents. The Committee woul d like to be informed of the 
mechanism in this regard and its functioning. 
 
4. Incidentally, as many as 33 cases of complaints filed against recruiting 
agents in 2006 are reported to be still pending final action. The Committee 
desire that the causes for delay in fina lly disposing of complaints should be 
looked into and suitable remedial me asures taken to ensure expeditious 
action on complaints. As regards 106 complaints dropped/ settled in 2006, the 
Committee be intimated of the number of complaints actually settled and the 
nature of such complaints.  
 
5. Admittedly, there is an urgent need  to convert the Emigration Act, 
1983 into an effective instrument for p revention of irregular migration. The 
Committee are at a loss to understand why the bill for amending Emigration 
Act, 1983 to address the present day concerns in emigration management has 
not been introduced even one year after the Committee made a 
recommendation to this effect in their 10
th Report (14 th Lok Sabha). The 
Committee urge that the amendment Bill should be introduced in parliament 
without further loss of time. 
 
6. The Committee are glad to note that the pilot project for automation 
of Protector of Emigrants (PoEs) offi ce, Delhi is almost operational which 
would usher in greater transparency, efficiency and accountability in the 

 34
emigration process. The Committee desire that after gaining experience from 
the pilot project, automation of the oth er PoE offices should be taken up in a 
time bound manner with a view to realizing the merits of e-governance. 
 
7. Another programme embarked on pilot basis by the Ministry was  
Pre-departure orientation and skill up-gradation programme for emigrant 
workers which was reportedly well recei ved in five States (Tamil Nadu, 
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Kerala, and Karnataka) where the programme 
was experimented on cost sharing basis in 2006-2007. The Committee are of 
the view that adequacy of the progra mme in terms of inputs, duration and 
accrual of benefits needs to be asse ssed and the programme restructured, if 
need be, on the basis of outcome of such an assessment. The Committee feel 
that such an exercise will give sound basis for extending the programme to 
other States.  
 
8. The Committee would like to know  whether any feedback was 
received/ obtained from the intended be neficiaries of the Social Security 
Agreement (SSA) with Belgium in N ovember, 2006 and would like to be 
apprised of the same. The Committee hope that such a feedback will help the 
Ministry to arrive at appropriate deci sion on the question of signing similar 
agreements with other countries.  
 
9. One of the appreciable measures initiated by the Ministry is pursuing 
bilateral agreements or MoUs with all major labour receiving countries 
aimed at promotion of overseas empl oyment of Indian workers and their 
protection and welfare. The Ministry has recently signed an MoU with the 
UAE and have initiated the process with five other countries – Malaysia, 
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman and Bahr ain. The Committee have no doubt 
that these bilateral labour agreements will go a long way in ameliorating the 
problems of Indian workers abroad. The Committee hope that the Ministry 

 35
will simultaneously strive to enter in to such agreements with other major 
labour receiving countries.  
 
10. The plight of Indian women deserted or divorced by their overseas 
Indian spouses is a matter of con cern to the Committee. The Committee 
observe that a scheme has been in troduced recently to extend financial 
assistance for obtaining legal and co unseling services through Indian 
Missions abroad. The scheme repor tedly envisages payment of $ 1,000 
merely for documentation and no paymen t is envisaged by way of fees to 
advocates. The Committee feel that this scheme should be extended to Indian 
women who are deserted by their spouses abroad. 
 
11. The Committee note that the Cabine t has given in-principle approval 
to the setting  up of a University which will have 50% students from abroad 
and 50% from India. The modalities of setting up the University are yet to be 
firmed up and notified. Needless to poin t out that the University will be first 
of its kind. All efforts should, therefo re, be made to ensure that it is a 
University of excellence with internat ional academic standards and world-
class environment.  The Committee desi re that a detail note regarding this 
university should be placed before the Committee for discussion before 
finalization of the proposal. 
 
12. The Committee find there has been considerable progress in 
implementing some of the major reco mmendations of the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas held in January 2007. These include establishment of PIO University, 
establishment of Overseas Indian Fac ilitation Centre and implementation of 
pilot projects in Andhra Pradesh and Bihar for extending the primary health 
care in pursuance of an MoU signed between the MOIA and the Association 
of American physicians of Indian origin. The Committee desire that other 
major recommendations of PBD such as  establishment of institutional 
mechanism to enable NRI community to become a knowledge partner in 

 36
India’s Development, designing of a ppropriate financial instruments and 
products to promote overseas Indian in vestments, etc. be given expeditious 
consideration for appropriate action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
25 April, 2007                                                         Chairman,  
5 Vaisakha,1929 (Saka)                Standing Committee on External Affairs 

- 37 - 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTHEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 13 April, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Room No. 62, 
Parliament House. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
6. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
7. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
8. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
9. Shri M. Shivanna 
10. Shri Vanlalzawma 
11. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
13. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K 
14. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
15. Dr. Karan Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Lalkithang     - Under Secretary 

- 38 - 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
 
1.  Shri Nirmal Singh  - Secretary 
2.  Dr. (Mrs.) Sheela Bhide - Special Secretary(FA) 
3.  Shri Malay Mishra  - Joint Secretary (DS) 
 4.   Shri G. Gurucharan  - Joint Secretary (FS) 
 5.  Shri Jagadananda Panda - Protector General of        
         E m i g r a n t s  ( P G E )   
6.  Dr. Ranbir Singh  - Director (EP) 
7.  Smt. Sandhya Shukla  - Director (SS) 
 8.  Dr. (Mrs.) Shailja Sharma - Director (ES) 
9.  Shri S.P. Tripathi  - Deputy Secretary (Budget & Vig.) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Mi nistry of Overseas Indian Affairs to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Chairman then drew attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(I) 
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs in connecti on with examination of the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2007-2008. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

-39- 
ANNEXURE-II 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 25TH APRIL, 2007  
  
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe.  
  
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
1. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
2. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
3. Dr.(Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
4. Shri Vanlalzawma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Smt. S.G. Indira 
6. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K 
7. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
8. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
9. Dr. Karan Singh 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C.V. Gadgil - Director 
4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
 

-40- 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2007-
2008. The Committee adopted the same, subject to the following 
additions/modifications:  
(i) The last sentence in Recommenda tion No.10 to be substituted with 
the following: “The Committee feel that this scheme should be 
extended to Indian women who are deserted by their spouses 
abroad.” 
(ii) In Recommendation No.11, the fo llowing sentence to be added at 
the end: “The Committee desire th at a detailed note regarding this 
university should be placed before the Committee for discussion 
before finalization of the proposal”. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report and 
present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 