 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
                                  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  13 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
(Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2006-2007)    
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
  
 
(Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the 
year 2006-2007) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2006 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO.60  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2006 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

(ii)

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
          
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2006-2007     iv  
I N T R O D U C T I O N          v  
    
CHAPTER I  Report        
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations that have been   
accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which replies of Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
Which final replies of the government are still awaited 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I. Construction Projects Abroad (Clarifying schedules of completion) 
II. Standard Projects Construction Schedule 
III. List of ICWA Events held from 1 st May to 8th August, 2006 
IV. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on14.12.2006  
V. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                
Recommendations/observations contained in the 11th Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) 
VI. Statement of Recommend ations/Observations    
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2006-2007) 
 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  2. Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
  3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
  4. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
  5. Shri A.V. Bellarmine 
  6. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
  7. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
  8. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
  9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
10. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
11. Shri Sebastian Paul 
12. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
13. Shri P.A. Sangma 
14. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
15. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
16. Shri M. Shivanna 
17. Shri Vanlalzawma 
18. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant  
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
26. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
31. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia* 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri Devender Singh  - Director 
Shri Ashok Balwani  - Under Secretary 
Shri Lalkithang  - Committee Officer 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 3 rd December, 2006. 
(iv) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this 13th 
Report (14 th Lok  Sabha) on the Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations c ontained in the 11 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants of the Mini stry of External Affairs for the y ear 
2006-2007. 
2. The 11th Report was presented to both the Houses of Parliament  on 18 th 
May, 2006. The Action Tak en Replies of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 28 th 
August, 2006.    
3. The Draft Report on the basis of Action Taken Replies was considered 
and adopted by the Standing  Committee on External A ffairs (2006-2007) at their 
sitting held on 14th December, 2006.  The minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
have been reproduced as Appendix-IV to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the ac tion taken by  Government on the recommendatio ns 
contained in the 11 th Report of the Standin g Committee on External Affairs (14 th 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-V. 
5. For facilit y of reference and  conven ience, the observations an d 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of 
the Report and have also been reproduced in consolidated form in Appendix-VI. 
                
 
 
NEW DELHI                                      Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
15th  December, 2006/ 24 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)  Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 
 
(v) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals wit h the Action Taken by Government on 
the obser vations/recommendations contained in the 11 th Report of Standing 
Committee on External Affair s on Demands for Grants for the y ear 2006-2007 in 
respect of the Ministry of External Affairs.  The 11 th Report of the Committee was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 18th May, 2006. 
2. The Action taken notes have been rece ived from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the obs ervations/recommendations cont ained in the report.  These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have b een accep ted b y 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3,4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 
18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 36 
Recom  Total-31 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  w hich the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. - 29. 
Total-01 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of 
Government have not been  accepted  b y the Committee an d 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 20, 21, 26 and 35. 
Total-04 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich final replies 
of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
Total-Nil 
Chapter-V 
 
 
 
 

3. The Co mmittee desire that  Action Taken Notes on  the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Re port be 
furnished expeditiously. The Committee furthe r desire that w here, in case, it is 
not possible for the Ministry  to implement the recommendations in letter and  
spirit, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the G overnment on  
some of their observations/recommendations. 
 
A. OVERALL BUDGETARY PROPOSALS 
 
Recommendation No. 1 [Para 18] 
 
5. The Committee had noted that the total a llocation of the Ministry in the Budget 
Estimates for 2006 – 2007 was Rs. 3,695.05 cr ore. Compared to Rs.3928.00 crore in 
BE 2005 – 2006, it was a reduction of Rs.232.95 crore or 5.93 %. On the other hand, 
compared to RE of Rs.4182. 00 in the year 2005 – 2006, it was a dec rease of 
Rs.486.95 crore or 11. 64 %. T he Ministry  had informed that this reduction wa s 
primarily on account of r educed allocation of funds u nder the Plan Head as a very  
large and signific ant project was neari ng completion.  The non-plan Budget had 
increased f rom Rs.3163.00 crore in BE 2 005-2006 t o Rs.3472. 75 crore in BE of 
2006-2007, which was an inc rease of Rs.309.75 crore or 9.79 %.  However. 
Compared to RE of 2005 – 2006 (Rs.3463 crore), the increas e was only  Rs.9.75 
crore or 0.28 %. 
The Ministry had also informed that no vi tal areas were lik ely to be affected 
thereby and the Ministry of Finance has  informed that sympathetic cons ideration 
would be given to any  Additionality requi red in 2006 – 2007. In the meanwhile, the 
Ministry would prioritize its expenditure plans and work  within the available budget 
and take up the matter of additional funds at  RE stage. The Committee w ere of the 
view that any kind of decrease in the a llocation of funds will c ertainly impede the 
Ministry to do justice with their stated objectives and reinforce the positive image of 
the country abroad. As the gl obal scenario is changing explosiv ely day by  day, the 
 
 

workload of the Ministry is increasing by leaps and bound. The Ministry should be 
ready by all means to face  the c hallenge of modern a ge. Therefore, the Committee 
had recommended that, with the expansion of ac tivities along with  India’s growing 
stature, the Budget of  the Ministry should be augment ed proportionately in order to 
pursue our foreign policy mor e effectiv ely in the changing circumstances. The 
Ministry should ensure that sufficient funds are available as and when required.  The 
Committee had expressed hope that  the Ministry of Fi nance will realize the need of  
time and provide additional funds as per requirement of MEA at RE 2006-2007 stage 
to enable them to keep pace with the growth of our stature in foreign affairs. 
 
6. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“Against the projection of Rs. 4,126. 75 crore for non-Plan expenditure made 
by this Ministry for BE 2006-07, budgetary allocation of Rs. 3472.75 crore has  
been made by Ministry of Finance in BE 2006-07.  This shortfall of Rs. 654 
crore in allocation has been brought to t he notice of Ministry of Finance as t he 
activities of this Ministry, parti cularly; the “Technical and Economic 
Cooperation with Other Countries” are likel y to be affected if the ceilin g of BE 
2006-07 is not revised adequately.” 
 
7. The Com mittee note that the activitie s of the Ministr y, par ticularly, the 
“Technical and Economic Cooperation” w ith other countries is likely  to be 
affected due to shortfall of Rs. 654 crore allocation.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry  should ensu re that ceiling of BE 2006-2007 is 
revised adequately at RE 2006- 2007 stage so that the technical and eco nomic 
cooperation with other countries is not affected adversely. 
 (Recommendation No. 1) 
B. ADEVERTISING AND PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation No. 10 [Para 38] 
 
8. The Ministry had informed the Committee that they were trying to create a Cell 
called ‘Public Diplomacy’ headed by an Addi tional Secretary, wh o will over see the 
matter of public involvement/public interest in Indian Foreign Policy.  The Ministry had 
 
 

informed further that there wa s a requirement for explaining the foreign polic y to the 
Indian audiences.  They had not quite form ulized it but had drawn up a charter of  
duties and were awaiting the approval of t he Prime Minister, in his ca pacity as the 
External Affairs Minister.  The idea was to really use t his particular unit to do these 
kinds of outreach ac tivities and also lo ok at the aspect of holding seminars, 
workshops and specific films that were impor tant in terms of foreign policy.  The 
Committee appreciated the steps been taken and had expressed thei r feelings that 
our Foreign Policy must be explained to our own people and it should had happened 
earlier.  The Committee had extended thei r support for the cause and expressed 
hope that the Cell should be in position at  the earliest.  The Committee had also 
recommended that this work should be done in close coor dination with Society for 
Research and Information System for non-aligned and other countries [RIS] and 
additional funds may be allocated to RIS for this purpose. 
 
9. The Ministry furnished their reply as under:  
 
“The Public Diplomacy Division of MEA headed by an Additional Secretary has 
been created and has begun its work. Its mandate includes inter-alia outreach 
activities inside and outside India, audio visual and print publicity, website, and 
documentation. The Additio nal Secretary has begun  to  reach out to States 
within India beginning with P unjab and Orissa and it is planned to cover ever y 
region of the country. Contacts wit h think tanks, media persons, and 
personalities in the opinion/ decis ion maker category have also been 
activated. The recommendation of the Committee on co-ordination a nd 
cooperation with RIS has been initiated and is being implemented.” 
 
10. The Committee welcome the creation of the Public Diplomacy Division of 
MEA head ed b y an Additional Secretar y w hose mandate includes inter-alia 
outreach activities inside an d outside I ndia, audio visual and print p ublicity, 
website, a nd docum entation. The Com mittee note that the Public Diplomac y 
Division, aiming to cover every region of the country, has begun to reach out to 
States w ithin India beginning w ith Pun jab and O rissa. The Committee have 
 
 

been informed that contacts with think tanks, media persons, and personalities 
in the opinion/ decision maker cate gory have also been activated.  The 
Committee hope that the Public Dipl omacy Division w ill soon extend its 
outreach activities outside I ndia and also help g enerate p ublic interest an d 
understanding of Indian Foreign Policy. The Committee recommend that inputs 
obtained from the activities of the Pub lic Diplomacy Division should invariably 
be taken into consideration in the Foreign Policy.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
C. PASSPORT AND EMIGRATION 
 
 
Recommendation No. 20 [Para 73] 
 
11. The Committee had noted that 21 Passpor t Offices were work ing from rented 
premises and at that t ime huge part of allocated Budget under this Head was being 
paid for their rentals.  The Comm ittee had been expressing their concern continously 
over the delay in acquisition/construction of own premises for Passport Offices since 
long but no significant developm ent had been made in this regard. The Committee, 
therefore, again recommended that all construction projects relating to Passport 
Offices should be taken up on priority basis and efforts should be made vigorously for 
the early c ompletion of these projects so t hat the rental liabilities can be  reduced t o 
the barest minimum. The Committee h ad also recommended that opening of 
Passport Offices in states of Uttranchal, Chattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh should 
be carried out at the earliest. 
 
12. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
 
“As directed by the Committee, efforts are continually being made to hasten 
the construction proj ects in c ollaboration with the concerned authorities.  
Action is a t hand to open new Passport Offices at Dehradun (Uttranchal), 
Raipur (Chattisgarh) and Shimla (Himachal Pradesh) as early as possible.” 
 
 
 

13. The Committee are concerned over th e time being taken by the Ministr y 
in completion of all their construction projects since most o f the projects are 
lagging behind the time schedule.  The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of 
the efforts  being made to hasten th e construction projects.  The Committee 
further recommend that ne w Passport Offices at Dehradun, Raipur an d Shimla 
must be opened by the end of financial year 2006-2007. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Recommendation No. 21 [Para 74] 
 
14. The Com mittee had noted that  the Staff Inspection Un it of the Ministry of 
Finance has recommended 293 additional posts in various categories and a proposal 
to create these additional posts had been subm itted for approval of the Competent 
Authorities on 22 nd December  2005. The Committ ee had also noted that Staff 
Selection Commission had nominated 55 Grade C posts of LDC and 4 Grade C posts 
of Jr. Hindi Translator for CPO. Out of tha t, 15 LDCs and 3 Jr Hindi Translat ors have 
joined so far. The Committee hope that afte r creation of 293 posts and nomination o f 
59 posts by SSC for fillin g the  vacant pos ts, shortage of staff problem would b e 
eliminated to a large extent. The Committee had recommended that all the necessary 
formalities of these posts should be complet ed at the earliest in order to enable t he 
opening of new offices as well as to avoid the out-sourcing. 
 
15. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
 
“The approval for the augmentation of posts  is still awaited from the Financ e 
Ministry. The appo intment of staff will be made after obtai ning the requisit e 
approval.” 
 
16. The Committee do not approve of the reply furnished by the Ministry and 
hope that the requisite approval for the augmentation of pos t will be obtained 
at the earliest considering the fact that  staff requirement is based  o n Staff  
Inspection Unit (SIU) stud y and the fact that passport officers bring 
considerable reven ue to the Government.  The Committee recom mend that 
 
 

grievances of officers/staff of Passp ort Offices must b e heard w ith due 
attention and the Committee should be apprised of the ste ps taken b y CPV 
Division/Ministry to redress their grievances. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
D. INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS (ICCR) 
 
Recommendation No. 26 [Para 86] 
 
17. The Ministry had informed that the new cultural centres at Beijing, Tehran and 
Kathmandu will be opened subjec t to the allocation of r equisite additional posts and 
Budgetary resources.  The st atutory body of the Counc il had approved the budge t 
allocation and posts for the centres in Tehran and Kathmandu.  Creation of these 
centres was under consider ation and it shall be the Council’s endeavour to 
operationalise these centres in 2006-07.  T he proposal for an Indian Cultural Centre 
at Beijing was being proc essed through diplomatic channels.  The Committee 
expressed hope that exercis es in this r egard will be c ompleted as early as possib le 
and these  centres will be in place by the end of Financ ial Year 2006 -07.  The 
Committee also expressed hope that a s uitable property for Cultural Centre in 
Washington will also be located in the Current Financial Year. 
 
18. The Ministry have informed as under: 
 
“The position regarding opening of Indian Cultural Centre s in Beijing, Tehran, 
Kathmandu and Washington is as follows: 
Beijing 
Since the Chinese Government is not prepared to give diplomatic status 
to the proposed Cult ural Centre in Beij ing, the matter is being process ed 
through the diplomatic channels .  The Mi nistry of External Affairs and t he 
Embassy of India in Be ijing are in corresponden ce with the Chines e 
Government and the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi to resolve the issue s o 
that the Indian Cultural Centre at Beijing may be opened in the near future. 
 
 

Tehran 
According to the Iranian laws,  func tioning of independent Cultural 
Centres of foreign countries is not permi tted.  Therefore, it has been proposed 
to the Embassy of India, Tehran to comm ence with cer tain basic activities of  
the Cultural Centre as a part of the Embassy during the current financial year. 
 
Kathmandu 
The Indian Mission in Kathmandu has  informed the Council that the 
construction of Cultur al Centre as par t of Chancery  project is expected to 
begin in the third quarter of the curr ent financial year  and the Mission ha s 
requested that the PIC Wing of the Mission be allowed to function as ‘deemed’ 
Centre until the necessary formalities to open the Cultural Centre in 
Kathmandu are completed.  The proposal is under consideration of ICCR. 
Washington 
A suitable property for the Cultural Centre in Washington has  been 
identified. The property i dentified needs some modifications.  The matter i s, 
therefore, under activ e c onsideration with the Establ ishment Division of t he 
Ministry of External Affairs.” 
 
19. The Com mittee find that no signifi cant progress has been made so f ar 
with regard to the  opening of Ind ian Cultural Centres in Beijing , Tehran, 
Kathmandu and Washington.  The Com mittee, therefore, reiterate, considering 
the potential role of cult ural diplomacy  and India’ s incredible and diverse 
cultural heritage, that Ministry  should make concerted efforts to open cultural 
centers at Beijing, Tehran, Kat hmandu and Washington by  the end of current  
financial year.   
(Recommendation No. 5) 
E. CAPITAL SECTION 
 
Recommendation No. 35 [Para 117] 
 
20. The Ministry had informed that a substantial hike in budgetary allocation under 
the Head Capital Outlay on P ublic Works & Housing had been sought in BE 2006-07 
based on realistic as sessment of progress in various construction projects and 
 
 

acquisition proposals.  As per the ongoing progre ss of pre-construction activities, a 
number of construction projects were expected to reach ground-breaking stage in the 
next financial year.  Promi nent among these construction projects were J awaharlal 
Nehru Bhawan, Indian Embass y Complex in  Kathmandu, Mus cat, Brasilia, Abuja, 
Warsaw, Beijing, Kabul and residential proj ect in Islamabad.  In addition, projects for 
redevelopment of property in Singapor e and proposal fo r construction of four  
apartments in London may also reach cons truction stage in the next financ ial year.  
Additional, sufficient  budgetary  provision has been sought to meet anticipated 
expenditure on acquisi tion proposals, whic h were lik ely to be finaliz ed in the next  
financial year and for expend iture on repair  and maint enance of government-owned 
properties.  The Committee, therefore,  recommended that sufficient budgetary  
provision should be made to meet anticipated expenditure on acquisition/construction 
of these projects and anticipat ion must be fulfilled. The Ministry should ens ure that 
each project undertaken by the Ministry is completed in a time bound manner. 
 
21. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
 
“The Ministry will continue to ask  for su fficient funds to meet the requirement  
of construction projects and acquisition of properties.  These requirements will 
be formulated keeping in mind the need to ensure that budgetary constraints 
do not hamper progress in relation to construction projects and acquisition 
proposals.” 
 
22. The Com mittee feel that pace of progress of construction projects and 
acquisition proposals of th e Ministry  is far from commensurate w ith the 
required speed warranted by the stipulated time-schedule for completion of the 
projects.  The Com mittee desire that they may be apprised regularl y about the 
steps being taken to complete the c onstruction/acquisition projects of the 
Ministry without further delay.  The Committee also desire that progress report  
regarding Jawahar Lal Nahru Bhavan (Vid esh Bhavan) may be furnished to the 
Committee on a half yearly basis.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
 

CHAPTER- II 
 
 
OBSRVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Com mittee note that the total alloc ation of the Ministry in the Budget 
Estimates for 2006 – 2007 is Rs . 3,695.05 cror e. Compared to Rs.3928.00 crore in 
BE 2005 – 2006, this represents a reduction of  Rs.232.95 crore or 5.93 %. On the 
other hand, compared to RE of Rs.4182.00  in the year 2005 – 2006, this marks a 
decrease of Rs.486.95 crore or 11.64 %. The Ministry has  informed that this 
reduction is primarily on account  of reduced allocation of funds und er the Plan Head 
as a very large and s ignificant project is nearing completion. The non – plan Budget 
has increased from Rs.3163.00 crore in BE 2005 – 2006 to Rs.3472.75 crore in BE of 
2006 – 2007, whic h is an increase of Rs .309.75 crore or 9.79 %. Howev er. 
Compared to RE of 2005 – 2006 (Rs.3463 cror e), the increase is  only Rs.9.75 crore 
or 0.28 %. 
 
The Ministry has als o informed that no vital areas are likely to be affected 
thereby and the Ministry of Finance has  informed that sympathetic cons ideration 
would be given to any  Additionality requi red in 2006 – 2007. In the meanwhile, the 
Ministry would prioritize its expenditure plans and work  within the available budget 
and take up the matter of additional funds  at RE stage. The Committee are of the 
view that any kind of decrease in the a llocation of funds will c ertainly impede the 
Ministry to do justice with their stated objectives and reinforce the positive image of 
the country abroad. As the gl obal scenario is changing explosiv ely day by  day, the 
work load of the Ministry is increasing by leaps and bound. The Ministry should be 
ready by all means to face  the c hallenge of modern a ge. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that, with the expansion of activi ties along with India’ s growing stature, 
the Budget of the Ministry  should be augm ented proportionately in order  to pursue 
our foreign policy m ore effectively in the changing circumst ances. The Ministry 
should ensure that sufficient funds ar e available as and when requir ed.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry of Financ e will realize the need of time and provide 
additional funds as per requirement of  MEA at RE 2006-2007 stage to enable them  
to keep pace with the growth of our stature in foreign affairs. 
(Para No.18) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Against the projection of Rs. 4,126.75 crore for non-Plan expenditure made by 
this Ministry for BE 2006-07, budgetary al location of Rs. 3472.75 crore has been 
made by Ministry of Financ e in BE 2006-07.  This s hortfall of Rs. 654  crore in 
allocation has been brought to t he notice of Ministry of Finance as the activities of  
 
 

this Ministry, particularly; the “Techni cal and Economic Coop eration with Other 
Countries” are likely  to be affected if t he ceiling of BE 2006-07 is not revised 
adequately. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 2  
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Expenditure Monitoring Committee 
which had been established la st year has through frequent reviews maintained a 
steady and stable pace of ex penditure compared to t he Ministry’s pattern of 
expenditure in previous years.  The current trend indicates improved budgeting 
evenly paced expenditure and fuller util ization of  allocations. The Committee 
recommend that the trend of better phas ing of expenditure on various  
projects/schemes should be cont inued in the years to come and the problem  of non 
utilization/surrender of funds should not be allowed to rise again.  
(Para No. 19) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Expenditure Monitoring Committee in the Mi nistry of External Affairs, has  
evolved an internal monitoring mechanism to regularly review the expenditure pattern 
of its various spending Divis ions and the pr ogress of projects undertaken by them, 
and ensur e utiliz ation of the b udgetary p rovisions b y the various Div isions in a  
suitably phased manner to av oid the occurrence of un spent balance or surrender of  
funds at the end of the Financial Year. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 3  
 
      The Committee express their concern over the huge number of vacant posts in 
each grade as against sanctioned strength  since the past many years. While 
furnishing many reasons for not  filling up t he vacant posts  on time, the Ministry ha s 
submitted that they are act ually conscious of the need to  ensure that vacancies are 
filled up at the earliest . However, the posts remain vac ant on account of the process  
involved in  filling the se posts. Neverthele ss, the Ministry has been takin g specia l 
efforts to reduce the period for which po sts are vacant. These include accurate 
estimation of vacancies and im mediate ident ifying, regular and timely holding of  
DPCs and diversion of vacancies  to other modes whenever feasible. The Committee 
recommend that all efforts which are required / involved in filling up the vacancies as  
enumerated by the Ministry should be made seriously to cut short the time being 
taken presently. 
(Para No. 20) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Posts are usually filled up either thr ough promotion or direct recruitment. Even 
in the promotion mode, some of the vacancies are to be filled up on the basis of a 
 
 

Limited Departmental Examinat ion (LDE). The recruitment process for vacancies to 
be filled up through a LDE or direct recruitment is conduc ted by the Un ion Public 
Service Commission (UPSC) or the Staff Selection Commission (SSC), and is usually 
done only once a year. The inher ent structure of this proc ess, and the time frames 
involved, lead to a number of posts lying vacant at any poi nt in time. This is beyond 
the control of the Ministry. Nevertheless,  Ministry has already placed appropriat e 
indents to ensure early filling up of vacancies for 2006-07. 
 
2. As regards the vacancies t o be filled through promotion on the 
recommendations of the Depar tmental Promotion Committees  (DPC), the Ministry 
has made all efforts to ensure that these va cancies are filled up  at the earliest. Th e 
Ministry has already estimated vacancies that are expected to arise during 2006 - 07, 
and all meetings of the DPC for 2006 - 07 t hat are conduct ed by the Ministry hav e 
already been held. Some DP C meetings are held by t he UPSC, who have been 
requested to expedite the same. Some backlog reserved vacancies have als o been 
diverted to the direct recruitment mode and indented with the SSC so t hat these 
could be filled at the earliest. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 4  
 
 The Com mittee are surprised to note that more than 600 posts have been 
abolished over the last 5 years, while the Ministry is  facing acut e shortage of man-
power.  Th e Ministry is continuo usly expressing their inab ility to further stretch their 
limited man-power resources to open ne w Missions/Posts abroad and the urgent  
need to establish India’s presence felt in va rious locations has remained cons trained 
by personnel and budgetary restrictions. Accord ingly, they are left with no options in 
cases of additional work load. The Committ ee feel that the creation of pos ts is a 
torturous process. The pr ocedure will have to be streamlined ot herwise there will be 
mismatch between the requirements of the modern age and manpo wer. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that t he Ministry should make all out efforts to obtain 
sanction for required posts and fill them imm ediately, to cope up with the problem as  
early as possible. 
(Para No. 21) 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Minist ry welcom es the recogniti on by the Hon'ble Mem bers of the 
Committee of the shortage of personnel,  which has  been exacerbated due to the 
abolitions carried out  since 2000. Howev er, given t he time frames involved in 
recruitment to new posts, which is c onducted by the Union Public Servic e 
Commission (UPSC) or the Staf f Selection Commission (SSC),  Ministry is unable to 
fill newly created posts immediately. Thus , even wh en new Missions / Posts are set  
up and new posts created for the same, Ministry has to bear the shortage of posts till 
such time as the recruitment process is completed by the UPSC/SSC.  Nevertheless, 
 
 

Ministry is making all efforts to ensure that opening of new Missions / Posts is done in 
a phased manner, with simultan eous creation of new posts. This would ens ure that 
the shortages on acc ount of delay between creation of new  posts and their filling  up 
are not exacerbated. In this regard, it may be mentioned that the Government has 
decided to open 5 new Missions  / Posts during 2006 -  07, for which the Ministry has 
obtained requisite approvals for creation of posts and the process  of recruitment to 
these posts has been initiated. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5  
 
 
The Committee note that a major share of the funds allotted to Embassies and 
Missions is being utilized towards payment of rent, rates & taxes  and there has not  
been much change in terms of overall hired pr operty.  In the last three years, some 
13 properties have been additionally hired f or housing chanceries and residences for 
the newly opened Consulat e General of India in Birg unj and Abuja Office  of High 
Commission of India, Lagos thereby adding to the rental liability of the Government to 
the tune of nearly 1.2 crore per annum.  On the other hand, acquisition of Chancery-
cum/Embassy Residence in Ulaanbaatar and Consular General’s Res idence in 
Chicago has resulted in an annual saving of around Rs. 58 lakhs on account of rental 
out flow.  The Committee also note that built-up properties acquired in Prague and 
Panama need renov ation. The Ministry informed that action has been in itiated for  
renovating these properties.  However, the Committee are not satisfied with the pac e 
of acquis ition/purchase of properties at Missions/Post s abroad.  Although, some 
properties have been acquisitioned and some savings have been made but it is not  
sufficient.  The Committee are of the view t hat work of acquisition/construction to 
house our Missions/Chanceries could be accele rated with the intr oduction of some 
comprehensive plans.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that more concrete 
efforts need to be made to reduce the rental li abilities of the Ministry.  At the places , 
where little work is  to be done t o get proper ties in hand, it should be done at the 
earliest.  As for instance, in Prague and Panama where some renovation is  needed, 
the work should be done immediately to make properties useable.  The Committee 
further recommend that the work of acqui sition/purchase of pr operties should be 
taken up sincerely and all the pr ojects pending with the Ministry since long time must  
be completed without further delay. 
(Para No. 29) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With a view to reduce its rental liabiliti es this Ministry has prepared a five year  
comprehensive action plan to acquire built up proper ties and c onstruct our own 
buildings f or residences/offices at high re ntal and ot her stations. This action plan 
envisages purchase of proper ties in 23 st ations in addition to construction of  
 
 

properties in 23 stations in the next fi ve years upto financial year 2009- 10.  The 
above proposal will, however, require adequate budgetary support. 
 
2. The renovation work in the Embassy Residence in Prague is underway and it 
is scheduled to be completed by December 2007. As for Panama, the consultant and 
contractor for the ren ovation of the Embassy Residence hav e been appointed and 
the preliminary estimates have also been appr oved. Additional scope of work for the 
renovation is under process. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6  
 
The Committee note that a new divis ion, called Project Division headed by a 
Joint Secretary had been set-up in the Ministry  with effect from 15 February, 2005, to 
handle exc lusively the work relating to the Ministry’s proposals for acquisitions of 
property/construction of projects in I ndia and abroad.  The Committee are happy t o 
note that system of regul ar preparation of an u pdated status Report for all  
construction projects has been introduced.  Fo r all construction projects, reports are 
being submitted for the perusal of the Forei gn Secretary and the Minister of Externa l 
Affairs.  Further progress in the constr uction projects and property acquisition 
proposals is reviewed and monitored though periodical meetings called by F oreign 
Secretary.  The Committee fu rther note that the Minist ry recently undertook an 
exercise to identify high rent al stations and priority has been accorded in acquiring 
properties for Indian Missions in those stations.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry will n ow be  in b etter positio n a fter setting up of project division a nd 
acquisition/construction of property proce ss will be s treamlined sign ificantly.  The  
Committee would like to be apprised of updat ed status report being prepared for  
construction projects from time to time. 
(Para No. 30) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired by Standing Committee the late st Status Report on construction 
projects being handled by the Ministry is enclosed herewith as Appendix-I for perusal 
of Committee. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7  
 
The Committee note that the mechanism  worked out between  Ministry and 
Ministry of Finance now provides for significantly higher allocation for properties or for 
project work, which would be undertaken in the European zone, American zone or  
the Asian zone.  The Committee also note that as a resu lt of higher delegated power 
being vested in the MEA the process of approv al for properties or for projects will be 
speeded up.  The Committee hope that t he mechanism work ed out bet ween the 
 
 

Ministry and Ministry of Finance will enable the Minist ry to speedily  take up and 
complete all pending projects on time. 
(Para No. 31) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has  been noted. All efforts are being 
made to fully utilize the alloc ations for  construction or ac quisition of  built-up 
properties in our missions abroad for whic h a five year s comprehensive action plan 
has been drawn. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 8  
 
 The Com mittee are happy to note that  outstanding issues pertaining to the 
rental for the Akbar Bhawan has been resolved to the mutual satisfaction with NDMC.  
The Com mittee would lik e to suggest that the Mi nistry should remain in touch 
constantly with the concerned authorities to avoid such situation in future. 
(Para No. 32) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As pointed out by the Committee, the Mi nistry is maintaining regular contact 
with all concerned authorities/local bodies for avoiding any situation of  
misunderstanding in future.  As regards Akbar Bhawan, the Ministry has already pai d 
part of the arrears and action is under way for settling the remaining payments. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 9  
The Committee note that despite having clear trend of incu rring expenditure 
less than the BE and RE in the year 2004 -05 and 2005-06,  the projection of BE is  
again at a higher level for the year 2006-07. Though t he Committee has similar vie w 
as the Ministry that w hile allocating t he publicity budget, no Mission should feel a 
crunch in c arrying out the vital work of pr ojecting and promoting I ndia on ac count of 
non-availability of Budget, but the Commi ttee hope that alloc ated fund should b e 
utilized pro perly. Less  utiliz ation of fund c ertainly reflects that the Missio ns/Posts 
could not perform their duties as anticipat ed. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that all the Missions should do their best to meet the public ity targets to carry out the 
vital work of projecting and promoting India globally.  
(Para No. 37) 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The Ministry has conveyed the recommendation of the Standing Committee to 
all Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The Commi ttee may note that the publicity budget s 
to the Missions/Posts were alloc ated only a fter the receipt of detailed Action Plans. 
 
 

The Minis try undertakes regular reviews of the public ity activities  of the 
Missions/Posts and advises and directs them, wherever necessary, so that the work 
of projecting and promoting India globally is carried our effectively and efficiently.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 The Minist ry informed the Committee t hat they were trying to create a Cell 
called ‘Public Diplomacy’ headed by an Addi tional Secretary, wh o will over see the 
matter of public involvement/pub lic interest in Indian Fore ign Policy.  The Ministry  
informed further that there wa s a requirement for explaining the foreign polic y to the 
Indian audiences.  They have not quite formuliz ed it but have draw n up a charter of  
duties and awaiting the approval of the Prime Minister, in his capacity as the External 
Affairs Minister.  The idea is to really us e this particular unit to do these kinds of  
outreach activities and also look  at the aspect of holding seminars, workshops and 
specific films which are important in terms of for eign policy.  The Committee 
appreciate the steps being ta ken and feel that our  Foreign Policy must be explained 
to our own people and it should have happe ned earlier.  The Committee extend their 
support for the cause and hope t hat the Cell shall be in position at  the earliest.  The 
Committee also recommended that this wo rk should be done in close coordination 
with Soc iety for Research and Informa tion System for non-aligned and other 
countries [RIS] and additional funds may be allocated to RIS for this purpose. 
(Para No. 38) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Public Diplomacy Division of MEA headed by an A dditional Secretary has 
been creat ed and has begun it s work. Its mandate includes inter-alia out reach 
activities inside and outside I ndia, audio vi sual and print public ity, website, and 
documentation. The Additional  Secretary has begun to reach out to States within 
India beginning with Punjab and Orissa and it is planned to cover every region of the 
country. Contacts with think tanks, medi a persons, and personalities in the opinion/  
decision m aker category have also been  activated. The recommendation of the 
Committee on co-ordination and cooperation with RIS has been initiated and is being 
implemented. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 11  
 
The Committee appreciate the work being do ne by the Ministry to bring about  
a change in the perc eption of India and t o make the worl d more aware of the new 
face of India. The media perception as well as the official realization across the world 
has changed dramatically in this  respect par ticularly during the last year. Economic 
changes in India are now be ing widely rec ognized. T his has  come due to a more 
focused drive to attain the ov erall obj ectives of the Government through better  
 
 

utilization of available funds  and linking of budgetary allocations to the Action Plans . 
The Committee are of the view that momentum should be maintained keeping in view 
India’s perspectives and the country’s interests should not be overlooked at any cost.  
 
(Para No. 39) 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is gratified t hat our efforts in promoting the new face of India and 
its economic changes have been recognized and are appreciated by the Committee.  
As recommended, the Ministry has kept up the momentum in line with India’s  
perspective and interests. 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee that momentum should be maintaine d 
to make the world aware of the new face of India and that country’s interests should 
not be overlooked at any cost has been conv eyed to all Missions/Posts.  In this 
context, the Committee would be happy to note that the External Publicity Divis ion 
has recently undertaken efforts for formulat ing and coordinating m edia strategies of  
15 key Indian Missions for further improvi ng media perception about India through 
focused media interventions by  these Missi ons in their respective countries of 
accreditation. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 12  
 
 The Ministry informed that the proposal of panel of advocates for  extradition 
proceedings has been finalized after seeking approv al of the Minister of State of Law 
and Justice. The concern of the Committee to include in the panel of advocates legal 
experts having proven competence has been duly taken care of. The com mittee do 
express their satisfaction over the appoin tment of legal exper t panel for extradition 
cases and hope that, with the help of these l egal experts, extradition cases would be 
handled vigorously. 
(Para No. 42) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Yes. It is expected that by enlisting the services of these legal experts, 
extradition cases would be processed vigorously and expeditiously. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 13  
 
The Committee observed that, keeping in v iew the im pressive increase in the 
activities of FSI, the amount allocated, is  really less. The Committee are convinced 
with the s ubmission of the Minist ry for need of enhanc ed budget ary allocations for 
Foreign Service Institute. Implementati on of Agreements / MOUs recently signed 
entail additional expenditure. In spite of this, the institute organizes many programme 
/ courses for which t hey should have suffi cient funds . The Com mittee, therefore, 
 
 

recommend that the budgetary alloc ation for FSI should be augmented suitably so 
that the institute can meet the desired objectives effectively. 
(Para No. 48) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Keeping in view the Committee’s re commendation, the Foreign Service 
Institute has prepared a brie f on the budget ary requirements to meet its current and 
future programmes.  The Ministr y of Fi nance would be approached at RE st age for 
augmentation of budgetary allocation for the Institute. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 14  
 
 The Com mittee further desire that the programmes/courses should be 
organized by Foreign Service Institute (FSI) al so for lower level offi cers for all cadres 
in the Ministry.  Further, as informed to the Committee, the building of FSI is under  
construction and it will be completed within next few months.  It will have good 
infrastructure and the activiti es will get e xpanded when infrastructure is put in place.  
In this context, the Committee recommend that  the remaining work of construction of  
FSI building should be complet ed at the earliest s o that the activities could b e 
expanded as per the requirement of the Indian Foreign Policy.  The Committee would 
like to suggest that the Governmental sch emes such as the National Urban Rene wal 
Mission or the National Rural Mission should be accorded due publicity through FSI. 
(Para No. 49) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The Foreign Service Institute i s im plementing the recommendation.  It i s 
organizing programme/courses for lower level officers of different cadres in the 
Ministry.  The FSI building is nearly comp lete and only some finis hing work remain s 
before the Institute is shifted and a time frame has been worked out.  A broad outline 
on the exp ansion of FSI’s activities has  been formulated.  Greater emphasis will b e 
given through training programmes imparted in FSI to the Committee’s suggestion on 
according due publicity to various government schemes. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 15  
 
The Committee find that under the Head “Embassies & Missions” the actual 
expenditure for the y ear 2004 was Rs.848. 91 crore against the Revised Estimate of 
Rs.896.27 crore. This clearly indicates that funds allocated under this Head could not 
be utilized fully in the year 2004 – 2005. The Committee are not convinced at all with 
the reasons furnished by the Ministry for under utilization of funds as increase in 
foreign allowance and salary of locally recr uited staff in variou s Missions / Posts did 
not take place to the extent  anticipated or there was a r eduction in the nu mber of 
school going children in some Mi ssions / Posts leading to the lower expenditure. The 
 
 

Committee, therefore, recommend that effort should be made for optimal utilization of 
funds to avoid such under spending of funds. 
 (Para No. 53) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Expenditure Monitoring Committee in the Ministry of External Affairs has  
initiated st eps to monitor the expenditure pattern of Missions and Posts abroad to 
avoid the occurrence of unspent balances  or  surrender of fund s at the end of the 
Financial Year. 
  (No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 16  
 
The Com mittee notes that at pres ent there are 23 ongoing and pending 
projects related to Embassies and Missions abroad.  Many of them are pending since 
long due to various reasons.  The Committee has been recommending repeatedly for 
early completion of these projects but it is not getting momentum anyway and 
remained in the same state as before. T he Committee fully understands that there 
are different procedures for acquiring properties  in different countries and all projects 
cannot be completed/materialized with simila r procedure.  But taking 25-30 years in 
construction of a Chancery/Embassy buildi ng is beyond the wisdom while plots for 
construction were available exc ept in one or two cases.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should reintegrate their efforts by reviewing and proper 
monitoring the projects with new energy.  Now that the Joint Secretary (Projects) is in 
position for this specific task, the pace of work must be accelerated for completion of 
these projects at the earliest.  The Committ ee further recommends that a target date 
should be fixed for each project and all pos sible efforts should be made to complete 
the project within that target date. 
(Para No. 54) 
Reply of the Government 
 
As submitted earlier, a new Pr ojects Division has been created for better 
coordination, implementation and monitori ng of ongoing construction projects and 
acquisition of properties in our missions abroad, which has yielded positiv e results. 
The target date for completion of each pr oject has been fixed and reflec ted in our  
status report also under submission to Committee as Appendix – II. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 17  
 
 The Com mittee note that the proposed allocation in BE 20 06 – 2007 is 
Rs.147.98 crore with an in crease of Rs.7.43 crore vis a vis BE 2005 – 2006. In real 
term, the allocated amount under this Head is  Rs.10.76 crore lo wer than the amount 
allocated at RE 2005 – 2006. The Ministry informed that  the allocation in BE 2006  – 
2007 has been made on the basis of funds ava ilable for the overa ll Budget of the 
 
 

Ministry.  The Committee also  note that the esti mated cost of projects to be 
undertaken with the provisions  under this Head is  Rs.156.40 crore and have similar 
view as the Ministry that the projects  proposed to be underta ken during the year 
2006 – 2007 cannot be satisfactorily tak en up with the BE of Rs.147.98 crore due to 
increase in expenses as stated. Ther efore, the Committee recommend that the 
amount allocated in BE 2006 – 2007 should be increased suitably under this Head at 
the RE stage. 
(Para 70) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Financ e would be approache d at RE stage for augmentation of 
budgetary allocation under the head “Passport and Emigration”.  
 
 (No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
  
Recommendation No. 18  
  
The Ministry informed the Committee t hat the allocation in 2004-2005 could 
not be fully utilized as anticip ated increase in staff strengt h, increase in  rentals,  
payments of ground rent etc did not materialise. The Committee are of the view that if 
fund was  available then, it c ould have been utilised for other necessary activities  
under this Head. On the one side, the Minist ry is taki ng plea for  shortage of funds 
and on the other side, available funds are not being utilized properly. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make efforts for maximum utilisation of 
allocated funds and e nsure that funds are fully  utilised till the end of financial year, if  
necessary, by re-allocation of fund. 
(Para No. 71) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The esteemed Committee’s recommendation is duly noted. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
  
Recommendation No. 19  
 
 The Com mittee note that the Distric t Passport Cells (D PCs) have not been 
opened in all districts of the c ountry. So far, 463 DPCs are functioning in the country. 
The Ministry has informed that they have taken  up the matter at high level by writing 
to the Chief Ministers of the S tates to open DPCs  in their States. As a result,  
Uttranchal State has opened 12 DPCs in F ebruary 2005 and Ra jasthan has opened 
9 DPCs in June 2005.  A new DPC has been opened in Pitampura, Delhi in Jaunary  
2006. As at present Delhi has t hree centres and fourth one will be opene d shortly. 
The Ministry informed that idea is to form as many centres as possible so that the 
overcrowding at the Passport Offices co uld be avoided. The Com mittee appreciates 
the efforts being made by the Ministry in  this regard and hope th at DPCs in  all the 
districts of the country will be in place at the earliest. The Committee recommend that 
 
 

wide publicity on loc al TV, Radio and in newspapers should be made at regular  
intervals about the functioning of these DPCs so that awareness is created at large. 
(Para No. 72) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry will implement the reco mmendation of the Committee by giving 
wide publicity on loc al T V, radio and ne wspapers at regular in tervals about the 
functioning of DPCs. As a matter of fact , all Passport Officers in the country have 
been instructed to do the needful in this regard. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 22  
 
 The Ministry informed that delay  in issu e of the Passports is bas ically due to 
delayed Police Verification Report. At pres ent the Ministry has a system called ‘local 
identity system’ in which the Police verifies whether or not the applicant resides at the 
address furnished in the application form.  Sometimes, circumstances compel 
applicant to change his residence after submitting his application for passport, so the 
verifying officer makes remarks that appl icant does not reside at his address or 
address is false and he is, therefore, not elig ible to get a passport. Most of the other  
countries do not follow this prac tice. They follow an ‘identity bas ed passport issuing 
system’ in which as long as the identity of  the applicant is estab lished, it does not  
really matter where he is residing. Realiz ing the advantages of  this system, the 
Ministry is trying to c onvince the Home  Ministry and their own agencies t o try and 
shift to an ‘identity-based system’ in whic h only identity of applicant will have to be 
established. 
 
 The Committee are of the view t hat the existing local identity system is really 
not advantageous and only proof of identit y should be the basis for issuing a 
passport. The Committee feel that shifting to ‘identity based system’ will considerably 
help to av oid delays in issuanc e of pa ssport. However, the Committee re commend 
that pros a nd cons of this syste m should be examined carefully before its adoption.   
All precautions should be taken during the c hange in process. No decision should be 
taken in a hurry.  
(Para No. 75) 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As part of an on-going process to simp lify and expedite the Police Verification 
System, a number of proposal s are presently under consi deration to move towards  
an identity-based verification system so as to  avoid delays in issuance of passports. 
All precautions are being taken and pros and cons of the system  will be taken into 
consideration before its adoption. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 

Recommendation No. 23  
 
 The Minist ry also informed that on the issue of backlog of passport 
applications, they have taken a variety of measures includ ing pendency clearanc e 
drive in Delhi, Jaipur and Trivandrum and also planning major drive in Ghaziabad 
very soon where there is a pendency  probl em, to accelerate the c learance of  
backlog. The Committee recommend that su ch pendency clearance drive should be 
undertaken in all the Passport Offices where the pendency is much higher. 
(Para No. 76) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee wil l be carried out while undertaking 
the pendency clearance drives in the future. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
H. INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS 
 
Recommendation No. 24  
 
The Committee note that the budgetary al location for Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations (ICCR) is the same as it was in RE 2005 –  2006. The Ministry 
informed that the alloc ation of funds to ICCR is usua lly not commensurate with the 
projected demands made by the Council and due to this r eason, the Cou ncil has to 
curtail its activities wit hin the limits of allo cated funds. The Ministry also stated that  
they have been const rained by t he pauc ity of  funds, yet they have tried hard to 
provide allocations for wider role of cultural  diplomacy. The Committee also note that 
the ICCR is engage d in a wide  range of activities g oing b eyond the e xchange o f 
cultural troupes, execution of scholarships, operation of cultural  centers and opening 
of new c ultural center s to provide greater  outreach facility etc. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the Counc il has to curtail its activities due to paucity of funds.  
The Com mittee, therefore,  recommend that substantia l additional fund should be 
provided to ICCR to achieve their mandated objectives successfully. 
(Para No. 84) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Minis try of Finance would be approached at the RE stage for 
augmentation of budgetary allocation to ICCR, if needed.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Recommendation No. 25  
 
The Committee note that with regard to the constitution of Advisory Committee 
for regional centres the Ministry is giving sa me reply since last few years that action 
has been initiated but  the Adv isory Committees have not been constituted so far  
except for 2 Regional Offices.  The Committ ee are of the view t hat functioning of 
Regional Offices are being imped ed inordinately without Ad visory Committees.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that Advisory Committees for remaining 7 
Regional Offices should be constituted without any further delay. 
(Para No. 85) 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Advisory Committees for all the Regional Offices have been constituted in 
June-July, 2006. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 27  
  
 The Committee note that the various M inistries such as Human Resource 
Development, Ex ternal Affairs, Overseas  Indian Affairs etc. are providing 
scholarships in their own capacit y and work ing in c ompartments.  The ICCR too is  
providing scholarships for foreign scholars.  The Com mittee are of  the view that all 
these Ministries/Agencies should coordi nate together and form a “Joint Committee” 
for execution of scholarship.  The Committee feel that by forming a Joint Committee, 
the disbursement of scholarships  will be mu ch more effective and purposeful.  The 
Committee, therefore, would like to suggest that a joint Coordination Committee with 
representatives of each Ministry should be  formed for more purposeful and effective 
execution of scholars hip schem es.  The Committee hope that  Ministry of External 
Affairs will take initiative towards the formation of a Joint Coordination Committee. 
(Para No. 87) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of External Affair s wi ll take up this  matter with the ot her 
concerned Ministries  to set up a Joint Coordination Committee for more  effective 
utilization of the available scholarships. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 28  
 
The Ministry informed that the fund allocated in BE 2006- 07 would not be 
sufficient for all the activities of the I ndian Council for World Affairs (IC WA). The 
Ministry has als o informed during the c ourse of evidenc e in connection with 
examination of demands fo r grants 2006-2007 that “Gover ning Body” of ICWA has 
been constituted. The Hon’ble Vice- President has signed the order and ICWA will 
now work according t o its plan. The Commi ttee hope that after constitution of the 
 
 

Governing Body, working of ICWA will get anticipated pace and c ertainly achieve its 
objectives placed at the time of its fo rmation. The Committee would like to suggest  
that allocated fund for ICWA should be enhanced appropriately at the RE stage.                               
(Para No. 92) 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Indian Council of World Affairs [IC WA] is working actively to achiev e its  
objectives.  A list of the activities carried out in the last few months is enclosed at  
Appendix-III. 
 
2. The rules pertaining to the functioning of the Governing Body of the Indian 
Council of  World Affairs [ICWA] are under pr eparation.  The first meeting of the 
Governing Body will b e convene d as soon as the draft of the proposed rules has 
been prepared. 
 
3. Budgetary alloc ation of Rs.2.25 crore has been m ade in BE 2006-07 f or 
ICWA. If needed, Ministry of Finance would be approached at RE stage for 
augmentation of the budgetary allocation. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 30  
 
The Committee note that Rs.1432.79 cror e was allocat ed under this Head in 
BE 2005 - 2006 and Rs.1274. 65 crore has been alloc ated in BE 2006 – 2007, whic h 
works out to a decrease of 12.47 %. The Mi nistry informed that the reduction is 
primarily on account of lowe r requirement in the Plan allocation because m ajor item 
of expenditure viz. Tala – Hydro – Electr ic project is nearing completion. The 
allocation for non – plan expenditure is bas ed on requirement as presently perceived 
and als o based on overall alloc ation availabl e to the Ministry. The Comm ittee feel 
that allocated fund will not  be adequate to meet  the needs for the ongoing projects 
and some new ones, which have been announced fr om time to time at highes t level, 
but hope that the Ministry would be able to arrange  fo r expanded nature of their  
commitment at RE 2006 – 2007 stage parti cularly in view of the enhanced 
requirement of funds for reconstruction of Nepal.  
(Para No. 98) 
Reply of the Government 
 
Aid to Nepal 
 
Against the proposed expenditure of  Rs. 129.25 crores for BE 2006-2007, 
budgetary allocation of only Rs. 65 crores has been made in BE 2006-2007. 
 
2. In the context of recent dev elopments in Nepal, GOI has announc ed 
significant economic assistance to Nepal during the official  v isit of H.E. Mr. G.P. 
 
 

Koirala, PM of Nepal to India fr om June 6-9, 2006.  This inter alia includes,  
immediate one-time grant of Rs. 100 crore to the budget of  Government of Nepal, a 
concessional Lin e of Credit of US $ 100 m illion for the execution of infrastructure 
development projects, enhancement of ‘Aid to  Nepal’ budget for the current financia l 
year from Rs. 65 crore to Rs . 150 crore, doubling the number of scholarships, waiver 
of outstanding dues owed by the Government of Nepal to Government of India on 
account of defence purchases, rescheduling of dues of Nepal O il Corporation owed 
to Indian Oil Corporation and immediate supply of 25,000 MT of fertilizers to Nepal at 
subsidized prices.   
 
3. MEA’s Internal Finance Div ision (IFD) has been asked to approach the 
Ministry of Finance eit her at the supplemen tary or RE stage for augmentation of the 
allocation t o fulfill the commitment of GOI fo r providing economic aid to Nepal.  In 
pursuant of decis ions tak en above, IF D Divis ion, MEA has done internal re-
appropriation to provide Rs. 10 0 crores while Depart ment of Economic Affairs has 
agreed ‘in princip le’ t o ext end US $ 100 million soft Line of  Credit (LOC) to Nepal 
through the Exim Bank.  The m odalities of disbursal of LO C are yet to be finalized.   
The government is in the process of arr anging supplies of 25,000 MT of fertilizers to 
Nepal at subsidized price which would entail a subsidy burden of around Rs. 17 
crores.  This expenditure would be met from the ‘Aid to Nepal’ budget. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 31  
 
 The Committee note that currently thr ee projects in Bhutan are being funded 
from plan alloc ation viz. Tala Hydro-el ectric Project [1020MW], Dungsum  Cement  
Plant Project and the Punatsang chu Hydro-electric Project.  All other Government of  
Indian assistance Programmes in Bhutan are catered to in the non-plan allocation.   
The Tala Hydro-electric Project as per current schedule is expected to be 
commissioned by Se ptember 2006.  Surp lus power [approximat ely 1020MW] will b e 
supplied to India as per the rates mutua lly agreed by both sides.  Dungsum  Cement 
Plant Project was in t he state of suspens ion due to Indian Insurgent Groups (IIGs),  
now is go ing to be revived s the security situation has improved after the military  
operations against t he Indian  Insurgent Group conducted by Bhutan.  Detailed 
Project Report (DPR)  of Punat sangchu Hydro-electric Project is currently under  
preparation by Water and Power  Consultancy se rvices limited.  T his is likely  to be 
900 – 1000 MW project whic h will be tak en up after finalis ation of DPR.   The 
Committee hope that  Ministry will continue  their exc ellent performance as shown 
earlier in Bhutan and all these projects must be beneficial in order to firm the relations 
between two countries.  
(Para No. 101) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The demand for Non Plan Aid to Bhutan was Rs. 464 crores and Plan demand 
was 223.70 crores for the Year 2006-07.  However, Non Plan grant of Rs. 397.21 and 
Plan grant of Rs. 222. 30 crores have been made in BE 2006-07 under the Head of 
 
 

Account “Aid to Bhutan’.  Our Internal  Finance Division woul d be requested to 
approach t he Ministry of Finance for augm entation of Budgetary Allocations, if 
needed for the ongoing projects in Bhutan. 
 
2. India’s relations with Bhutan are mutually beneficial and based on deep-rooted 
trust and friendship. Bhutan is alr eady supplying power to India from Hydro-electric 
plants jointly developed by I ndia and Bhutan. The first turbi nes of Tala Hydro-electric 
Project (1020 MW) have become functional and the project would  be operational by  
October 2006. Draft Detailed Project R eport by Water and Power Consultancy  
Services Limited for P unatsangchu-I Hydro-electric Project has been received and is  
under consideration and work has comm enced on the Dungs um Cement Plant 
Project. India-Bhutan relati ons are entering a ne w phase with intense multi-faceted 
co-operation including the Hydro-electricity sector.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 32  
  
The Committee observed that 2862 slots under Indian T echnical an d 
Economic Cooperat ion (ITEC) and 698 slots under Special Commonwealth 
Assistance for Africa Programme (SCAAP) were allotted in 2005-2006, but only 1033 
and 381 trainees availed the slots respecti vely. The Ministry informed that the figure 
of utilization mentioned i.e. 1033 for ITEC and 381 for SCAAP i.e.  total of 1414 were 
those of candidates, who had actually joined their c ourses as on 19 th January 2006 
and not for entire 2005-06. As on 10 th March 2006, the total number of trainees who 
have actually joined their courses has  reached 2911 (i.e. 2353 under ITEC and 558 
under SCAAP). This is 81.1% utilization of the total 3 560 slots a llotted for 2005-06. 
This is all an all time high record, exec uting the figures for the year 2004-05 i.e. 2421 
by 490 or an increas e by 20.24%. In fact , MEA had received and proces sed over 
3862 applications and had giv en approv als in  order to have full utilization. The 
Committee are hap py to note th e improvement made regarding  utilization of slots in  
last financial year and hope that in current financial year, the allotted slots will be fully 
utilized. Notwithstanding, the Co mmittee recommend to ensure  that all a llotted slots 
are fully utilized in Financial Year 2006-07.  
(Para No. 105) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Further to the “Status of Implement ation Report on the recommendations  
contained in the 7th Report [14th Lok Sabha]” made to the Commit tee in March 2006, 
it may be mentioned that as on 31 st Mar ch 2006, a total num ber of 2975 foreign 
trainees have done/ attended training course s under ITEC/SCAAP for the financial 
year 2005-06. This is an all time high record for ITEC/SCAAP training programme. 
 
2. The Ministry of External Affair s [TC Div ision] has  already  finalized re-
empanelment of Indian institut ions and details of the courses have been sent to all 
the Missions in/accredited to 156 ITEC par tner countries. Moreover the information 
 
 

has been posted on the ITEC website of  the MEA. The ITEC/SCAAP Training 
Programme Booklet is being printed and the same will be sent to all the Mission s 
abroad. Indian Miss ions abroad have been directed to send  nominations ev en 
beyond the allotted number of slots for different countries, so that full utilization of the 
training slots could be made by substituting those trainees who are unable to come to 
India at the last minute, by allocating the slots to those who are on standby. 
 
3. The information about ITEC/SCAAP civ ilian training programme is also being  
shared with the foreign missions based in India, so that they can also coordinate wit h 
their respective governments for better utilization of ITEC/SCAAP training slots. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 33  
  
 The Committee observed that during th e year 2004-05 actual expendit ure 
under the Head “Multilateral Economic Re lations” was Rs. 00.79 crores only.   
Allocation at BE 2005-06 stage was 1.90 crore and it was enhanced at RE2005-2006 
stage to Rs. 12.9 crore.  Now in BE 2006-07, the allocation has been almost doubled 
to Rs. 25.00 crore.  The Ministry has in formed that Prime Minister had announc ed 
additional contribution of US $ 2.5 billion to the Indian Association of South-East 
Asian Nations (ASEAN) cooperation fund.  Thus Rs. 12.9 crore was t entatively 
allocated at RE 2005-2006 stage under the H ead ‘MER Programme’.  Again, the 
Prime Minister announced a co ntribution of US$ 5 mill ion to the ASEAN-India 
cooperation fund in December  2005.  Therefore, Rs. 25 crores has been alloc ated 
under this Head in BE 2006- 2007.  The Committee are convinc ed with the reasons 
submitted for such increase in BE 2006- 2007 by t he Ministry and express that  
commitments made at various  multilater al meetings may be fu lfilled in order to 
elevate our multilateral diplomacy. 
(Para No. 108) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation has been noted and efforts are being made to fulfill the 
commitments made at various multilateral meetings.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 34  
 
 The Committee note that India has offered to set up a South Asian Association 
of Regional Cooperation [SAARC] center  for disaster management [SCDM ] in New 
Delhi.  The Ministry informed that the c enter would provide a mechanism for sharing 
information on disast er management am ongst SAARC countries and als o benefit  
from best practices prevaili ng in the region and bey ond.  This  Centre would be 
located within the Nat ional Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), New Delhi, an 
institution of international standard, and can function as a resource base for data and 
Regional Training Center in  SAARC for Disaster Managemen t.  India would be in a 
position to share IT and GIS-based technolo gies.  T he Commit tee feel that such 
 
 

responsibilities must be taken by the Gove rnment of India k eeping in view it s 
additional r elevance and urgenc y in the wa ke of the recent tsunami tragedy and 
earthquake, which c aused massive loss of life,  displacement of persons and loss of  
property and infrastructure.  Therefore,  the Committee apprecia tes the commitment 
made by the Ministry. 
(Para No. 109) 
 Reply of the Government 
 
 A meeting of experts took plac e during 1 – 2 nd Jun e 200 6 in New De lhi t o 
finalize the modalities for setting up of the SAARC Center for Disaster Management; 
a concept paper has been finaliz ed.  The meeting also dec ided to change the nam e 
of the Center to ‘SAARC Disaster Managem ent Center’ in line with the nomenclature 
of other existing SAARC regional centers.  The Council of Ministers Meeti ng held 
during 1-2 nd August 2006 in Dhaka has appr oved the c oncept paper and 
subsequently the First Governing Board Meet ing of the Center  would be held to 
finalize the Budget and the work plan for the Center. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
  
Recommendation No. 36 
 
The Committee have similar view as expressed by CAG in their  performance 
audit that “the entire system of property  management by MEA was made by delay s 
both in acquisition and proper ty construction resulting in  a recurring expenditure of  
Rs.11.80 crore annually on rentals blocki ng of Rs.18.81 crore in capitals and 
increase building cos ts.”  Though the Ministry  submitted that after setting up of a 
Projects Divis ion under Jo int Secretary(Projects) has  significantly improved 
monitoring of construction projects in I ndia and abroad as well as has res ulted in 
expeditious processing of R&M proposal s of GOI-ow ned proper ties and proposals  
for acquisition of properties in India and abroad.  As a consequence, Ministry has 
been able to fully utilize t he budgetary allocation of Rs . 66.41 crores under Capital 
Outlay for the Financial Year 2005-06 and also had to seek an additionally of Rs. 42 
crores in t he Second Ba tch of Supplementary Dema nd for Grants. The Committee 
are not convinced with the explanation presented by the Ministry and hope that more 
vigorous effort will be made in  regard to ac quisition/construction of projects abroad  
and within the country. 
 
The Ministry must realize that there is inordinate delay in m any projects as in 
Brasilia pr oject, second diplomatic encla ve project etc. Even if the Committee 
acknowledge the fact  that t he Ministry was required to deal with sev eral external 
factors while handling cons truction/acquisition projects abroad over which the 
Ministry has no control, they are of the view that the Second Diplomatic  Enclav e 
project within India, the Ministry failed here also as the project could not materializ e 
over the years. The Committee,  therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make 
fresh endeavour and prepare a time schedul e for each project to ensure their 
completion without any further delay. 
(Para No. 118) 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 The time schedule for completion of various construction/re-development 
projects or acquis ition of properties has been reviewed and revised after accounting 
for various factors which could affect the pr ogress of these projects. The projects are 
being taken up in a manner to ensure timely  completion and the progress on projects 
in India is being monitored through regular site meetings, constant liaison with other  
Government Departments and local bodies and processing of related issues in the 
Ministry in a time bound manner. Similarly,  our missions monitor and report regularly  
on various construction projects and acquisition proposals abroad. 
 
 2. Ministry of External Affairs has la id importance to the establis hment of a 
Second Diplomatic Enclave so as to allot suitable land to  those Diplomatic  Missions 
which desire to build their Chancery/Embassy Residence here.  The matter is being 
pursued actively by the Ministry.  
 
3. The Ministry had conveyed its agreem ent for land south of Vasant Viha r 
[Vasant Kunj, Phase-II] in February 1991 for the project but the same could no t 
materialise.   
 
4. Again, in March 1992,  the Ministry of Urban Development and Pov erty 
Alleviation proposed to accommodate the sec ond diplomatic enclav e in a new area 
being developed at Papan Kalan [Dwarka].  T he proposal was not found suitable for 
a number of reasons e.g. pr oximity to the airport, distance from the existing 
diplomatic enclave and security considerati ons.  In September 2000, the Ministry of 
Urban Development  offered some land in Rangpuri but it was also not found 
acceptable after a visit to the site.  The a pproach road to it from  the Mahipalpur side 
was far too congested and the site itself was not free from encumbrances.  With 
further requests from diplomatic  Missions , the requir ement of land swe lled to 75 
acres. 
 
5. The plot of land for the Second Di plomatic Enc lave had to be s elected 
carefully keeping in view its access, availabi lity of utility services and security as also  
acceptability for foreign missions who will eventually have to pay the assessed value 
of the land for acquisition.  This matter had been raised by this Ministry at the level of 
Committee of Secretaries and a request for allotment of suitable land for this purpose 
had been made at the lev el of Minister for Ex ternal Affairs to the Minister f or Urban 
Development. 
 
6. Redevelopment plan of the area su rrounded by Netaji Nagar, R.K. Puram,  
Moti Bagh, Shanti Pat h and Safdarjung Rail way Station was considered for Second 
Diplomatic Enclave and, vide  its communication (No.  L-II-9(76)/04/105 dated 
27.4.04),  the Ministry of Urban Developm ent and Pov erty Alleviation informed this  
Ministry that the proposal for “establishmen t of a Second Diplomatic Enclave at the 
area surrounded by  Netaji Nagar, Moti  B agh, R.K. Puram, Shanti Path and 
Safdarjung Railway Stat ion has been under active  consi deration of this  office in 
 
 

consultation with CPWD” and that this propos al would require “change of land use 
from Residential and Partly Govt. Offices to Partly Diplomatic Enclave and Partly  
Residential which is under process and furt her development in this regard shall be 
intimated in due course of time.”  
7. Foreign Secretary then wrote to Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and 
Poverty Alleviation in August 2004 and requested that the 34 years old pending 
matter may be finalised early.   
8. In this connection it may be mentioned  that the decision on the allotment of  
land for the Second Diplomatic  Enclave r ests entirely with the Ministry of Urban 
Development and Pov erty Allev iation, as it is the sole decision m aking authority in 
this regard.  The Ministry of External Affairs, despite its best intentions of meeting the 
requirements of the diplomatic missions in New Delhi can only recommend allotment 
of land to the missions, after the land has  been grant ed for the purpose by  the land 
owning agency.  
9. The matter was then taken up at the le vel of the Ministers with the External 
Affairs Minister writing to his  c ounterpart in the Ministry of Urban Development 
stressing the urgency to identify land for the Second Diplomatic Enclave.  Minister for 
Parliamentary Affairs & Ur ban Development had replied that he was hav ing the 
matter looked into. 
 
10. Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development  subseque ntly indic ated that the 
option of the Second Diplomatic Enclave at Sarojini Nagar would be difficult in view of 
the lack of space as well as the requirement to change the land use from “residential 
and partly government offices to partly diplomatic enclave and partly residential”.  He 
suggested that they would be willing to give up to one hundred acres in Dwarka.  
 
11. Subsequently, in June 2005, the then Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and 
Urban Dev elopment wrote to t he then External Affairs Mini ster that, “it would be 
difficult to locate a lar ge chunk of area at a Central location for  developm ent of a 
Second Diplomatic Enclave.  The area near Netaji Nagar and Moti Bagh has been 
proposed for development of higher categories of accommodation for senior officers, 
judges and Minister s in view of acute shortage of accomm odation in higher  
categories at present.  Dwarka, which is  a new planned sub-c ity, seems to be an 
ideal loc ation for dev elopment of a Second Diplomatic Enclav e.  The poss ibility of 
locating suitable area in Dwarka can be c onsidered by DDA jointl y with Ministry o f 
External Affairs”. 
 
12. Following the Hon’ble Minister’s suggestion, discussions are going on with the 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) for development of a Second Diplomatic Enclave 
in Dwarka.  The DDA has informed that Sectors 27, 28 and 29 are being developed 
for the proposed Second Diplomatic Enclave.  According to DDA, the development of 
the site would take approxim ately one year.  Chief of Protocol has again sent a 
reminder to Vice Chairman DDA in this regard impressing upon him the urgency o f 
the matter and suggesting organization of a site visit by the Heads of Foreign 
Missions in Delhi.                       
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006)
 
 

 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSRVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation No. 29  
 
 The Ministry informed that the draft advocacy paper to present India’s cas e 
with regar d to introducing Hindi in Unit ed Nations Organisation (UNO) has been 
prepared.  The paper was disc ussed in the follow up committee on World Hindi 
Conference held on 8 th June 2005, under  the Chair manship of Minister of State for 
External Af fairs.  The view s of non-official members were  invited and are awaited.   
They are r eminded t o expedite their views.   The Committee are of the view that  
efforts to make Hindi an official language of t he UN should be ex pedited and 
comprehensive efforts be made t o convince the General Assemb ly of UN to amend 
Rule 51 of its Rules and Procedure. 
(Para No. 95) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry has been engaged in addressi ng the issue of introducing Hindi in 
the UN.  MOS (AS) had on 1 st June 2006, chaired a meeting on the World Hind i 
Conference, which inter alia also discussed introducing Hindi in the United Nations.   
 
2. The Permanent Mission of India in Ne w York has be en asked t o provide its 
latest assessment especially regarding the financial implic ations as well as the 
procedures which will require to be fulfilled for the possibl e recognition of Hindi as  
one of the official languages of the UN. 
 
3. The asses sment has been rec eived.  Th e financ ial implic ations at a v ery 
minimum would entail a c ost of US$ 14.21 m illion per year.  This is based on the 
decision of the United Nati ons General Assembly in 1973 to include Arabic as a 
working and official language of Gene ral Assembly and adding an inflation 
component of 2-3% per annum on a compounded basis.  The ac tual cost is likely to 
be considerably higher since infrastructural changes would also n eed to be made in 
all conference halls to provide for an additional interpreter’s booth. 
 
4. Further, while the question of fi nancial implications is an important one, it is 
not the only factor in decision making.  The procedure for getting any language 
recognised as an official language of th e UN involves obtaining  approval of the 
General Assembly to amend Rule 51 (specif ying the official and working languages) 
of the Rules of Procedure.  Such a proposal has to be approved by a majority in the 
General Assembly (96 members).  In 197 3, when the General Assembly approved 
the inclus ion of Arabic among the offici al and working languag es of the General 
 
 

Assembly, it did s o recognising that Arabic was the language of  19 members of the 
United Nations.  It was also the worki ng language of specialised  agencies such a s 
UNESCO, FAO, WHO and the ILO.  It was the o fficial and working language of the 
OAU. 
 
5. Notwithstanding the f act that Hindi is spok en in many  countries of the world, 
recognition of it as an offi cial language of other countries as well as official language 
in some of the specialised agencies and re gional/sub-regional groupings is a factor 
which is to be considered for recognition in the UN.  No special weightage is given by 
the UN for population, size of the country or its Gross Domestic Product(the basic  
principle of the UN is the sovereign equality of all nations, whether big or small). Due 
to the above-mentioned reasons, Japan and Germany who are t he second and third 
largest contributors of the regular budget  of the UN and who also hav e a strong 
policy and preference for using their own language have not pressed for inclusion of  
their respective languages for inclusion as official language of the UN. 
 
6. All the above factors ar e being taken into account before deciding on how to 
proceed further on the subject. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 

CHAPTER- IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
  
Recommendation No. 20 
 
 The Committee note that 21 Passport Offices are working from rented 
premises and at present huge pa rt of allocated Budget under this Head is being paid 
for their rentals.  The Commi ttee has been expressing their concern continously over 
the delay in acquis ition/construction of own premises for Passport Offices since long 
but no significant developm ent has been made in this  regard. The Committee,  
therefore, again recommend that all construction projects relating to Passport Offices 
should be taken up on priority basis and ef forts should be made vigorously  for the 
early completion of these proj ects so that the rental li abilities can be reduc ed to the 
barest minimum. The Committee also recommend that opening of Passport Offices in 
states of Uttranchal, Chattisgarh and Himac hal Pradesh should be carried out at the 
earliest. 
(Para No. 73) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As directed by the Committee, efforts are continually being made to hasten the 
construction projects in collabor ation with the concerned author ities.  Action  is at  
hand to open new Passport Offi ces at Dehradun (Uttranchal), Raipur (Chattisgarh) 
and Shimla (Himachal Pradesh) as early as possible. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 21  
 
 The Committee note that the Staff Inspec tion Unit of the Ministry of Financ e 
has recommended 293 additional  posts in various categories  and a pr oposal to 
create these additional posts has been s ubmitted for approval of the Competent 
Authorities on 22 nd December 2005. The Committee al so note that Staff Selection 
Commission has nominated 55 Grade C posts of LDC and 4 Grade C posts of Jr. 
Hindi Translator for CPO. Out of that, 15 LDCs and 3 Jr Hindi Translators have joined 
so far. The Committee hope that after crea tion of 293 posts and nomination of 59 
posts by SSC for filling the  v acant pos ts, shortage of staff problem would  b e 
eliminated to a large extent. The Com mittee recommend that all the  necessar y 
formalities of these posts should be complet ed at the earliest in order to enable t he 
opening of new offices as well as to avoid the out-sourcing. 
(Para No. 74) 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The approval for the augment ation of posts is still awaited from the Finance 
Ministry. The appointment of staff will be made after obtaining the requisite approval. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
Recommendation No. 26  
 
The Minist ry informed that the new cult ural centres at Be ijing, Tehran and 
Kathmandu will be opened subjec t to the allocation of r equisite additional posts and 
Budgetary resources.  The statutory body of the Coun cil has approved the budget  
allocation and posts for the centres in Tehran and Kathmandu.  Creation of these 
centres is under consideration and it shall be the Counc il’s endeavour to 
operationalise these centres in 2006-07.  T he proposal for an Indian Cultural Centre 
at Beijing is being processed through diplomatic channels.  The Committee hope that 
exercises in this regard will be completed as early as possible and these cent res will 
be in place by the end of Financ ial Year 20 06-07.  The Committee also hope that a 
suitable property for Cultural Centre in Washington will also be located in the Current 
Financial Year. 
(Para No. 86) 
Reply of the Government 
 
The position regarding opening of Indian Cu ltural Centres in Beijing, Tehran,  
Kathmandu and Washington is as follows: 
 
Beijing 
Since the Chinese Government is not prepared to give diplomatic status to the 
proposed Cultural Centre in  Beijing, the matter is being processed through the 
diplomatic channels.  The Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs and the Embassy of India in 
Beijing are in correspondenc e with the Chinese Government and the Chinese 
Embassy in New Delhi to resolve the issue so  that the Indian Cu ltural Centre at  
Beijing may be opened in the near future. 
 
Tehran 
According to the Iranian laws, functioni ng of independent Cultural Centres of  
foreign countries is not permitted.  Ther efore, it has been proposed to the Embassy 
of India, Tehran to commence with certain basic  activities of the Cultural Cen tre as a 
part of the Embassy during the current financial year. 
 
Kathmandu 
The Indian Mission in Kathmandu has informed the Council that  the 
construction of Cultural Centre as part of Chancery project is expected to begin in the 
third quarter of the current financial year and the Mission has requested that the PI C 
Wing of the Mission be allowed to function as ‘deemed’ Centre until the necessary  
 
 

formalities to open the Cultural Centre in Kathmandu are completed.  The proposal is 
under consideration of ICCR. 
 
Washington 
A suitable property for the Cu ltural Centre in Washingt on has been identified. 
The proper ty identified needs s ome modifica tions.  The matter is, therefore, under 
active consideration with the Establishmen t Divis ion of the Ministry of External 
Affairs. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 35  
 
The Ministry informed that a substantia l hike in budgetary allocation under the 
Head Capital Outlay on Public Works & Housing has  been sought in BE 2006-07 
based on realistic as sessment of progress in various construction projects and 
acquisition proposals.  As per the ongoing progre ss of pre-construction activities, a 
number of construction proj ects are expect ed to reac h ground-breaking stage in the 
next financ ial year.  Prominent among thes e construction projects are Jawaharla l 
Nehru Bhawan, Indian Embass y Complex in  Kathmandu, Mus cat, Brasilia, Abuja, 
Warsaw, Beijing, Kabul and residential proj ect in Islamabad.  In addition, projects for 
redevelopment of property in Singapor e and proposal fo r construction of four  
apartments in London may also reach cons truction stage in the next financ ial year.  
Additional, sufficient  budgetary  provision has  been sought to meet anticipated 
expenditure on acquisi tion proposals, which are likel y to be finaliz ed in the next  
financial year and for expend iture on repair  and maint enance of government-owned 
properties.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that sufficient budgetary provision 
should be made to meet antic ipated expenditure on acquisi tion/construction of these 
projects and antic ipation must  be fulfilled. The Ministry should ensue that each 
project undertaken by the Ministry is completed in a time bound manner. 
(Para No. 117) 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry will continue to ask for suffi cient funds to meet the requirement of 
construction projects and acqu isition of  p roperties.  These requirements will b e 
formulated keeping in mind the need to en sure that budgetary constraints do not 
hamper progress in relation to construction projects and acquisition proposals. 
 
(No.AA/125/Parl/49/2006 dated August 23, 2006) 
 
 

 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 NIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                          Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                    Chairman, 
15th  December, 2006/ 24 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)      Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 
 

Appendix - I 
 
Ministry of External Affairs 
(Projects Division) 
… 
 
Construction Projects Abroad 
 
Note:  A Standard Project Construction Schedule is attached explaining the different phases of the project for 
            clarifying the completion schedules of the various projects. 
 
No Station Project Plot Physical Progress Financial 
Progress 
Budgetar
y 
Provision 
Completion 
schedule  
1. Kabul, 
Afghanist
an 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and 
Residences 
Plot 
measuring 
19,184 
sqm 
(approx 5 
acres). 
In 1987 
development of the 
project was 
entrusted to CPWD. 
However, project 
could not be 
implemented due to 
situation in 
Afghanistan. In 
2002 it was decided 
to revive the 
project.   CNE 
approved the 
proposal on 
9.9.2005 for an 
amount of Rs.60.03 
crores.  
CNE has 
approved an 
amount of Rs. 
60.03 crores for 
the project. 
Administrative 
approval of 
EAM and 
Finance 
Minister has 
been obtained. 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 15 
crores has 
been 
made in 
BE 2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
December 
2008. 
2. Kath-
mandu, 
Nepal 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and 
Residences 
The 
present 
Indian 
Embassy 
complex 
extends 
over 45.79 
acres.  
It is proposed to 
demolish and 
reconstruct the 
Chancery, 
residential buildings 
and other structures 
on the Indian 
Embassy campus, 
which are presently 
in a dilapidated 
condition.  Only the 
HC’s residence will 
be retained.  
 
Officials living in 
rented houses 
outside the campus 
will be 
accommodated 
within the new 
complex.  
 
Financial 
approval of 
Cabinet 
obtained for Rs 
125.36 crores. 
 
Provision 
of Rs. 10 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
December 
2009. 

M/s. Akshaya Jain 
and Raka 
Chakravorty are the  
architects for the 
project selected 
through 
competition. 
 
 
3. Beijing, 
China 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and 
Residences 
Plot 
measuring 
13,500 
sqm 
acquired 
in 1989. 
M/s Raj Rewal 
Associates has 
been  appointed as 
architect-consultant 
selected through 
competition. 
 
 Local body 
approvals are being 
processed in 
Beijing. 
Financial 
approval of 
CNE was 
obtained for an 
expenditure of 
Rs. 49.59 
crores on the 
project. 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 8 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-07. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
June 2008. 
4. Muscat, 
Oman 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and Embassy 
Residence 
12,600 
sqm plot 
acquired 
from the 
Governme
nt of 
Oman on 
reciprocal 
basis in 
December 
1991 on 
99 year 
lease. 
M/s Babbar & 
Babbar is the  
Architect-
Consultants for the 
project selected 
through 
competition.  
 
After CNE’s 
approval of the 
revised estimates, 
the project was 
awarded for 
implementation in 
June 2006. 
CNE approved 
the project for 
Rs.XXXX 
crores.   
A 
provision 
of Rs.8 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007.   
It is in the 
Phase V of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The 
construction 
is in progress 
and the 
expected date 
of completion 
is July 2007. 
 
5. Singa-
pore 
Redevelopme
nt of Embassy 
Residence 
and 
Construction 
of two 
residences. 
2-storey 
Heritage 
building 
on 3.3 
acres land 
purchased 
in 1948. 
M/s. Shing Design 
Atelier, Singapore is 
the architect for the 
project selected 
through 
competition.   
 
Project 
approved at a 
cost of 
Rs.25.29 
crores. 
 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 6 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
September 
2007. 
6. Abuja, 
Nigeria 
 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and Embassy 
Residence. 
GOI owns 
two plots 
of land 
measurin
g 
The capital of 
Nigeria was shifted 
from Lagos to Abuja 
in December, 1991. 
It has been 
decided to split 
the project into 
2 
phases - first 
Provision 
of Rs.5 
crores 
ke
pt in BE 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 

4,144 sq. 
meters 
and 
13,248 sq. 
meters.  
All diplomatic 
missions are 
accordingly 
required to function 
from the new 
capital.   
 
M/s. C.P. Kukreja 
Associates are the 
architects for the 
project selected 
through 
competition.   
the Chancery 
building and 
then the 
Embassy 
Residence on 
the smaller plot. 
Total cost for 
the 1
st phase of 
the project, 
estimated at Rs 
13.87 crores, 
has been 
approved.  
 
2006-
2007. 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
September 
2007. 
 
 
7. Warsaw, 
Poland 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and 
Residences. 
Plot of 
9,657 sqm 
was 
purchased 
in 1988 at 
a cost of 
Rs.1.21 
crores.   
M/s Sachdeva 
Eggleston are the 
architects for the 
project selected 
through 
competition.  
 
 
Project 
approved by 
CNE at a cost 
of Euro 5.64 
million or Rs. 
33.78 crores..  
 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 5 
crores has 
been kept 
in the BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
December 
2008. 
8. London Construction 
of 6 
residences in 
8 South 
Audley Street 
Property 
acquired 
in 1949 on 
99 year 
lease. 
The property is 
being redeveloped 
by constructing an 
Annexe with 6 
apartments for HCI 
officials.  
 
M/s Axis Mason are 
the architects for 
the project selected 
through 
competition.  
Project has 
been approved 
for Pounds 3.51 
million (Rs 30 
crores). 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 5 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
May 2008. 
9. Tash-
kent, 
Uzbekis-
tan 
Construction 
of Chancery, 
Embassy 
Residence 
and staff 
residences 
Plot of 
10,000 
sqm 
acquired 
in 1989 
under an 
agreemen
t with 
USSR. 
Matter got 
linked to 
reciprocal 
allotment. 
In 1998 
Mr. Romi Khosla 
Design Studios (M/s 
Grup India) 
selected as 
architects through 
competition. 
 
.  
 
CNE has 
approved the 
project for 
Rs.31 crores. 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 1.5 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
March 2009. 
 
 

Uzbekista
n was 
allotted 
10,000 
sqm in 
New Delhi 
on 
reciprocal 
basis. 
Physical 
possessio
n of plot 
measuring 
93.5 m x 
107 m 
taken in 
April 
2004. 
10 Brasilia, 
Brazil 
Chancery, 
Embassy 
Residence 
and 
Officers 
Residences 
A plot of 
25,000 
sqm was 
gifted by 
the 
Govern-
ment of 
Brazil.  
M/s. Paulo 
Henrique Paranhos 
were selected as 
architects through 
competition. 
 
The total 
estimated cost 
of the project is 
Rs 37.5 
crores).  
 
Provision 
of Rs.1 
crore has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase III of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
August 2009. 
 
 
11 Bang-
kok, 
Thailand 
Construction 
of Embassy 
Residence 
and Cultural 
Centre. 
Plot 
measuring  
4,524 sqm 
at Soi 25, 
Sukhumvit
, was 
purchased 
by GOI in 
1974 at a 
cost of 
Baht 5.08 
million 
(then eqvt 
to Rs. 
25.4 
lakhs) for 
constructi
on of 
Embassy 
Residence
In 2005, it was 
decided to 
construct Embassy 
Residence and 
Cultural Centre. 
 
M/s. SJA of 
Bangkok has been 
selected as 
architects through 
competition and 
the Ministry is in 
the process of 
finalizing the 
consultancy 
agreement. 
 
The consultant 
will draw up the  
estimates . 
 It is in the 
Phase II of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
December 
2009. 
 
 
12 Islama- Construction A plot of M/s Sachdev Financial A It is in the 

bad, 
Pakistan 
of 
Residences. 
10.75 
acres was 
purchased 
in 1962 
and 
additional 
area of 
2.57 acres 
was 
acquired 
in 2003 
when the 
plot was 
amalgama
ted. We 
have 
already 
constructe
d our 
Chancery 
on a 
portion of 
the plot 
measuring 
3.5 acres. 
Eggleston were 
appointed as 
consultants. 
 
  
 
 
approval from 
CNE was 
obtained in May 
1993 for Rs. 21 
crores. 
However, 
project could 
not take off due 
to political 
reasons. It was 
revived in 
August 2003. 
Consultant was 
asked to draw 
up revised 
design and cost 
estimates. 
Preliminary 
estimates 
prepared by the 
consultant have 
been vetted 
and approved 
by IFD. 
Estimated cost 
of boundary 
wall of Rs.1.81 
crore has been 
approved by 
IFD. 
provision 
of Rs. 1 
crore has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-07.   
Phase III of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
January 2010.
 
.  
13 Kyiv, 
Ukraine 
Demolition 
and 
reconstruction 
of residences.  
Built up 
property 
on a plot 
of 5255 
sqm 
purchased 
for 
Chancery 
in 1995 at 
USD 
800,000. 
It was decided to 
build staff flats after 
demolition of the 
existing structure. 
 
M/s Arcom were 
selected  as 
consultants through 
competition. 
 
The lease of the 
land has become 
an issue which is in 
the process of 
being resolved by 
engaging a 
government 
agency.                      
 
 
 
 The project 
schedule will 
be clear soon 
after the issue 
of lease is 
resolved.  
14 
 
Bahrain Construction 
of Chancery, 
Embassy 
Residence 
Plot 
measuring 
7,599 sqm 
at No. 9 
Five architectural 
companies have 
been short-listed for 
design competition. 
Plot has been 
purchased at a 
cost of Rs. 
4,77,59,930. 
 It is in the 
Phase I of the 
attached 
Standard 

and staff 
residences. 
 
Seef 
District 
purchased 
in 
February 
2005.  
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
May 2010 
 
 
15 Dar-Es-
Salaam, 
Tanzania 
Construction 
of Chancery 
Plot of 
2,120 sqm 
acquired 
in 1999 on 
reciprocal 
basis. 
M/s Covell Mathews 
Partnership Ltd, 
were selected as 
consultants through 
competition..  
 
 The 
preliminary 
estimates have 
since been 
received from 
the Mission and 
are under 
examination. 
 It is in the 
Phase I of the 
attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
May 2010 
 
16 Dhaka, 
Banglade
sh 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and 
Residences. 
Two plots 
measuring 
12 bighas 
and 2.5 
bighas 
were 
acquired 
in 1993 
and 2000. 
On the basis of a 
design competition, 
M/s Bose Brothers 
were selected as 
architect/ consultant 
for the project. 
 
 
The concept is 
being finalized 
for subsequent 
preparation of 
cost estimates.  
 It is in the 
Phase II of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
May 2010 
 
 
 
17 Doha, 
Qatar 
Construction 
of Chancery 
and Embassy 
Residence  
Original 
plot 
allotted in 
1977 
measuring 
5,005 
sqm. This 
was taken 
back and 
new plot 
has been 
allotted 
recently. 
 
The site 
M/s Rajendra 
Kumar & 
Associates were 
appointed 
consultant through 
competition. 
 
 
  It is in the 
Phase II of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
March 2010 
 
 
  

infrastruct
ure t is 
expected 
to be 
ready by 
end-
November 
2006.  
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Geneva, 
Switzerla
nd 
Renovation of 
PR’s 
Residence 
Purchase
d in 1989 
for Swiss 
Frank 6.3 
million. 
Mr. Gerard Kessler 
was appointed 
consultant through 
competition.  
 
The renovation 
work was awarded 
in June 2005.  
 
The project 
cost is SF 2.72 
million (Rs. 
9.74 crores) .  
 
A 
provision 
of Rs. 5 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
2007. 
It is in the 
Phase V of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
October 2006.
 
 
 
 
19 Moscow, 
Russia 
Construction 
of 93 
Residences 
and School 
Plot 
measuring 
57,870 
sqm 
allotted to 
the 
Governme
nt of India 
in Moscow 
as per 
Inter-
Governme
ntal 
Agreemen
t of  1989 
between 
India and 
then 
USSR.  
M/s. Consulting 
Engineering 
Services were 
appointed 
consultants through 
competition . 
 
However, no 
progress could be 
made as  the 
Russian authorities 
took back the 
allotted plot of land 
and proposed an 
alternative plot of 
land. However, they 
have not been able 
to identify a plot of 
land to our 
satisfaction so far.  
 
The last 
discussions on this 
issue took place in 
Moscow in June 
2006 and the matter 
is being pursued. 
 
  Soon after the 
plot is 
allotted, the 
project will 
take about 46 
months for 
completion 
thereafter.  
20 Parama- Construction 10,000 It was decided in The selected  It is in the 

ribo, 
Surinam 
of Indian 
Cultural 
Centre.  
sqm gifted 
by Govt. 
of 
Surinam 
in 1998.  
2004 to take up this 
project.  
 
The architects have 
been short-listed. 
Their design 
proposals are under 
evaluation.  
    
architect will 
prepare 
estimates. 
Phase I of the 
attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
March 2010. 
 
 
21 Port 
Louis, 
Mauritius 
Construction 
of Chancery 
complex. 
Initial plot 
in Bell 
Village 
offered in 
2000 by 
the 
Mauritian 
governme
nt free of 
cost on 99 
year lease 
was 
withdrawn
. A new 
plot 
measuring 
9,497 sqm 
in Ebene 
Triangle, 
Cyber city 
offered on 
same 
terms has 
been 
accepted 
in 
December 
2004. 
The architects have 
been short-listed. 
Their design 
proposals are 
awaited by 
September 2006. 
 
 
 
 
The selected 
architect will 
prepare 
estimates. 
 It is in the 
Phase I of the 
attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
May 2010. 
 
 

22 Port of 
Spain, 
Trinidad 
& Tobago 
Construction 
of Cultural 
Centre 
5 acres 
donated 
free of 
cost by 
local govt. 
in 1994 on 
99 year 
lease. 
M/s Vikab 
Engineering 
Consultants, were 
appointed 
consultants through 
competition. 
 
Though estimates 
submitted were for 
Rs. 15.51 crores, 
the CNE approved 
the proposal for a 
cost not exceeding 
Rs 12 crores. 
 
The project could 
not progress due to 
some internal 
problems within the 
appointed 
consultancy firm. 
These have been 
resolved now. 
 
The Consultant has 
given two options, 
the first to reduce 
the scope of work to 
limit the expenditure 
to Rs 12 crores or 
to enhance the 
budget to Rs 21 
crores. This is 
under examination. 
by him had to be 
cancelled as 
Mission had started 
the process without 
prior approval of 
Ministry). 
Consultant trying to 
resolve matter 
failing which he 
may engage new 
architect. 
 
CNE approved 
the project in 
May 2003 at a 
cost not 
exceeding Rs. 
12 crore.   
 It is in the 
Phase IV of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 
 
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
December 
2008. 
23 Tokyo, 
Japan 
 
 
Redevelopme
nt of 5 GOI 
owned 
properties in 
Tokyo, 
including 
Chancer
y, 
 M/s Plants 
Associates were 
appointed 
consultants through 
competition in 2005.
The Consultant has 
sent 
preliminary 
 A 
provision 
of Rs.1.5 
crores has 
been kept 
in BE 
2006-
It is in the 
Phase III of 
the attached 
Standard 
Project 
Construction 
Schedule. 

Embassy 
Residence 
and officers 
residences of 
1950 vintage. 
estimates with 
different options. A 
final decision on the 
options will be 
taken during the 
visit of a high-level 
team of MEA and 
MOF in the coming 
weeks. 
 
2007.  
The expected 
date of 
completion is 
April 2009. 
 
 

Appendix-II 
 
Standard Project Construction Schedule 
 
 
Description of 
Activities 
First Year Second Year Third Year Fourth Year 
 First 
quarter 
Second 
quarter 
Third 
quarter 
Fourth 
quarter 
First 
quarter 
Second 
quarter 
Third 
quarter 
Fourth 
quarter 
First 
quarter 
Second 
quarter 
Third 
quarter 
Fourth 
quarter 
First 
quarter 
Second 
quarter 
Third 
quarter 
Fourth 
quarter 
Phase-I 
Selection of the 
consultants by 
Design 
competition (Six 
months.)  
                
Phase-II 
Finalisation   of 
consultancy 
agreement, 
preparation of 
preliminary 
design and cost 
estimate(4 
months)    
                
Phase-III 
Financial 
approval of the 
competent 
authority(6-9 
months) 
                
Phase-IV 
Local body 
approval, pre-
qualification of 
contractors, 
preparation of 
tender 
document/s, 
calling of 
tender/s and 
award of work 
(6-9 months) 
                
Phase-V 
Construction 
time (12-36 
months) 
                

    
Appendix - III 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF WORLD AFFAIRS 
SAPRU HOUSE, NEW DELHI 
*** 
 
LIST OF EVENTS HELD AT ICWA DURING THE PERIOD 1ST MAY– 8th AUGUST, 2006 
 
May 2006 
1. 1st May Reception to  Commemorate the 51 st Anniversary of the Inauguration of 
Sapru House 
 
2. 9th May Interactive  Session  between  Polish  Foreign  Office  Delegation  and Indian 
Council of World Affairs 
 
3. 17th May Talk  by  H. E. Mr. Mohamed Nasheed, Minister  of  Information  of   the
Republic of Maldives on “Maldives: A Nation in Transition” 
 
4. 20th May Foreign Affairs Discussion Group Meeting on “Nepal: The Next Steps”  
Lead Speaker: Maj. Gen. Ashok Mehta (Retd.) 
 
5. 23rd May Foreign Secretary’s Meeting with French Diplomats 
6. 23rd May Talk  by  H.E. MR.  ALCIDES RONDON,   Vice   Minister   for   Foreign 
Affairs of Venezuela  on “Recent Developments  in Latin America and their 
Implications for Regional and Global Politics” 
 
7. 24th May The  Fourth  “Africa Day”  Lecture:  “India  and  Africa  –  Yesterday  and 
Tomorrow”  by   SHRI MANI SHANKAR AIYAR,  Hon’ble  Minister  of 
Youth Affairs & Sports and Panchayati Raj 
 
 
June 2006 
8. 3rd June Foreign  Affairs  Discussion  Group  Meeting  on “Recent  Developments in  
India–Pakistan   Relations”;   Lead  Speaker:  Shri  Siddhartha  Varadrajan, 
Deputy Editor, The Hindu 
 
9. 3rd June 
 
 
 
 
Special  screening  of  the  documentary  film,  “The  Unfinished Revolution” 
Directed   by  Suhas  Borker,  Executive  Director,  Citizens  First  Television 
News. [A documentary film on the Non-Aligned  Movement which  traces  the
evolution of NAM from Belgrade (1961 ) to Durban (1998) and examines the 
validity and relevance of the movement for the future.] 
 
10. 12th June Foreign   Affairs   Discussion   Group   Meeting   on   “Emerging   Strategic 
Architecture  in  South-East  Asia”;  Lead Speaker: Shri A.N. Ram, Former 
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs 
 
11. 16th June ‘SOWETO DAY’ Screening of ‘SARAFINA-THE SOUND  OF FREEDOM’
to commemorate the 30th Anniversary of the Students’ Uprising in South Africa 

 2
 
 
12. 17th June  Foreign Affairs Discussion Group on: “Recent Developments Pertaining to 
Iran: Regional and  Global Implications”   Lead Speaker: Shri M. Hamid 
Ansari, former Indian Ambassador to the UAE, Afghanistan, Iran  and Saudi 
Arabia, and Permanent Representative to the United Nations 
 
13. 23rd June Valedictory  Function   for  The  Indian  Foreign  Service  2004 Batch and 
Award of the B.K. Sanyal Memorial Medals 
 
14. 27th June Foreign Affairs Discussion Group on “Africa in the Post Cold War World: 
The Challenge of Nation Building, Peace & Development”; Lead Speaker: 
Dr. Greg Mills, Director, The Brenthurst Foundation, Johannesburg 
 
 
July 2006 
 
15. 1st July “Afghanistan:  Foreign Policy, Regional Relations & Future Perspectives”  
Lecture   by   H.E.  Dr.  Rangin  Dadfar  Spanta,   Foreign    Minister    of 
Afghanistan  
 
16. 27th July The 2nd Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru Memorial Lecture  by  Shri M.J. Akbar,  
Editor-in-Chief, THE ASIAN AGE on “The Clash of Civilisations’ Revisited: 
Implications  of  the  Global  War  on  Terror  and  the  Demonisation  of  the 
Other” 
 
  [Talk by the Iranian Foreign Minister scheduled for 20th July was cancelled  
on the previous day.] 
 
August 2006 
 
17.      8th August     (i) “Tajikistan and the Vision of Central Asia” 
.  
 
  
                Address by H.E.Mr. Emomali Sharifovich Rahmonov 
              President of the Republic of Tajikistan 
 
        (ii) International Seminar on “India and Tajikistan in International 
              International Affairs” including presentations by Minister of  
             Energy and Deputy Foreign Minister of the Republic of Tajikistan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
…3 
 

 
 
3
 
 
OCCASIONAL PAPERS/  MONOGRAPHS COMMISSIONED 
 
(i) IT and IT-related servic es: Building partnerships in Asia to expand and upgrade 
domestic capacities; 
[Note:  Report being prepared in association with the Department of Information  
Technology, Government of Indiato be released in early September, 
2006.] 
 
(ii) Implications of the Globalisation of  the Indian Gas Economy for the Power, 
Industry and Transport Sectors and for Domestic Usage. 
[Note:  A Joint ICWA-FICCI Projectto be released in late September, 2006.] 

Appendix-IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2006  
  
The Committee sat from 1515 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
  
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
3. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
4. Shri Vanlalzawma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K. 
6. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
7. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
8. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
9. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
  
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Balwani - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
--2-- 
 
 

-2- 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 13 th  Report on 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 11 th Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2006-2007. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their 
suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report.   
 
5. The committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report and present the same to 
Parliament.  
 
6. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix -V 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE ELEVENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations                                        36 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 36 
    Total-31 
86.12% 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. - 29 
Total-01 
2.77% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 20, 21, 26 and 35. 
Total-04 
11.11% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
 
T o t a l                N I L  
P e r c e n t a g e               N I L  
 
 
 

 
 
Appendix-VI 
 
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Ministry Observations/Recommendations 
1. 7 External Affairs The Committee note that the activities of the 
Ministry, p articularly, th e “T echnical and 
Economic Cooperation” with other countries is 
likely to be a ffected due t o shortfall of Rs. 65 4 
crore allo cation.  The Committee, therefo re, 
recommend that the Ministry should ensure that 
ceiling of BE 2006-2007 is revised adequately at 
RE 200 6-2007 stage so t hat the tech nical an d 
economic cooperation with other countries is not 
affected adversely. 
  
 
2. 10 External Affairs The Committee welcome  the creatio n of the  
Public Diplomacy Division of MEA headed by an 
Additional S ecretary whose m andate includes 
inter-alia outreach activities insid e and  outsid e 
India, audio visual and print publicity, website, 
and do cumentation. The Committee n ote that 
the Public Diplomacy Divi sion, aimi ng to cover 
every region of the country, has begun to reach 
out to States within India b eginning with Punjab 
and Orissa. The Committee have been informed 
that conta cts with thin k t anks, me dia persons, 
and personalities in the o pinion/ decision maker 
category h ave also be en a ctivated.  The  
Committee hope that the Public Diplomacy 
Division will soon extend its outre ach activities 
outside India  and al so h elp gen erate public 
interest and  unde rstanding of Indian  Foreig n 
Policy. The  Committee recom mend t hat inp uts 
obtained fro m the activities of the Public 
Diplomacy Division should invariably b e take n 
into consideration in the Foreign Policy.  
 
3. 13 External Affairs The Committee a re concerned ove r t he time 
being taken by the Ministry in completi on of all 
their con struction p rojects si nce most of the  
projects a re l agging b ehind the tim e schedule.  
The Committee would like to be app rised of the 
efforts bein g made to ha sten the co nstruction 
projects.  Th e Com mittee further recommend 
that new P assport Offices at Dehradun, Raipur 
and Shiml a must b e op ened by the  end of 
financial year 2006-2007. 
 
  
 

  
 
4. 16 External Affairs The Committee do not approve of the reply 
furnished by the Ministry and hope that the 
requisite approval for the augmentation of post 
will be obtained at the earliest considering the 
fact that staff requirement is based on Staff 
Inspection Unit (SIU) study and the fact that 
passport officers bring considerable revenue to 
the Government.  The Committee recommend 
that grievances of officers/staff of Passport 
Offices must be heard with due attention and 
the Committee should be apprised of the steps 
taken by CPV Division/Ministry to redress their 
grievances. 
 
5. 19 External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee find that no significant progress 
has been made so far with regard to the 
opening of Indian Cultural Centres in Beijing, 
Tehran, Kathmandu and Washington.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate, considering the 
potential role of cultural diplomacy and India’s 
incredible and diverse cultural heritage, that 
Ministry should make concerted efforts to open 
cultural centers at Beijing, Tehran, Kathmandu 
and Washington by the end of current financial 
year.   
 
6. 22 External Affairs The Committee feel that pace of progress of 
construction projects and acquisition proposals 
of the Ministry is far from commensurate with 
the required speed warranted by the stipulated 
time-schedule for completion of the projects.  
The Committee desire that they may be 
apprised regularly about the steps being taken 
to complete the construction/acquisition projects 
of the Ministry without  further delay.  The 
Committee also desire that progress report 
regarding Jawahar Lal Nahru Bhavan (Videsh 
Bhavan) may be furnished to the Committee on 
a half yearly basis. 
 
 