  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
                                   
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 3 
 
                                                                                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
[ACTION TAKEN ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH 
REPORT (13TH Lok Sabha) ON “WORKING OF INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL 
RELATIONS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO CULTURAL CENTRES ABROAD”] 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 

  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[ACTION TAKEN ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT (13TH 
Lok sabha) ON “WORKING OF INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS 
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO CULTURAL CENTRES ABROAD”] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21st December, 2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21st December, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

  
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2004-2005    
INTRODUCTION        
       
CHAPTER I.  REPORT 
 
CHAPTER II. Recommendations/Conclusions that have been  
accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III. Recommendations/Conclusions which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV. Recommendations/Con clusions in respect of  
which replies of Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V. Recommendations/Conclusions in respect of  
Which final replies of Government are  
still awaited 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on  
15th December,2004  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the  
 Recommendations contained in the 13th  Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(13th Lok Sabha) 
 
III. Statement of Recommendations/Conclusions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2004-2005) 
 
Chairman - Shri Laxminarayan Pandey 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Omar Abdullah 
3 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
4. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigouda 
7. Shri Vinod Khanna 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
9. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
11. Shri Dinsha Patel 
12. Shri Somabhai Patel 
13. Shri Sebastian Paul 
14. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
15. Shri P .A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada  
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
20. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
21. Shri George Fernandes* 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. K. Maheshwari 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Dr. Karan Singh 
25. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
26. Shri Arun Shourie 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
29. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
30. Shri Fali S. Nariman 
31. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
Shri U.S.Saxena  - Director 
Shri Shiv Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
* Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee ceased to a Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
w.e.f. 13.8.2004 Shri George Fernandes has been nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 1.10.2004  
 
(iv) 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs having been 
authorised by the Committee to  submit the report on thei r behalf, present this 3 rd 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations co ntained in the 13 th Report (13 th Lok  Sabha) of  the 
Committee on “Working of Indian Counc il for Cultural Relations with special 
reference to Cultural Centres Abroad”. 
 
2. The 13th Report was presented to both t he Houses of Parliament  on 23 rd 
December, 2003. The Government furnished their replies indicating Action Taken 
on the recommendations contained in the Report. 
 
3. The Draft Report on the bas is of Action Taken Notes was cons idered and 
adopted by the Standing Com mittee on Externa l Affair s (2004-2005) at their  
sitting held on 15th December, 2004. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have 
been reproduced as Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of Action Taken by  Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 13 th Report of the Standin g Committee on External Affairs (13 th 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facilit y of reference and  conven ience, the observations an d 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of 
the Report and have also been reproduced in consolidated form in Appendix-III. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                   
                 Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)

  
   
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This report of the Committee deal with the action taken by Government on 
the observations/recommendati ons contained in the 13 th report of Standing 
Committee on External Affairs on “Worki ng of Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations with special reference to Cultural Centres Abroad”.  The 13 th report of 
the Committee was pres ented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd December, 2003.  It 
contained 38 Recommendations/Observations. 
2. Action taken notes on all the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs These have 
been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 2, 9,11,12,16,17,21,24,26,27,28,29,30,31, 32, 33, 35 
Total – 17 
Chapter - II 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 7,8,14, 22 
Total – 4 
Chapter – III 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1,3,4,5,6,10,13,15,18,19,20,23,25,34,36,37,38 
Total – 17 
Chapter – IV 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited. 
 
Nil 
Total – Nil 
Chapter-V 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations. 

  
 
A. CULTURAL DIPLOMACY 
Recommendation No. 1(Para No.1.6) 
4. During the examinati on of the subject, the Committee had visited the 
Headquarters of ICCR and its regional Cult ural Centres in various parts of the 
country.  The Committee felt that the I CCR had not quite fulfilled the vision and 
mission with which it was launched 53 years ago. Although the Committee 
appreciated the work ICCR was doing, yet k eeping in view the increasing role of 
cultural diplomacy, an extensive campaign needed to be done through media 
and other sources to spread the rich Indi an cultural heritage a ll over the world, 
which would not only strengt hen our diplomatic relations with other countries but 
also expand the horizon of our great artistes and exponents. 
 5. Reply of the Government is as under 
 “ICCR has consistently endeavoured to fulfill the mandate of the 
organization for promoting cultural re lations and internat ional understanding 
since its inception in 1950.   The range and scope of its multi-faceted activities 
has progressively been increased.  Starting from a budget of meagre amount, the 
Council’s budget during the financial year 2003-2004 is Rs. 54.50 crores.  This 
reflects the increase in the level of the Council’s activi ties which are designed to 
fulfil this mandate. 
6. Apart from the traditional activiti es of the ICCR, which the Hon’ble 
Committee is aware of, the Council has em barked in recent times on innovative 
programmes such as promoting human resource development, specially in the 
field of Information Technology, in Cambodia.  A proposal to establish a 
prominent Museum of Asian Textiles accompanied with a training component is 
also being implemented”. 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 ( Para No. 2.4) 
 
7. During the Examination of subject, the Committee had ex pressed that the 
cultural diplomacy is a powerful tool for furthering diplomatic interests in 
commercial, political and strategic fields . Keeping this important aspect in view, 
the Committee were of the opinion that  the ICCR was doing a good job in the 
field of cultural diplomacy. But there was need to further in crease the scope and 

  
intensity of its activities with innov ative policies and programmes in the 
ever-changing circumstances. Its polic ies and programmes would have to be 
specific, pointed and purposeful. The Co mmittee felt that ICCR's approach was 
conventional and unprofessional and as su ch, the ICCR was not  able to go 
beyond propagating the stereotyped imag e of our country. The Committee 
impressed upon the Government to acco rd cultural diplomacy the highest 
importance. Since ICCR was the nodal ag ency under the Ministry of External 
Affairs for cultural promotions, the Committee had urged the ICCR to intensify its 
efforts in external projecti on. Apart from our efforts in  sustaining our traditional 
ties with some specific Asian countries, the ICCR should widen its area of activity 
and strive hard to achieve a stronger cultural presence all over the world.  
8. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
  “ICCR has 15 Cultural Centres in diffe rent parts of the world for promoting 
its aims and objectives. The most rec ent Centre established was in Dushanbe 
(2002). Financial and administrative approval for obtaining two additional Centres 
and a Sub-Centre has been obtained. Accord ingly, Cultural Centres in Kuala 
Lumpur (Malaysia) and Suva (Fiji) along with a Sub-Centre in Laotoko (Fiji) are in 
the process of bei ng opened. Proposals for opening additional Cultural Centres 
in other parts of the world including USA, China, Iran etc. are being considered.In 
so far as activities are concerned, the Council is diversifyi ng the range of its 
activities to project contemporary trends in Indian culture. Innovative projects like 
establishing Computer Kiosks in Cambod ia for imparting IT education are also 
being undertaken.” 
 
9. The Committee feel that the Ministry have not taken their 
recommendation in its proper perspecti ve. While the Committee have been 
insisting on strengthening our cultural  relations and spreading our rich 
cultural heritage worldwide, ICCR is merely working on few countries 
without any visible plan of action to this effect.  The Committee are of the 
view that establishing a computer Ki osk for spreading IT Education, 
opening a museum of Asian textiles and cultural centres in one or two 
countries will not suffice.  The larger goal of  ICCR cannot be achieved by 
these occasional steps. Promotion of culture is a continuous and ongoing 
process and hence ICCR needs to engage itself into the larger perspective 
of this continuous cultural promotion globally.  

  
(Recommendation No.1) 
10. The Committee once again wish to strongly stress on the fact that 
apart from consideration of proposals for opening new cultural centres in 
order to become an effective instrume nt of cultural promotion, the ICCR 
will have to come up with dynamic plans and novel ideas, which can widen 
its areas of activity such as there shou ld be frequent cultural exchanges 
with our neighbouring countries as we share a common cultural heritage 
and political history, special thrust n eeds to be given to direct people to 
people contact through food f estivals, art and crafts exhibitions, literary 
exchanges etc.  All these can go a long way in effectively portraying our 
rich and composite cultural heritage. 
(Recommendation No.2)  
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 2.5) 
11. The Committee were also of the opini on that it was not sufficient for the 
ICCR to merely draw up ambitious projec ts for cultural promotion. What was 
needed was the effective implementation of these projects. To achieve its 
objectives, the ICCR had to work in uni son with the civil society, the Indian 
Diaspora who have been the st rongest promoters of Indian culture in foreign 
countries.Therefore, the Committee strongly felt that the ICCR needed to change 
its mantle, reorient its activities in such a way that it was able to cope with the 
changing requirements in cultural diplom acy and actively involve the Indian 
diaspora in all its drives for cultural promotion. This way, the image of our country 
could be projected in a better perspective  and at the same time the creative 
energies and the subtle strength of t hese people could also be utilized in the 
most efficient and productive manner. 
12. The Ministry in their reply have stated that: 
 “The Council is consistently e ngaged in cooperating with the Indian 
Diaspora overseas in organi zing its activities. On many occasions sponsorships 
are obtained from the Indian Diaspora for organizing ICCR events.” 
13. The Committee in their recommenda tion had stated that the ICCR in 
order to achieve its objectives, had to work in unison with the civil society, 
the Indian diaspora who have been th e strongest promoters of Indian 
culture in foreign countries.  This wa y the image of our country could be 
projected in a better perspective and at the same time the creative energies 
and subtle strength of these people could be utilised in the most efficient 

  
and productive manner.  To this, the Ministry have replied that the 
Council is consistently engaged in cooperating with the Indian Diaspora 
overseas in organizing its activities and on many occasions sponsorships 
are obtained from the Indian Diaspora for organizing ICCR events. The 
Committee are not convinced with the re ply put forward by the Ministry.  
The Committee feel that whatever little initiatives have been taken by ICCR 
to engage Indian Diaspora in its activ ities, these are not up to the desired 
level. In fact, there are many regiona l groups worldwide such as the Telegu 
Association, Marathi Association, Punjabi Association, Gujarati 
Association etc. which are better or ganised, more active in cultural 
promotion.  These groups are doing a commendable job in the preservation 
of their regional cultural identity. Th e Committee reiterate that Ministry of 
External Affairs and particularly our  Embassies/Missions must keep in 
touch with such groups. The ICCR, on its part should make much vigorous 
efforts to involve such groups and ut ilize their potential in its drive for 
cultural promotion. 
(Recommendation No.3)  
B. REGIONAL CENTRES OF ICCR  
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 3.6) 
14. The Committee noted that ICCR had planned to open more regional 
centers in different parts of the country viz. Jaip ur, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar and 
North-eastern Region. However, the Commi ttee found that certain key regions of 
the country like Bihar and Jammu & Kashmir had been ignored. Hardly any 
attention had been given to Bihar and Ja mmu & Kashmir who had contributed 
significantly to the country's culture and the latter attracts a large number of 
tourists. Besides, to remove the region al imbalances, certai n regions needed to 
be strengthened.                 
15. The Ministry have replied that, 
  “The statutory bodies of the Council comprises personalities in different 
fields of art and culture. In order to further improve and strengthen the functioning 
of the Regional Centres of  the Council, the Council is constituting "Advisory 
Committees" for each of the existing and proposed new Regional Centres. Each 
such Committee would comprise of people from diverse field of culture in the 
region and General Assembly member  from the region. The Advisory 
Committees will give its recommendations to  further strengthen the activities of 

  
the Council. With regard to th e recommendation of the Standing 
Committee to remove regional imbal ance while opening the new regional 
centers, a detailed proposal  would be processed fo r consideration of the 
statutory bodies of the Council.” 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 3.7) 
16. The Committee also found that the Chief Secretary of Meghalaya, Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Orissa have been r equested to nominate officers from 
the concerned State Governments with whom  the Council could coordinate the 
opening of Regional Offices, The Committee’s hope was that the matter would be 
pursued earnestly with the concerned aut horities and the proposed regional 
centers would be opened soon. The Committee also re commended that regional 
centers in Srinagar, Bihar and other parts of the country which had rich cultural 
traditions should be opened at the earliest.              
17. The Ministry in their reply stated as under: 
  “The matter with regard to opening of  new regional centers is being 
pursued earnestly. The Council has received positive response from the 
concerned State Governments for Counc il's proposed regional centers in the 
North-East and Jaipur. The Council is hopeful to receive such positive responses 
from the other State Governm ents. With regard to openin g of regional centers in 
Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir and other parts of  the country, a detailed proposal 
will be processed for consideration of the statutory bodies of the Council.” 
18. The Committee had expressed thei r view that hardly any attention 
had been given to Bihar and Jammu  & Kashmir who had contributed 
significantly to the country’s cultur e as they attract a large number of 
tourists.  Along with the removal of  regional imbalances, these regions 
need to be strengthened.  However, the Committee are dismayed to note 
that the proposal to open new regional centres has not even been initiated 
in the last seven months and a detailed proposal is still to be processed for 
consideration of the statutory bodies of the Council and desire that it 
should be expedited.  
(Recommendation No. 4) 
19. The Committee are aware that St ates of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh 
have rich Buddhist Cultural Heritage and World famous Buddhists sites 
and monuments.  They attract a larg e number of Buddhist Pilgrims and 
tourists from the East-Asian countries.  In many Universities abroad, there 

  
is a department of Buddhist Studi es.  The Committee suggest that 
these states have immense potential fo r spiritual Tourism and ICCR can 
encash this for intensive promotion of our diverse culture.  A large number 
of settlers in Mauritius, South Afri ca, West-Indies and Suriname belonged 
to Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and their links to their roots can also help in 
Cultural diplomacy.  Regional Centres in  these States will definitely help in 
achieving our goal.  Similarly, openi ng a Regional Centre in Jammu and 
Kashmir will respect the sentiments of the people of that state.   
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 
 
20. The Committee are partially satisfied  with the reply of Government 
that the Council is constituting “A dvisory Committees” for each of the 
existing and proposed new cultural ce ntres, These Adviso ry bodies will 
advise and recommend for further st rengthening the activities of the 
Council. To the Committee, this signals  a welcome development. However, 
at the same time, the Committee are apprehensive of the fact that these 
Advisory Committees may, in effect, tu rn into defunct advisory bodies 
because they might take their own sweet time to give their 
recommendations.  Thus, the task of opening as well as strengthening the 
activities of the regional centres may be stretched too far.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that this process must be completed at the earliest. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
C. CULTURAL CENTRES ABROAD 
Recommendation No.10 (Para No. 4.15) 
21. As recommended in their 12th Re port presented on 17th December, 2003 
the Committee had desired that the Cultural Centre at Washington should be 
opened without any further delay. The Co mmittee desired that setting up of a 
centre at Kathmandu should be given sincere consideration. 
22. The Government  has stated that, 
“The proposal with regard to the prem ises to house the Indian Cultural 
Centre, Washington is being processed by the Ministry of External Affairs”. 
23. During the evidence on 6 th November, 2003, Foreign Secretary had stated 
that as far as the Indian Cultural Centre in Washington was concerned, they were 

  
on the verge of a decisi on. The property had been selected and negotiation 
was going on.  If everything went accordin g to the plan, then in the middle of 
January they would have this building in their own possession.  
24. In this context, at the time of exam ination of Demands for Grants for the 
year 2004-2005, the Ministry had informed the Committee: 
“The Ministry had purchased the property of PR’s Residence in New York 
after placing fund in Escrow Account.  The intention was to follow a similar 
procedure for the purchase of the proper ty in Washington. However, while 
processing this requirement, it was ru led by the Ministry of Finance that 
the purchase proposal be processed with out resorting to Escrow Account 
payment.  In the meantime, it wa s informed by the property agents 
handling this transaction that the seller could not wait further as the local 
government was taking much time in giving permission from zoning angle 
for the intended use of the property as a Cultural Centre.   
 
25. Earlier, the Ministry had inform ed that the Property Team had also 
explored the possibility of development of a portion of land available in the 
Chancery Annexe Complex in Washington DC.  This land has the potential of 
being developed for construction of an Auditorium and office for a Cultural 
Centre.  A local consultancy firm has been commissioned to undertake a 
feasibility study for the construction of a cultural centre. 
26. However, again during the course of examination of Demands for Grants, the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
“The feasibility report of construction of auditorium and other areas for use of 
the India Culture Centre has revealed that only ma rginal addition of space 
would be possible through fresh cons truction owing to the local body 
regulations.  As such, the Mission has b een asked to look for properties with 
rental options.  Following these devel opments, Mission has been asked to 
make a concerted, renewed effort to loca te a suitable rental property in the 
Washington D.C. area to house the India Cultural Centre. 
27. The Committee are dissatisfied a nd note that inspite of repeated 
recommendations for the last several year s on the urgent need to finalise 
the proposal regarding the setting up of Cultural Centre in Washington, the 
Ministry have failed to acquire the sel ected property and the deal has once 
again slipped out from their hands. It is only due to the extremely 
bureaucratic, rigid and cumbersome procedures and inept handling by the 
Ministry that the matter has once again come back to square one. The 
Committee feel that there is a need to review the very working of the 

  
Ministry to this effect so that opportunities do not continue to be lost 
like it happened in the present case. The Committee in their First Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) had also expressed thei r deep anguish over the lapses 
committed by the Ministry in establishment of Cultural Centre in 
Washington and recommended that the Cultural Centre in Washington 
should be established at the earliest. The Committee again reiterate that 
immediate action should be initiated on the project on top priority so that a 
Cultural Centre is opened in Washington at the earliest and hope that it will 
be in place by the end of 2005. 
 The Committee further desire that the process to open the Cultural 
Centre at Iran, Japan, Thailand, Cambodia and also in China should be 
expedited. 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
D. BUDGET OF ICCR 
Recommendation No.13 (Para No. 5.6) 
28. The Committee find that ICCR's  budget had recorded only marginal 
increase over successive years while there was constant pressure on it to 
increase the scope and intensit y of its activities. If inflationary trends were taken 
into account,. ICCR's budget, in real terms , had been actually  reduced over the 
last few years. It was also noted that  the Council had visu alized a number of 
innovative activities, projects and it also  intends to promote more aggressively 
India's culture abroad and provide a better national and international profile for its 
activities. Furthermore, there were a number of proposals awaiting the 
establishment of cultural centres abroad. But the Council due to lack of additional 
financial resources could not take up all those projects. 
29. The Government has replied as under: 
“ICCR projected a revised estimate fo r 2003-04 for Rs. 58.86 crores as 
against this projection an al location of Rs. 54.50 crores  (which was the Budget 
Estimate figure) has been given. The net increase in actual allocation of ICCR 
during the two years 2002-03 and 2003-04 has been Rs. 12.88 crores which is 
way above the normal inflationary trends, whereas during the same period 
Ministry's non-plan budget allocation has been reduced in RE by Rs. 38.34 
crores and Rs. 110.00 crores respectively. Additionally, MEA has also been 
incurring expenditure from its c apital outlay on behalf of ICCR for 
construction/purchase of properties for use by cultural centers abroad, in addition 

  
to payment of grants-in-aid which is  not indicated separately. For the 
establishment of new cultur al centers abroad, allocati on of additional funds from 
Capital Outlay of the Ministry will be c onsidered to meet ICCR's requirement for 
purchase/construction of cultural centers.” 
30. In a written reply to a question whether non- availability of adequate 
fund restricted ICCR to increase its activities and programmes in the 
country as well as abroad, the Ministry  itself had stated that the ICCR’s 
budget recorded only marginal increase over successive years.  If 
inflationary trends and rise in cost of  living were also taken into account, 
ICCR’s budget, in real terms, actuall y stood reduced over the last few 
years.  However, subsequently in their action taken reply to the 
Committee’s observation on budget, the Ministry of External Affairs have 
stated that the net increase in actua l allocation of ICCR during the two 
years 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 has been Rs. 12.88 cr ores which is way 
above the normal trends.  The Committee feel that such a reply is self- 
contradictory and should be avoided in future. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
31. The Committee note that Ministry of External Affairs have also been 
incurring expenditure from its capit al outlay on behalf of ICCR for 
construction/purchase of properties for use by the cultural centres abroad, 
in addition to payment of grants-in-ai d which is not indicated separately.  
The Committee further note that for the establishment of new cultural 
centres abroad, allocation of additiona l funds from capital outlay of the 
Ministry is to be considered by the Ministry to meet ICCR’s requirement for 
the purchase/construction of cultural centre.  The Committee expect that 
paucity of funds which had been a majo r impediment in previous years will 
no more be there and through this ne w arrangement ICCR will be able to 
meet its future requirements and the target set for the 
purchase/construction of cultural cen tres will be achieved without any 
difficulty. 
(Recommendation No. 9)  
Recommendation No.15 (Para No. 5.8) 
 
 
32. Furthermore, the Committee had point ed out that ICCR was not working in 

  
tandem with the civil society of various countries of the world which left it 
high and dry and somewhat lonely in the matter of raising resources. The 
Committee had no doubt that ICCR could subs tantially augment its resources if it 
will start involving the civil society gl obally and the Indian Di asporas in those 
countries. The Committee had also sug gested that to r educe the budgetary 
constraints of the Council, the Minist ry should explore the possibility of 
coordinating trade and cultur e as there were several Fortune 500 companies of 
Indian origin and their resources could be tapped. Greater coordination between 
business and culture would certainly be  helpful in meeting the budgetary 
constraints. 
33. The Government have stat ed in their reply that,  
“Efforts are being made in this regard. Many of the reputed Hotels are 
giving accommodation to the Council at  discounted rates for boarding/lodging of 
various cultural groups/distinguished visito rs coming to India. A donation of Rs. 
10.00 lacs was received from Jammu & Ka shmir Bank during the year 2001-02 
towards hosting of "International Festival  of lndian Literature" at Neemrana 
(Haryana).”  
34. The Committee note that the Mini stry in general and the Council in 
particular have not made any progress in the matter of raising resources by 
working in close coordination with civil society and this keeps the Council 
high and dry as far as the budget is concerned. Getting mere discounts 
from hotels or donation of Rs. 10.00 lakh are not sufficient to achieve 
global objectives.  The Committee are una ble to understand as to why the 
Ministry/ ICCR are not exploring the po ssibilities of seeking coordination 
with important public and private comp anies of Indian origin and getting 
sponsorships for their cultural programmes in India and abroad to raise 
their resources. Even the advertisemen ts of ICCR in Newspapers could be 
sponsored which will considerably reduce its financial constraints.  
Coordination, cooperation and interming ling of trade and culture is the 
order of the day and need of modern age.  The Committee are of the view 
that in line with this trend, the Ministry should wit hout any hesitation 
explore the possibility of coordinating trade and culture and benefit from it 
immensely.  Further efforts should also be made to involve the civil society 
globally and Indian Diaspora in various countries in this cause. This, in the 
opinion of the Committee, is certainly one of the better options available to 

  
the ICCR to overcome their budgetary constraints. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
E. SCHOLARSHIP AND WELFARE OF STUDENT 
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 6.22) 
35. The Committee noted that under the scholarship programme of the 
Council, scholarships were offered to foreign students in different courses. It was 
only the foreign students who come here and not the other way round. The 
Committee felt that ICCR did not make any arrangement under its schemes for 
the Indian students who wish to  go for studies in the Universities abroad. The 
Committee had desired that ICCR should  bring under its schemes the 
programme of sending Indi an students abroad for studies to Universities, like 
Harward University and other who may, pe rhaps, be willing to offer a couple of 
scholarships for the Indian students. 
36. The Government replied that  “ICCR administers 16 Scholarship Schemes 
on behalf of various Government Depar tments. These Schemes provide for 
scholarships to be offered to forei gn students. The Department of Higher 
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development loo ks after work relating to 
Indian students studying abroad. Since our  Scholarship Schemes are not linked 
to foreign universities, it is unlikely that they would entertain any request for grant 
of scholarships to Indian students.”  
37. The Committee had expressed their desire that the ICCR should 
bring under its schemes the programme of sending Indian students abroad 
for studies to universities like Harvar d University and others who may, 
perhaps, be willing to offer a coup le of scholarships for the Indian 
students.  But ICCR has stated that  their scholarship schemes are not 
linked to the foreign universities and it is unlikely that they would entertain 
any request for grant of scholarship s to Indian students. The Committee 
are surprised to note how the mi nistry makes such a hypothetical 
assumption that foreign universities will not entertain any request for grant 
of scholarships to Indian students – without practically making any efforts 
in approaching foreign universities in  this regard. Many of the foreign 
universities have full-fledged Oriental  Studies Divisions and Departments 
of Indology - imparting education of Hindi, Sanskrit and Buddhist studies 
etc.  The Committee are of the strong  opinion that ICCR/Ministry can co-

  
ordinate with these departments for obtaining scholarships for Indian 
students in foreign universities. Many Non-Resident Indians settled abroad 
have also been patronising and propagati ng Indian art/culture and music.  
ICCR can seek the assistance of these pe ople for more vigorous projection 
of our culture abroad.  The Committee further reiterate that ICCR/Ministry 
must make efforts to get scholarships for Indian students in foreign 
universities and for this purpose, if re quired, the help of the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development may also be taken. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
Recommendation No. 19 (Para No. 6.23) 
 
38. The committee were constrained to note that utilizati on of scholarships 
offered to foreign students was constant ly very low, although, the ICCR had 
stated that it was working towards optim izing utilization of scholarships being 
offered. Even during the year 2003-2004 ICCR offered 1093 scholarships out of 
which only 606 students had joined their respective courses. The reasons cited 
by the ICCR for non-utilisation of scholarships, viz. decision of the scholars not to 
pursue studies in India after making applic ation or to opt for some scholarship 
schemes in another country or  the scholar's inability to pay international fare 
which was not covered by scholarship schem e, was not satisfactory at all. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that a system  should be evolved whereby if seats 
offered for scholarships for a particular course remain unutilized, waitlisted 
candidates should be offered the scholarship. 
39.  The Government has st ated in their reply that,  
“During the academic year 2003-2004 placements were offered to 779 
scholars against 1093 available slots. The slots are earmarked for different 
countries as per specific bilateral agr eements and allocations made by a Special 
Committee. The Council has been allo cating unutilized slots from certain 
countries to reserve candidates of countri es who have fully utilized their given 
slots.”  
40. The Committee regret to note that  the scholarship allocations meant 
for certain countries have not been optimally utilized. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the scholarship slots earmarked for scholars 
from a particular country should pr eferably go to that country and 
unutilized slots do not go to reserve ca ndidates of other countries who 

  
have fully utilized their given sl ots.  For this, the Committee 
recommend that ICCR should evolve such a system whereby if scholarship 
slots offered for a particular country remain unutilized – waitlisted 
candidates from that country should, in the first instance, be offered the 
scholarships and only in the event of  waitlisted candi dates not being 
available, the unutilized slots should be allowed to go to reserved 
candidates of those countries who have fully utilized their given slots. 
Further, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the number of 
seats as also the amount of scholarship being offered to students from the 
countries having maximum number of Persons of Indian Origin need to be 
increased so that the number of students coming to our country go up who 
in turn may act as brand ambassadors for promoting Indian culture abroad. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para No. 6.24) 
41. As regard the student's inability to pay international airfare, the committee 
find that the air fares offered had been in creased from 3 to 30 for each country. 
The committee desired that the number of airfares being offered be increased 
substantially covering not only Central Asia but also other parts of the world. The 
Committee also expressed hope that th e ICCR would take steps to provide 
suitable hostel facilities to foreign st udents and ensure their co mfortable stay in 
the country so that they may not feel home sick and could cope with the new 
environment. It should also be ensured that  the students receive their financial 
dues as per their entitlem ent in time. The Committee also recommend that the 
amount of scholarships being paid to the scholars should be reviewed biannually. 
42. In reply to the recommendation of  the Government had stated that,  
“The question of offering additional airf ares to foreign scholars would be 
considered in the context of availability  of sufficient funds. Regarding the comfort 
of the students, various universities have been asked to present proposals for 
assistance in developing hostel facilities.  Special arrangements to deliver 
financial dues and entitlements in time have also been made . Scholarship dues 
were last revised by the Finance Committee in June, 2001.”   
43. The Ministry have stated that  the question, offering additional 
airfares to foreign scholars would be  considered in the context of 
availability of sufficient funds.  How ever, the Committee feel that efforts 
should be made to provide some additional funds for this purpose which in 

  
turn will go a long way to enhance our bilateral goodwill globally. The 
Committee reiterate that the numbe r of airfares may be increased 
substantially covering central Asia as we ll as other parts of the world.  The 
Committee also reiterate that the ICCR should take appropriate steps to 
provide suitable hostel facilities to foreign students for their comfortable 
stay in the country to avoid their home sickness and easy adjustment with 
new environment.  As the Ministry have overlooked the Committee’s view 
about the review of scholarship, the Committee would like to recommend 
that  scholarships being paid to the scholars by the ICCR should be 
reviewed biennially. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
F. VISITING PROFESSORS AND CHAIRS OF INDIAN STUDIES 
Recommendation No. 23 (Para No. 6.29) 
 44. The Committee were of the opini on that the Council's programme of 
establishing chairs and deputing Visiti ng Professors abroad to educate foreign 
university students in Indian studies and other related subjects, was very meagre 
but useful as it influences the perc eption of foreign st udents about India and 
assists them to understand India's position on various issues in the right 
perspective. The Committee find  that there were present ly only sixteen Chairs 
and Professorships which are functiona l worldwide under t he aegis of ICCR. 
They expressed the desire that more Chairs should be established under this 
programme and the number of Professors being sent abroad to  teach Hindi and 
other Indian languages, particularly where a large number of persons of Indian 
origin reside, should be increased substantially. 
45. The Government have stated that, 
“Presently, the Council is maintain ing 17 Chairs and Professorships 
worldwide under the aegis of ICCR. Efforts are being m ade to establish a Chair 
in Malaysia”. 
46. The Committee still hold the opinion that the council’s programme of 
establishing Chairs and deputing visi ting Professors abroad to educate 
foreign university students in Indian studies and other related subjects are 
not at all satisfactory.  Visiting Ch air and Professors abroad play an 
important role in educating foreign university students,  enlightening and 
influencing the mind of foreign students about India and assisting them to 

  
understand India’s position on various issues in the right perspective.  
By maintaining only 17 Chairs and pr ofessorship all over the world under 
the aegis of ICCR cannot fulfill the vi sion and Mission of India’s cultural 
diplomacy.  Therefore, the Committee re iterate that more Chairs should be 
established under the programme and the number of professors being sent 
abroad to teach Hindi and other Indi an languages, particularly where a 
large number of persons of Indian orig in reside should also be increased 
substantially. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
G. PROMOTION OF CONTEMPORARY INDIAN ART 
Recommendation No. 25 (Para No.6.44) 
47. The Committee had received the im pression that ICCR was focussing 
more on performing arts and was sending a number of troupes/groups for 
performances in various parts of the wo rld, but contemporar y art had not been 
sufficiently promoted by the Council. In the Committee's view whatever 
recognition the Indian c ontemporary art had achieved , had been more through 
private galleries or otherwise rather than through the efforts of the Council. In 
order to promote contemporary Indian art, to give exposu re to the Indian art and 
culture worldwide and also to organise festivals and other activities, permanent 
presence of Indian art was a must at least in key cities of the world. The 
Committee had desired that the Council, in  collaboration with Indian Missions 
abroad, should make sincere efforts in this regard. 
48. The Government has replied that, 
  “We are now participating in more and more festivals organized abroad”.    
49. The Committee are of the view th at while much attention is being 
paid on performing arts and to send a number of troupes/groups for 
performance in various parts of the world, the ICCR is not making much 
efforts regarding the promotion of contemporary Indian art. The steps 
taken so far by ICCR to promote cont emporary art are not sufficient and up 
to the desired level. Whatever little recognition Indian contemporary art has 
received is only through private galleries.   The Committee reiterate that to 
promote Indian contemporary art, to give exposure to Indian art and culture 
world wide and also to organise festivals and other activities and to exhibit 
Indian arts at least in  key cities of the world,  ICCR should come up with 

  
some specific action plan.  The Committee, therefore, desire that more 
attention should be given to promote our contemporary art and the ICCR in 
collaboration with Indian Missions abro ad should make sincere efforts in 
this regard. 
(Recommendation No.15) 
H. PUBLICITY 
Recommendation No. 34 (Para No.6.72) 
50. The Committee felt t hat the impression created by the Indian films has 
tremendous which no other area can ac hieve easily. They, therefore, 
recommended that the Council in collabo ration with the External Publicity 
Division of the Ministry should make effo rts to get the rights for sponsoring more 
and more Indian popular films abroad, gi ving suitable sub-titles in major 
languages. 
 
51. Reply of the Government is as under: 
  “In pursuance of the recommendations  of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the Council has started the production of films from within its meagre 
resources. The first film commissioned by ICCR in pursuance of Committee's 
recommendation is "New Delhi the Book Capital of the World". The film will 
highlight the importance of  books in our national life in the context of rising 
literacy and their popularit y and influence among young Indians. The film is 
expected to be completed by March, 2004 and shall be shown on television 
channels across the world, besides a special screening in New Delhi. Much as 
ICCR would like to undertake production of films on culture re lated themes, we 
require the support of the esteemed Parliamentary Standing Committee for 
provision of additional budgetary resources from its parent Ministry i.e. Ministry of 
External Affairs. Hon'ble President, ICCR has already made. a request to Hon'ble 
Minister of External Affair s. A response is awaited. If additional funds are made 
available, the Council is in a stat e of readiness to produce films on such 
interesting subjects as "Calligraphy Art of India", "Culture in the times of 
Information Revolution", "Temple Art of India", "Evolution of  Indian civilization 
from Ashoka to Atal", "Theatre forms of India", "Evolution of Hindi Poetry", "Urdu 
Gazals" and number of other subjects.” 
52. As per the reply of the Government, in pursuance of the 
recommendations of the Parliament ary Standing Committee, the Council 

  
has started the production of films within its meagre resources.  
However, the Committee are of the opini on that production of films in itself 
is a complicated, time consuming a nd expensive task and the Committee 
said nothing which suggested that ICCR should start producing films itself.  
In any case, the Committee are happy to note that the council is producing 
a film with its limited resources.  The Committee also extend their full 
support to get additional budgetary resources to produce films on selected 
interesting subjects.  If sufficient  budget is made available to the Council 
easily it may also prove to be an in telligent move.  Ho wever, for the time 
being it will be wise on the part of  the Council to get the rights for 
sponsoring Indian popular films/documen taries abroad. Our film industry 
and advertisement agencies are produ cing huge amount of useful films 
and documentaries and so many f ilms/documentaries are also readily 
available which can be used for the purpose.  The Committee reiterate that 
ICCR may try to select these readily av ailable films which can reflect our 
tradition and rich cultural heritage gl obally and manage to get the rights of 
these films with sub-titles into major languages. This is the easiest way to 
create impression worldwide in a short sp an of time and may prove to be 
useful in rapid promotion and dissemination of our culture across the 
globe. 
(Recommendation No.16) 
I. COORDINATION WITH AGENCIES 
Recommendation No. 36 (Para No. 7.6) 
53. The Committee noted that the ICCR was an autonomous organization 
administratively attached to the Ministry of External Affairs. While the Committee 
appreciated the work being done by ICCR in promoting India's rich cultural 
heritage globally, they were of the firm opini on that there was st ill a lot of scope 
to revamp and reorient the Council's f unctioning in keeping with the changing 
circumstances the world over. The Committee felt that ICCR or for that matter no 
other organization could work in isolation.  Cultural diplomacy had to be a basic 
and significant element in our foreign policy and for achieving this objective ICCR 
should identify organizations and institutio ns which may supplem ent its efforts in 
strengthening its activities. The Committee did not agree with the Ministry that 
coordination between the different Go vernment Departments was beyond the 
purview of the Ministry of External Affa irs. The Committee strongly felt that to 

  
achieve the objectives of ICCR and also to enhance its activities, there was 
need for an increased coordination and great er involvement of different wings of 
Government of India. The Ministries of External Affairs, Tourism, Information & 
Broadcasting, Human Resource Develo pment (Departments of Culture and 
Education) and also Commerce need to have a coordinated and combined effort 
in that direction. 
 
54. The Government replied straight-away that  
“The recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee is an inter-ministerial 
subject, the Ministry is examining the matter.” 
Recommendation No. 37 (Para No. 7.7) 
55. During the Examination at the s ubject Committee expressed that, the 
Cultural Diplomacy was the responsibility mainly of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, it was they who should ac t as the nodal Ministry. The Committee 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry of External Affairs should form a 
Coordination Committee which may include s enior officers of the Ministries of 
External Affairs, Tourism, Informat ion and Broadcasting, Human Resource 
Development (Department of Culture and Education) and Commerce as its 
Members. The Committee ex pressed hope that with the active involvement of 
various Ministries of the Government  of India, the ICCR would be able to 
formulate in real terms comprehensiv e action plans for strengthening and 
promoting its activities within the country as well as abroad. Apart from affording 
adequate opportunities to under stand, plan and implement various ideas, the 
Coordination Committee could function as a think tank for ICCR to enable it to 
become a more effective instrument for India's cultural diplomacy. 
56. The Government only said that 
  “Kindly refer to response to recommendation no. 36.” 
 
57. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of Government that 
the recommendation is a inter-Minister ial subject and the Ministry is 
examining the matter.  The Committee beli eve that there is lot of scope to 
revamp and reorient the council’s func tioning in keeping with the changing 
circumstances the world over.  The id entification of organisations and 
institutions, which may supplement th e efforts towards strengthening our 
cultural Diplomacy, is not a difficult  task. The Committee are of the opinion 
that to achieve the objecti ves of ICCR and also enha nce its activities, an 

  
increased coordination and greater involvement of different wings 
of Government of India is the need of the hour. The Committee reiterate 
that the Ministry of External Affairs should make all out efforts to form a 
coordination Committee as early as  possible, whic h may include 
representative from the Mini stries of External Affairs, Tourism, Information 
Technology, Human Resources Develop ment (Department of Culture and 
Education) and Commerce as its members.  This co-ordination Committee 
according to them should get together  to work out annual plans for the 
purpose. Without the help of other Ministries/Departments it is not possible 
to achieve the goal.  ICCR is representi ng India in promoting Indian culture 
& civilisation abroad.  Hence, It is all the more necessary to coordinate with 
other Ministries in properly project ing India.  Since all Government 
departments abroad are under the purview of Indian Missions, it is easier to 
coordinate with them. As Many State capitals of the World have Indian 
Tourist Offices, ICCR can coordinate with these offices for promoting 
culture as well.  Only such steps can  bring about and ensure a symbiotic 
unity and all separate units working together can really lift our cultural 
diplomacy. The Committee are also hopeful that Ministry of External Affairs 
have by now initiated suitable steps in this direction and the Ministry will 
leave no stone unturned as far as the eff ective projection of  our cultural 
heritage is concerned.  
(Recommendation No.17) 
Recommendation No. 38 (Para No. 7.8) 
58. The Committee pointed out that agains t the sanctioned staff strength of 
351 in different categories, the present working strength of the Council was only 
252. The Ministry had themselves admitt ed that this had adversely affected the 
working of ICCR. The Committ ee, therefore, urged the Government to fill up the 
vacant posts immediately, particularly thos e at the operational levels, so that the 
work of the Council was not adversely affected. Keeping in  view the Council's 
proposals to open more Regional Centres in the country and Cultural Centres 
abroad and also the likely increase in the workload of the Council, the Committee 
suggested that the Ministry might revi ew the sanctioned sta ff strength of the 
Council in different categorie s. The Committee felt that inadequate staff, lack of 
promotional avenues and ineffective cadre managemen t was bound to have an 
adverse impact on the morale  of the staff resulting in poor efficiency. The 

  
Committee, therefore, desired that to motivate the staff to work with zeal and to 
the best of their ability, adequate incentives  should be given to them by way of 
opening more promotional avenues, particu larly at operational and supervisory 
levels and in postings abroad. 
59. The Government in their reply said that,  
“The difference between the sanctioned staff strength and the working 
staff strength of the Council has been enlarged over the years due to the fact that 
no direct recruitment had taken place si nce the year 1996 at the level of 
Assistant Programme Officer (Section Officer) and below. Prior to 1996, the 
Council was making recruitment to these gr ades by way of nominations received 
from the Staff Selection Commission. Subsequently, Staff Selection Commission 
has taken a policy decision not to nom inate candidates to the autonomous 
bodies. While the Council has been pursuin g the matter with the Staff Selection 
Commission, the Council has now proposed an overall restructuring of the ICCR 
Cadre in consultation with the Cadre Cell, MEA. Moreover, the Council is also in 
the process of re-framing its service rule s in order to give more promotional 
avenues to the staff of the Council.” 
60. Regarding inadequate staff strength, the Council has candidly 
accepted that at the level of Assistant Programme Officer (Section Officer) 
no direct recruitment had taken pl ace since 1996 because Staff Selection 
Commission had declined to nominate candidates to the autonomous 
bodies.  The Council has also informe d the Committee that it is still 
pursuing the matter with Staff Sel ection Commission.  The Committee are 
sorry to note that only after the passage of seven long years, the Council 
has now proposed an overall restructuring of the ICCR cadre in 
consultation with Cadre Cell, Ministry of External Affairs.  Further, the 
Council is also in the process of reformi ng its service rule in order to give 
more promotional avenues to the st aff of the Council. The Committee feel 
that fulfillment of the staff strength,  opening of more promotional avenues 
and incentives to raise the morale of the staff should be among the top 
priorities of the Council and the least th e Council can do is to fulfill its 
sanctioned staff strength immediately. 
(Recommendation No.18) 

  
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 The Committee also feel that ICCR has not been interacting to the desired 
extent with the people who are actively involved in the field and who can tell them 
more from their experiences what really is needed to be done.  In the opinion of 
the Committee the ICCR must adopt a multifacet ed approach.  For this purpose, 
it is of utmost necessity that the functioning of t he ICCR should be fine-tuned to 
meet the present day gro wing needs with a view to improving and upgrading its 
activities by inviting views and s uggestions from ar tistes and eminent 
personalities in the field.  It would certai nly help the ICCR to function effectively 
and respond to the changing demands and priorities in the conduct of our cultural 
diplomacy.         (Para No. 1.7) 
Reply of the Government 
 In keeping with the Hon’ble Commi ttee’s recommendations, additional 
publicity efforts are being made through t he Media with a view to making the 
Council’s activities better known.  The General Assembly and Governing Body of 
the ICCR has recently been reconstituted.  While reconstituting these statutory 
bodies, all efforts were made to include le ading personalities in the fields of art 
and culture with a view to obtaining thei r advice and recommendations for further 
improving the activities and effectiveness of the Council. 
 Furthermore, on recommendation of t he Governing Body, meetings with 
the Zonal Cultural Centres in different parts of the country are being planned to 
learn from their experiences in the field. 
 The Council is also assisted by a number  of Expert Committees 
comprising eminent personalities who advis e regarding selection of artistes for 
empanelment and deployment abroad. 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee find that a large number  of proposals for opening cultural 
centres abroad are under consid eration of the Ministry for the last several years 
but due to non-availability of funds and difficulty in creation of posts for the new 
centres, they have not come to any decis ion so far. Besides, South-East Asia 
and Latin American countries have been neglected in this respect. In Europe too, 

  
except UK and Germany, not much attent ion has been given to other important 
countries like France, which has proximity with UNESCO. The Committee view 
that there should be kind of regional balance globally while deciding to open a 
cultural centre abroad. Keep ing in view the importance of cultural diplomacy in 
the modern age and changing world scenario, the Committee recommended that, 
more Cultural Centres need to be opened preferably in  South-East Asia, Latin 
America and in countries where a sizeable Indian community resides. 
(Para No. 4.14) 
Reply of the Government 
The Council is processing the requests received from our Missions abroad 
for the opening of new cultural centres. 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
Non-availability of funds and difficult y in creation of new posts for the 
centres are stated to be the main reasons  for not opening more Cultural Centres 
abroad. Since cultural diplomacy has gained significant importance today the 
Committee strongly feel that such constraints should not come in the way of 
projecting India's cultural heritage and fostering close cultural linkages abroad. 
(Para No. 4.16) 
Reply of the Government 
The Governing Body of the ICCR in its meeting held on 21st January, 
2004 decided that performance audi t of the Indian Cultur al Centres abroad as 
well as of the Regional Offices in India should be undertaken. The Committee will 
submit its report to the Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs with a request to forward the 
same to the Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendation No.12 
The Committee find that the persons heading the Cultural Centres abroad 
face functional difficulties as they are not given diplomatic status in some of the 
countries. In some countries they are on a diplomatic list of the Missions only. 
The Committee feel that unles s a person heading the cult ural centre is given a 
diplomatic status, he is not taken seri ously and is not effective enough in 
strengthening and promoting cu ltural activities of the centre. The Committee, 
therefore, suggest that t he Director or head of the centre should be given a 
diplomatic status. Such per son may not necessarily be a diplomat. He may be a 
person well conversant with the art, culture and our traditional heritage and 

  
capable of achieving the aims and objectives for which the Council was 
established. 
(Para No. 4.17) 
Reply of the Government 
All the Directors of the cultural cent res abroad have been given diplomatic 
status and they are functioning under the administrative control of the respective 
Mission. 
Recommendation No. 16 
The Committee observe that ICCR's schemes of offering scholarships to 
foreign students playa significant ro le in generating goodwill and better 
understanding of India. Over the last more than 50 years, w hen the ICCR was in 
existence, the Council has  imparted training to a la rge number of foreign 
students under this scheme. Today several such students/persons are occupying 
important positions in their countries. Such students can be seen as good friends 
of India as after learning and living here, they obtain firsthand knowledge of 
India's rich cultural traditions, understanding of India's political, socio-economic 
systems etc. and can actually contribute in different ways to our image abroad. 
(Para No. 6.20) 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Diplomatic Missions abroad have been advised from time to time to 
develop a data base of scholars who have studied in India. These scholars are 
invited for meetings and social get-t ogethers on events like International 
Students Day. The Missions has further been advised to record information about 
positions held by them in their respective countries upon their return from India. 
 

  
 
Recommendation No. 17 
However, the Committee feel that k eeping in view the changing world 
scenario and development in our econom ic and political strategies, the 
scholarship programmes of the Council shou ld be formulated to make it specific 
and targeted to our foreign policy objective s. Several courses are being offered 
by the Council to the foreign scholars in various Universities of the country. The 
Committee desire that courses such as  "India Study programme" as has been 
started by the University  of Hyderabad should be introd uced which has attracted 
quite a number of students from the wes t. The council could use this mode for 
promoting Indian studie s in a more structured way in  collaboration with various 
Universities of the Country. For starting the "Study India programmes", many of 
our Universities, like Jamia Milia Univer sity, could be asked to provide course 
content and other support for preparing such courses. 
(Para No.6.21) 
Reply of the Government 
During the current academic year one sc holar was also sponsored for the 
"India Study Programme" at the Universi ty of Hyderabad. As desired, the 
University of Hyderabad has been asked to provide course contents so that other 
universities like Jamia Millia Islamia can be addressed in the matter for 
formulating similar courses. 
 Recommendation No. 21 
The Committee appreciate the scheme introduced by ICCR, under which 
on the completion of the course, the st udents can go and open schools in their 
own countries in the field of dance and music. After five or six years they can 
come back for a reorientation or mid-career training. They can again go back and 
propagate further Indian da nce and music to upgrade the skills. The committee 
desire that the scheme shou ld be encouraged and ICCR should provide logistic 
support to the scholars for opening schools in their countries. 
(Para No. 6.25) 
Reply of the Government 
The Council in consultation with various agencies such as Centre for 
Cultural Resources and Training, Shri ram Bharatiya Kala Kendra, Gandharva 
Mahavidyalaya, Kathak Kendra, Triveni Kala Sangam is arranging Orientation 

  
Programmes for foreign teachers of Indian performing arts. Necessary 
assistance to foreign artistes propagating Indian performing arts and encouraging 
them to open schools in their respective countries is also being given. 
Recommendation No. 24 
The Committee note that ICCR org anizes visits of performing 
artistes/troupes to various parts of the world for performances under the ambit of 
bilateral cultural exchange programmes as well as in response to the 
recommendations received from Indian Mi ssions abroad with the objective of 
depicting different performing art forms of India in various parts of the world. 
However, the Committee find that the Council does not have cultural agreements 
with all the countries and also many of the bilateral exchange agreements which 
are agreed upon for two years remain un fulfilled and unexplore d. Moreover, the 
Council does not renew the cultur al exchange progr ammes agreements 
periodically, as required and even wher e cultural exchange programmes are 
valid, full implementation of  their provisions is rare ly achieved. The Committee 
are not at all satisfied with such a st ate of affairs. The Committee recommend 
that the reasons for non-fu lfillment of the cultural exchange agreements be 
identified and in the light thereof the Council should make all out efforts to ensure 
that bilateral cultural exchange agreements do not remain unfulfilled. The Council 
must also go in for bilateral cultural  exchange agreements with various countries 
of the world. 
(Para No.6.43) 
Reply of the Government 
Noted for future planning. Department of Culture, Ministry of Tourism and 
Culture signs CEPs on behalf of the Government of India, not ICCR. ICCR is only 
an implementing agency. 
Recommendation No. 26 
The Committee feel that the Council gives preference to certain eminent 
artistes/troupes/groups based in some se lected cities while representing India 
abroad in cultural performances and programmes. Junior and up-coming artistes 
are not being given adequat e opportunities while making selection for 
performances abroad. Also regional repres entation of artistes/folk dancers, etc. 
particularly from North-Eastern States, West Bengal and other remote areas are 
not given fair chance to perform abroad.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the criteria for selecting arti stes/troupes for performing abroad should be 

  
made more transparent. Also, while selecting artistes/groups for sponsoring to 
perform abroad, junior upcoming artistes fr om various regions of the country, 
particularly from remote areas should also be included in the list in addition to the 
established and outstanding musicians, dancer s or groups, so that India's true 
traditional art performances could be represented abroad. The Committee would 
also like the' ICCR to make efforts to get the cultural programmes sponsored by 
private parties so that its financ ial burden could be reduced and more 
artistes/troupes could be sent abroad. 
(Para No.6.45) 
Reply of the Government 
It is noted for future programmes. 
Recommendation No. 27 
The Committee also recommend that t he Ministry, particularly the Indian 
Missions abroad, should collaborate wit h organizations of regional groups in 
foreign countries e.g. Telugu Association,  Marathi Association, etc. in organising 
cultural shows by ICCR in various coun tries. These Associations/groups, if 
involved by the Council, will be a great hel p in promoting Indian art and Culture 
abroad. The Committee also recommends t hat more number of theatre groups 
should be sent abroad. 
(Para No.6.46) 
Reply of the Government 
It is noted for future programmes. 
Recommendation No. 28 
The Committee find that the Council's Distinguished Visitors Programme is 
an extremely useful programme under which it facilitates exc hange of scholars, 
intellectuals, academicians and arti stes. Such exchanges provide ample 
opportunities of sharing ideas through discussions and meetings. The Committee 
therefore recommend that more emphasis be given to this programme, keeping 
in view the new trends and priorities of our foreign policy objectives. 
(Para No.6.47) 
Reply of the Government: 
The recommendation has been noted for future compliance. 
Recommendation No. 29 
The committee note that ICCR publishes a number of journals to spread 
its cultural message. Though these journal s are very useful and informative in 

  
nature, the Committee feel  that these are not accessible to the common 
man.  The Committee recommend the ICCR to publish a single and 
comprehensive publication which can be an effective instrument for carrying 
information about India's art and culture to  the targeted readership. Each issue 
may carry, apart from cultural information, profiles of achievers in diverse fields of 
art and culture and with authoritative k nowledge in the respective field of 
specialization. The committee are of the opinion that such a single publication by 
ICCR will be more effective voice of the rich Indian cultural heritage, which needs 
to be given exposure with great thrust. A video -CD edition of the publication may 
also be brought out by the Council and made available to the media in the 
country as well as abroad. The committee further recommend that necessary 
steps may be taken to make the Council's publications commercially available to 
the common man, but at an affordable price. 
(Para No.6.56) 
Reply of the Government 
The Indian Council for Cu ltural Relations' Hindi magazine "Gagananchal" 
and English magazine "Indian Horizons" ar e being recast in accordance with the 
recommendation of the Stand ing Committee. Necessary steps are also being 
initiated to publish the inter net / VCD edition, as also for making the publications 
commercially available to common man at an affordable price. 
 

  
 
Recommendation No. 30 
  The Committee also desire the Coun cil to design and print meaningful 
posters to disseminate India's cultur al philosophy. Such posters may be 
displayed at the regional c entres of the Council and also at our Missions and 
Cultural Centres abroad. This will further strengthen India's cultural relations with 
the rest of the world.               (Para No. 6.57) 
Reply of the Government 
The Council has invited several well-k nown designers to submit concepts 
for posters for effectively disseminating India's cultural philosophy. 
Recommendation No. 31 
The lectures delivered by our foundi ng fathers, eminent personalities and 
intellectuals at the Council's "Memorial Lecture", Seminars, etc. are available with 
the Council in book forms. Bu t the committee have an impr ession that they are 
badly produced and not mainta ined properly. They, ther efore, recommend that 
necessary steps be taken by the Council to preserve and produce these lectures 
in a presentable form. Such publications  can be given to distinguished visitors 
and distributed in the universities for the benefit of students and others. 
(Para No.6.58) 
Reply of the Government 
It has been decided to upl oad lectures delivered by our founding fathers, 
eminent personalities and intellectuals as well as memorial lectures etc. on 
ICCR's web site. This will enable general publ ic to access and print them in a 
presentable form. A limited number would also be brought out for presentation to 
distinguished visitors and distribution of copies to universities for the benefit of 
students and others. 
Recommendation No. 32 
  The Committee note that the number of Indian writers, poets, musicians, 
scholars and artistes whose visits are fac ilitated by the Council to participate in 
international seminars and conferences of cultural interests has been coming 
down gradually over the last  few years. The Committee desires that the Council 
should take initiative to encourage and  facilitate Indian writers, scholars, 
musicians, etc. to take part in the organi zation of international seminars and 
conferences held abroad by giving them more incentives, as these persons leave 
a positive impact of our efforts to stre ngthen cultural relations and mutual 

  
understanding between I ndia and other countries of  the world through these 
programmes. The Council should also  co-sponsor seminars abroad in 
association with other organizations. The Committee would like the Council to act 
as the nodal agency for implementing all the cultural activities in association and 
in co-ordination with other Governm ent agencies and private groups/agencies 
engaged in cultural activities so as to ensure optimal results. 
(Para No.6.66) 
Reply of the Government 
The Council has sponsored 10 eminent writers to attend 'Writer's 
Conference of SAARC Writer s' held at Colombo, Sri Lanka. The Council also 
committed to cosponsors 9 international seminars from April 2003 to March 
2004. 
 
Recommendation No. 33 
The Committee note that the Council sp onsors exhibitions of Indian art 
and crafts to foreign countries and also receives exhibitions from abroad for 
exposition in India. However, the Committee understand that the Council has 
created very few exhibitions of its ow n and depends more on other sources to 
lend exhibitions for spons oring abroad. The Committee desire that the council 
should create more exhibition of its own depicting Indian tradition, heritage and 
different art forms for exhi biting abroad. They also re commend that the post of 
trained curators should be created in ICCR so  that the paintings, etc. could be 
saved from damage. The Committee hope that the basement of the Nehru 
Centre, London would be renovated and a small gallery for exhibiting Indian art 
there would be set up soon. 
(Para No.6.71) 
Reply of the Government 
Keeping the recommendation of Standing  Committee on External Affairs, 
the Council has decided and kept the followi ng points in our Plan of Action for 
2004-05 in respect of Exhibition Section: 
1. To acquire two permanent exhibitions; 
2. To host four major exhibiti ons every year in New Delhi; 
3. To send four exhibitions outside Indi a annually covering 5-6 countries in 
each time; 
4. To continue commissioning of busts/ statues of important National Leaders 
for installation abroad. 

  
Recommendation No. 35 
The Committee note that ICCR has a large library with Maulana Azad's 
personal collections, rare manuscripts and a lot of books which have detailed 
marginal notes from Maulana Azad's own st udy. But these collections are not in 
good shape and are poorly maintained. T he Committee desire that necessary 
measures should be initiat ed to preserve and maintain  the Council's Library, 
which has very rare collection of valuable  heritage left by its founding father and 
other by using the latest technology . The Committee recommend that the ICCR 
should also establish a Research Cell-cum Archives Unit to study and preserve 
the works and profiles of  distinguished and eminent personalities, scholars, 
writers and artistes in diverse fiel ds. The Committee hope that the new 
comprehensive web-site being created by ICCR, featuring the latest technologies 
of international standard will be completed soon. 
(Para No.6.78) 
Reply of the Government 
Preservation of documents has been undertaken in parts. Reprographic 
preservation of manuscripts has been comp leted by the Council. Digitization of 
manuscripts, a pilot project, has been started & expected to be over by March 
2004. During this phase we shall digiti ze 10 manuscripts in Urdu, Arabic & 
Persian language. So far as the Chemic al Preservation is concerned, Shri 
S.S.Sohoni, Vice-President, ICCR & Dr . Madhup Mohta had visited Asiatic 
Society Library in Mumbai. This shall be initiated when the Conservation unit is 
opened in the new build ing. The Council is planning to have a Research Cell-
cum Archive in the new building (Africa Ho use). It can not be started immediately 
due to the constraint of space at Azad Bhavan Library. 

  
 
 CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that the regi onal centers are responsible for 
coordinating arrangements with the concerned State Governments and local 
cultural institutions for the Council's activities. They are al so responsible for 
organizing shows of performing art gr oups, welfare of foreign scholars, 
organization and participation in non-performing arts such as seminars, symposia 
and conferences organized in that region, prov iding logistic support during the 
visits of distinguished visitors, making arrangements for incoming and .outgoing 
exhibitions and sending books/ musical instruments for presentation to the Indian 
Cultural Centres or Missions abroad. 
(Para No. 3.8) 
Reply of the Government 
Needs no reply. 
Recommendation No. 8 
However, the Committee are not sa tisfied with the functions being 
performed by the regional ce nters as they have been simply doing the work of 
coordination in organizing shows of performing art groups, arranging incoming 
and outgoing exhibitions and gi ving logistic support during the visits of 
distinguished visitors. They  are not even allo wed to go in for talent hunt and 
hardly have any interaction with the people engaged in various activities in the 
region. The Committee feel th at continuous interaction of  this kind is absolutely 
necessary for improvement in the workin g of regional centers in the country. 
Based on the interaction with the people of the region in the field and also from 
the incoming as well as outgoing groups, et c., reports should be presented to the 
headquarters with suggestions to improve t he functioning and activities of the 
respective regional center . The Committee also desire that regional centers of 
ICCR should prepare a comprehensive data  bank giving information about the 
local artistes/groups/theatres in the form of cassettes/CD Roms. Such data could 
be made available at all the regional centers in the count ry as well as Cultural 
Centres abroad. It will work as a ready re ckoner for organizing cultural activities 
in India and abroad. 

  
(Para No. 3.9) 
Reply of the Government 
The statutory bodies of the Council comprises perso nalities in different 
fields of art and culture. In order to further improve and strengthen the functioning 
of the Regional Centres of the Council, the Council is  constituting" Advisory 
Committees" for each of the existing and proposed new Regional Centres. Each 
such Committee would comprise of people from diverse field of culture in the 
region and General Assembly member  from the region. The Advisory 
Committees will give its recommendations to further strengthen the activities of 
the Council. With regard to the reco mmendation of the Standing Committee to 
remove regional imbalance while opening the new regional centers, a detailed 
proposal would be processed for consider ation of the statut ory bodies of the 
Council. 
Recommendation No.14 
 
The Committee are constrained to observe  that in spite of their repeated 
recommendations, there has be en virtually no increase in  the annual grants of 
the Council in real terms, though the same have been increased from Rs.42.43 
crore in 2002-03 to Rs.54. 50 crore in 2003-04. The co mmittee are of the view 
that even the proper maintenance  of the existing level of activities of the Council 
would justify a further increase in the budgetary allocations of ICCR. However, 
they feel that the Ministry of External Affairs have not been able to present the 
case of ICCR properly and forcefully and the Ministry of Finance have also not 
realized the importance of cultural dipl omacy. The committee strongly feel that 
the financial allocation being given to the Council is not at all sufficient for the 
gamut of its activities and for achieving its objectives fully. ICCR was established 
to act as India's premier institution for promoting India's cultural heritage, 
fostering cultural exchange and strengthening  cultural ties with the countries of 
the world. For better projection of India's image abroad and also for the increased 
activities and projects of the Council, financial constrains should not come in its 
way. The Committee would like to emphasize  that nothing else can project our 
country in the world in a stronger way than our culture and her itage. Therefore, 
the committee recommend that the budget ary allocations for ICCR should 
substantially be augmented so that it could achieve its desired objectives. 
(Para No. 5.7) 

  
Reply of the Government 
A comparative statement of figures of  BE, RE proposed by ICCR and RE 
approved by MEA during the last 3 years is given as follows: 
(Figure in crores) 
Year           BE  RE proposed by ICCR Approved RE  
2001-02  40.00  41.62    41.62 
2002-03  42.43  44.31    42.00 
2003-04  54.50  59.36    54.50 
It could be seen from the above that ther e has not been much variation in the 
Revised Estimates projected by ICCR an d actual allocation approved under RE 
during the FY 2002-03. Council was also permitted to utilize unspent balance of 
Rs. 1.88 crore carried forward from the previous financial year on their request as 
a special case, in addition to the prov ision of Rs. 42.00 crore approved in RE-
2002-03. 
MEA has been vigorously taking up the cause of ICCR during its 
budgetary discussions with MOF. In this regard it may be mentioned that Ministry 
projected, duly supported wit h detailed justification, an enhancement of Rs. 
435.51 crore at RE-2003-04 (non-plan) an d Rs. 715.95 crore in BE 2004-05 in 
non-plan Section. However, MOF instead of providing additional funds reduced 
Ministry's allocation for the CFY by Rs. 110 crores. The BE 2004-05 has been 
capped at Rs. 2772.69 crores against Ministry's projection of Rs. 3475.95 crores. 
Despite reduction in BE 2 003-04 by Rs. 110 crores, no proportionate cut has 
been made in the original allocations of ICCR for the FY 03-04 whereas the 
allocated amount to other spending Divi sion/Schemes have been proportionately 
reduced. 
From the above it may be no ted that MEA is well aw are of the importance of 
cultural diplomacy and would continue to endeavour to allocate funds to ICCR to 
the extent possible within the overall ce iling of BE/RE for the Ministry approved 
by MoF so as to ensure that financial c onstraints should not come in the way of 
projecting our country in the world in a stronger way by ICCR to achieve its 
desired objectives.  
Recommendation No. 22 
The Committee are happy to note that the Council has started a 
programme to prepare a comprehensiv e data base of its scholars. The 
Committee desire that information about the pos itions held by foreign students in 

  
their respective countries after avai ling the scholarships, should also be 
included in it. The Committee hope that  the computerised data base will be 
completed expeditiously. 
(Para No. 6.26) 
Reply of the Government 
All efforts are being made to expeditiously complete the computerization 
of the students' database.  As mentioned in ATR for recommendation No.16 the 
Indian Diplomatic Missions have also  been advised to update and record 
information about foreign scholars who returned to their respective countries after 
completion of their courses in India. 

  
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 During the examination of the s ubject, the Committee have visited the 
Headquarters of ICCR and its regional Cult ural Centres in various parts of the 
country.  The Committee feel that the ICCR has  not quite fulfilled the vision and 
mission with which it was launched 53  years ago.  Although the Committee 
appreciate the work ICCR is doing, yet k eeping in view the increasing role of 
cultural diplomacy, an extensive cam paign needs to be done through media and 
other sources to spread the rich Indian cult ural heritage all over the world, which 
will not only strengthen our diplomatic relations with other countries but also 
expand the horizon of our great artistes and exponents. 
(Para No.1.6) 
Reply of the Government 
 ICCR has consistently endeavoured to fulfill the mandate of the 
organization for promoting cultural re lations and internat ional understanding 
since its inception in 1950.   The range and scope of its multi-faceted activities 
has progressively been increased.  Starting from a budget of meagre amount, the 
Council’s budget during the financial year 2003-2004 is Rs. 54.50 crores.  This 
reflects the increase in the level of the Council’s activi ties which are designed to 
fulfil this mandate. 
 Apart from the traditional activities of the ICCR, which the Hon’ble 
Committee is aware of, the Council has em barked in recent times on innovative 
programmes such as promoting human resource development, specially in the 
field of Information Technology, in Ca mbodia.  A proposal to establish a 
prominent Museum of Asian Textiles accompanied with a training component is 
also being implemented. 
Recommendation No. 3 
 Cultural diplomacy is a powerful tool for furthering diplomatic interests in 
commercial, political and strategic fields . Keeping this important aspect in view, 
the Committee are of the opinion that the ICCR has been doing a good job in the 
field of cultural diplomacy. But there is need to further increase the scope and 

  
intensity of its activities with innov ative policies and programmes in the 
ever-changing circumstances. Its policies and programmes will have to be 
specific, pointed and purposeful. The Commi ttee feel that ICCR's approach is 
conventional and unprofessional and as such, the ICCR has not been able to go 
beyond propagating the stereotyped image of our country. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to impress upon the Government to acco rd cultural diplomacy the 
highest importance. Since ICCR is t he nodal agency under the Ministry of 
External Affairs for cultural promoti ons, the Committee would urge the ICCR to 
intensify its efforts in external projection.  Apart from our efforts in sustaining our 
traditional ties with some specific As ian countries, the ICCR should widen its 
area of activity and strive hard to achiev e a stronger cultural  presence all over 
the world.                (Para No.2.4) 
Reply of the Government 
ICCR has 15 Cultural Centres in differ ent parts of the world for promoting 
its aims and objectives. The most recent Centre established was in Dushanbe 
(2002). Financial and administrative approval for obtaining two additional Centres 
and a SubCentre has been obtained. Accord ingly, Cultural Centres in Kuala 
Lumpur (Malaysia) and Suva (Fiji) along with a Sub-Centre in Laotoko (Fiji) are in 
the process of bei ng opened. Proposals for opening additional Cultural Centres 
in other parts of the world including USA, China, Iran etc. are being considered. 
In so far as activities are concerned,  the Council is diversifying the range 
of its activities to project contemporar y trends in Indian culture. Innovative 
projects like establishing Computer Kiosks in Cambodia for imparting IT 
education are also being undertaken. 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Committee are also of the opinion that it is not sufficient for the ICCR 
to merely draw up ambitious projects for cultural promotion. What is needed is 
the effective implementation of these pr ojects. To achieve its objectives, the 
ICCR has to work in unison with the civ il society, the Indian diaspora who have 
been the strongest promoters of Indian culture in foreign countries. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly feel that the ICCR needs to change its mantle, reorient its 
activities in such a way t hat it is able to cope with the changing requirements in 
cultural diplomacy and actively involve the Indian diaspora in all its drives for 
cultural promotion. This way, the image  of our country can be projected in a 
better perspective and at the same time the creative energi es and the subtle 

  
strength of these people could also be utilized in the most efficient and 
productive manner. 
(Para No.2.5) 
Reply of the Government 
The Council is consistently engaged in cooperating wit h the Indian 
Diaspora overseas in organi zing its activities. On many occasions sponsorships 
are obtained from the Indian Diaspora for organizing ICCR events. 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note that ICCR ha s planned to open more regional 
centers in different parts of the country viz. Jaip ur, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar and 
North-eastern Region. However, the Commi ttee find that certain key regions of 
the country like Bihar and Jammu & Ka shmir have been ignored. Hardly any 
attention has been given to Bihar and Jammu & Kashmir who have contributed 
significantly to the country's culture and the latter attracts a large number of 
tourists. Besides, to remove the region al imbalances, certain regions need to be 
strengthened.                (Para No. 3.6) 
Reply of the Government 
The statutory bodies of the Council comprises perso nalities in different 
fields of art and culture. In order to further improve and strengthen the functioning 
of the Regional Centres of  the Council, the Council is constituting "Advisory 
Committees" for each of the existing and proposed new Regional Centres. Each 
such Committee would comprise of people from diverse field of culture in the 
region and General Assembly member  from the region. The Advisory 
Committees will give its recommendations to  further strengthen the activities of 
the Council. With regard to the reco mmendation of the Standing Committee to 
remove regional imbalance while opening the new regional centers, a detailed 
proposal would be processed for consideration of the statutory bodies of the 
Council. 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee also find that the Chie f Secretary of Meghalaya, Madhya 
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Orissa have been r equested to nominate officers from 
the concerned State Governments with whom  the Council could coordinate the 
opening of Regional Offices, The Co mmittee hope that the matter would be 
pursued earnestly with the concerned aut horities and the proposed regional 
centers would be opened soon. The Co mmittee also recommend that regional 

  
centers in Srinagar, Bihar an d other parts of the country  which have rich cultural 
traditions should be opened at the earliest.             (Para No.3.7) 
Reply of the Government 
The matter with regard to opening of new regional centers is being 
pursued earnestly. The Council has received positive response from the 
concerned State Governments for Counc il's proposed regional centers in the 
North-East and Jaipur. The Council is hopeful to receive such positive responses 
from the other State Governm ents. With regard to openin g of regional centers in 
Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir and other parts of the country, a detailed proposal 
will be processed for consideration of the statutory bodies of the Council. 
Recommendation No.10 
As recommended in their 12th Repor t presented on 17th December, 2003 
the Committee desire that the Cultural Centre at Washington should be opened 
without any further delay. The Committee desire that setting up of a centre at 
Kathmandu should be given sincere consideration. 
(Para No. 4.15) 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal with regard to the prem ises to house the Indian Cultural 
Centre, Washington is being processed by the Ministry of External Affairs. 
Recommendation No.13 
The Committee find that ICCR's budget has recorded only marginal 
increases over successive years while t here was constant pressure on it to 
increase the scope and intensit y of its activities. If inflationary trends are taken 
into account,. ICCR's budget, in real terms , has been actually reduced over the 
last few years. It is also noted that the Council has visua lized a number of 
innovative activities, projects and it also  intends to promote more aggressively 
India's culture abroad and provide a better national and international profile for its 
activities. Furthermore, there are a number of proposals awaiting the 
establishment of cultural centres abroad.  But all those projects could not be 
taken up by the Council due to lack of additional financial resources. 
(Para No. 5.6) 
 
Reply of the Government 
ICCR projected a revised estimate for 2003-04 for Rs. 58.86 crores as 
against this projection an al location of Rs. 54.50 crores  (which was the Budget 

  
Estimate figure) has been given. The net increase in actual allocation of 
ICCR during the two years 2002-03 and 2003-04 has been Rs. 12.88 crores 
which is way above the normal inflati onary trends, whereas during the same 
period Ministry's non-plan budget allocati on has been reduced in RE by Rs. 
38.34 crores and Rs. 110.00 crores respectively. Additionally, MEA has also 
been incurring expenditure from its c apital outlay on behalf of ICCR for 
construction/purchase of properties for use by cultural centers abroad, in addition 
to payment of grants-in-aid which is  not indicated separately. For the 
establishment of new cultur al centers abroad, allocati on of additional funds from 
Capital Outlay of the Ministry will be c onsidered to meet ICCR's requirement for 
purchase/construction of cultural centers.  
Recommendation No.15 
Furthermore, the Committee would like to point out that ICCR has not 
been working in tandem  with the civil society of va rious countries of the world 
which leaves it high and dry and somewhat lonely in the matter of raising 
resources. The Committee have no doubt t hat ICCR could substantially augment 
its resources if it starts involving t he civil society globa lly and the Indian 
Diasporas in those countries. The Commi ttee also suggest that to reduce the 
budgetary constraints of the Council, the Ministry should explore the possibility of 
coordinating trade and cultur e as there are several Fortune 500 companies of 
Indian origin and their resources can be tapped. Greater c oordination between 
business and culture would certainly be  helpful in meet ing the budgetary 
constraints. 
(Para No. 5.8) 
Reply of the Government 
Efforts are being made in this regard.  Many of the reputed Hotels are 
giving accommodation to the Council at discounted rates for boarding/lodging of 
various cultural groups/distinguished visitors coming to India. A donation of Rs. 
10.00 lacs was received trom Jammu & Ka shmir Bank during the year 2001-02 
towards hosting of "International Festival  of lndian Literature" at Neemrana 
(Haryana). 
Recommendation No. 18 
The Committee note that under the scholarship programme of the Council, 
scholarships are offered to foreign student s in different courses. It is only the 
foreign students who come here and not the other way round. The Committee 

  
understand that ICCR does not make any arrangement under its schemes 
for the Indian students who wish to go for studies in the Univer sities abroad. The 
Committee desire that ICCR should bring under its schemes the programme of 
sending Indian students abroad for studi es to Universities, like Harward 
University and other who may, perhaps, be willing to offer a couple of 
scholarships for the Indian students. 
(Para No. 6.22) 
Reply of the Government 
ICCR administers 16 Scholarship Schemes on behalf of various 
Government Departments. These Scheme s provide for scholarships to be 
offered to foreign students. The Department  of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development looks a fter work relating to Indian students 
studying abroad. Since our Scholarship  Schemes are not linked to foreign 
universities, it is unlikely that they would entertain any request for grant of 
scholarships to Indian students. 
Recommendation no. 19 
 
The committee are constrained to note that utilization of scholarships 
offered to foreign students is constantly very low, although, the ICCR has stated 
that, it is working towards optimizing ut ilization of scholarships being offered. 
Even during the year  2003-2004 ICCR offered 1093 scholarships out of which 
only 606 students have joined their respective courses. The reasons cited by the 
ICCR for non-utilisation of sc holarships, viz. decision of the scholars not to 
pursue studies in India after making applic ation or to opt for some scholarship 
schemes in another country or  the scholar's inability to pay international fare 
which is not covered by scholarship schem e, is not satisfactory at all. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that a system  should be evolved whereby if seats 
offered for scholarships for a particular course remain unutilized, waitlisted 
candidates should be offered the scholarship. 
(Para No. 6.23) 
Reply of the Government 
During the academic year 2003-2004 placements were offered to 779 
scholars against 1093 available slots. The slots are earmarked for different 
countries as per specific bilateral agr eements and allocations made by a Special 
Committee. The Council has been allo cating unutilized slots from certain 
countries to reserve candidates of countri es who have fully utilized their given 

  
slots. 
Recommendation No. 20 
  As regard the student's inability to pay  international airfare, the committee 
find that the air fares offered have been increased from 3 to 30 for each country. 
The committee desire that the number of air fares being offered be increased 
substantially covering not only Central Asia but also other parts of the world. The 
Committee also hope that t he ICCR would take steps to  provide suitable hostel 
facilities to foreign students and ensure thei r comfortable stay in the country so 
that they may not feel home sick and c ould cope with the new environment. It 
should also be ensured that t he students receive their financial dues as per their 
entitlement in time. The Committee al so recommend that the amount of 
scholarships being paid to the scholars should be reviewed biannually. 
(Para No. 6.24) 
Reply of the Government 
The question of offering additional ai rfares to foreign scholars would be 
considered in the context of availabili ty of sufficient funds. . Regarding the 
comfort of the students, various universities have been asked to present 
proposals for assistance in developing hos tel facilities.  Sp ecial arrangements to 
deliver financial dues and entitlements in time have also been made. Scholarship 
dues were last revised by the Finance Committee in June, 2001. 
Recommendation No. 23 
  The Committee are of the opinion that the Council' s programme of 
establishing chairs and deputing Visiti ng Professors abroad to educate foreign 
university students in I ndian studies and other relate d subjects, is very meagre 
but useful as it influences the perc eption of foreign st udents about India and 
assists them to understand India's position on various issues in the right 
perspective. The Committee find that there are presently only sixteen Chairs and 
Professorships which are functional wo rldwide under the aegis of ICCR. They 
desire that more Chairs should be es tablished under this programme and the 
number of Professors being sent abr oad to teach Hindi and other Indian 
languages, particularly where a large number of persons of Indian origin reside, 
should be increased substantially. 
(Para No. 6.29) 
Reply of the Government 
Presently, the Council is maintaini ng 17 Chairs and Professorships 

  
worldwide under the aegis of ICCR. Effort s are being made to establish a Chair 
in Malaysia. 
Recommendation No. 25 
The Committee have received the impression that ICCR is focussing more 
on performing arts and is sending a number of troupes/groups for performances 
in various parts of the world, but contemporary art has not been sufficiently 
promoted by the Council. In the Committ ee's view whatever recognition the 
Indian contemporary art has achieved, has been more through private galleries 
or otherwise rather than thr ough the efforts of the Counc il. In order to promote 
contemporary Indian art, to give exposure to the Indian art and culture worldwide 
and also to organise festivals and other activities, permanent presence of Indian 
art is a must at least in key cities of  the world. The Commi ttee desire that the 
Council, in collaboration with Indian Mi ssions abroad, should make sincere 
efforts in this regard.               (Para No.6.44) 
Reply of the Government 
We are now participating in more and more festivals organized abroad. 
Recommendation No. 34 
The Committee feel that the impressi on created by the Indian films is 
tremendous which no other area can achieve easily. They, therefore, recommend 
that the Council in collaboration with the External Publicity Division of the Ministry 
should make efforts to get the rights for sponsoring more and more Indian 
popular films abroad, giving suitable sub-titles in major languages. 
(Para No.6.72) 
Reply of the Government 
In pursuance of the recommendations  of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, the Council has started the production of films from within its meagre 
resources. The first film commissioned by ICCR in pursuance of Committee's 
recommendation is "New Delhi the Book Capital of the World". The film will 
highlight the importance of  books in our national life in the context of rising 
literacy and their popularit y and influence among young Indians. The film is 
expected to be completed by March, 2004 and shall be shown on television 
channels across the world, besides a special screening in New Delhi. Much as 
ICCR would like to undertake production of films on culture re lated themes, we 
require the support of the esteemed Parliamentary Standing Committee for 
provision of additional budgetary resources from its parent Ministry i.e. Ministry of 

  
External Affairs. Hon'ble Presiden t, ICCR has already made. a request to 
Hon'ble Minister of External Affairs. A response is awaited. If additional funds are 
made available, the Council is in astate of readiness to produce films on such 
interesting subjects as "Calligraphy Art of India", "Culture in the times of 
Information Revolution", "Temple Art of India", "Evolution of Indian civilization 
from Ashoka to Atal", "Theatre forms of India", "Evolution of Hindi Poetry", "Urdu 
Gazals" and number of other subjects. 
 
Recommendation No. 36 
The Committee note that the ICCR is an autonomous organization 
administratively attached to the Ministry of External Affairs. While the Committee 
appreciate the work being done by ICCR in promoting India's rich cultural 
heritage globally, they are of the firm opini on that there is still a lot of scope to 
revamp and reorient the Council's functi oning in keeping with the changing 
circumstances the world over. The Committee feel that ICCR or for that matter no 
other organization can work in isolation. Cultural diplomacy has to be a basic and 
significant element in our foreign poli cy and for achieving this objective ICCR 
should identify organizations and institutio ns which may supplem ent its efforts in 
strengthening its activities. The Committee do not agree with the Ministry that 
coordination between the different Go vernment Departments is beyond the 
purview of the Ministry of External Affa irs. The Committee strongly feel that to 
achieve the objectives of ICCR and also to enhance its activities, there is need 
for an increased coordination and greater involvement of different wings of 
Government of India. The Ministries of External Affairs, Tourism, Information & 
Broadcasting, Human Resource Develo pment (Departments of Culture and 
Education) and also Commerce need to have a coordinated and combined effort 
in this direction. 
(Para No.7.6) 
Reply of the Government 
As the recommendation of the Hon'bl e Committee is an inter-ministerial 
subject, the Ministry is examining the matter. 
Recommendation No. 37 
Cultural Diplomacy being the responsib ility mainly of the Ministry of 
External Affairs, it is they who shoul d act as the nodal Ministry. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs should form a 

  
Coordination Committee which may include se nior officers of the Ministries of 
External Affairs, Tourism, Informat ion and Broadcasting, Human Resource 
Development (Department of Culture and Education) and Commerce as its 
Members. The Committee hope that with t he active involvement of various 
Ministries of the Government of India, the ICCR will be able to formulate in real 
terms comprehensive action plans for str engthening and promoting its activities 
within the country as well as abroad. Apart from affording adequate opportunities 
to understand, plan and implement various  ideas, the Coordination Committee 
could function as a think tank for ICCR to enable it to become a more effective 
instrument for India's cultural diplomacy. 
(Para No.7.7) 
Reply of the Government  
Kindly refer to response to recommendation no. 36. 
 
Recommendation No. 38 
The Committee note that against the s anctioned staff strength of 351 in 
different categories, the pres ent working strength of the Council is only 252. The 
Ministry have themselves admitted that this has adversely affected the working of 
ICCR. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to fill up the vacant posts 
immediately, particularly thos e at the operational levels, so that the work of the 
Council is not adversely a ffected. Keeping in view the Council's proposals to 
open more Regional Centres in the country and Cultural Centres abroad and also 
the likely increase in the workload of the Council, the Committee suggest that the 
Ministry may review the sanctioned sta ff strength of the Council in different 
categories. The Committee feel that inadequate staff,  lack of promotional 
avenues and ineffective cadre management are bou nd to have an adverse 
impact on the morale of t he staff resulting in poor efficiency. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that to moti vate the staff to work with  zeal and to the best of 
their ability, adequate incentives should be given to them by way of opening 
more promotional avenues, particularly at  operational and supervisory levels and 
in postings abroad. 
(Para No.7.8) 
Reply of the Government  
The difference between the sanctioned staff strength and the working staff 
strength of the Council has been  enlarged over the years due to the fact that no 

  
direct recruitment had taken place since the year 1996 at the level of Assistant 
Programme Officer (Section Officer) and below. Prior to 1996, the Council was 
making recruitment to these grades by way of nominations received from the 
Staff Selection Commission. Subsequent ly, Staff Selection Commission has 
taken a policy decision not to nominate candidates to the autonomous bodies. 
While the Council has been pursuing t he matter with the Staff Selection 
Commission, the Council has now proposed an overall restructuring of the ICCR 
Cadre in consultation with the Cadre Cell, MEA. Moreover, the Council is also in 
the process of re-framing its service rule s in order to give more promotional 
avenues to the staff of the Council. 

  
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              Laxminarayan Pandey, 
      December, 2004                                Chairman, 
Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)        Standing Committee on External Affairs. 

  
 
APPENDIX I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 15th DECEMBER, 2004  
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. S.P.Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
5. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
6. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
7. Shri Dinsha Patel 
8. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
9. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
10. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
11. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
MEMBERS 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
13. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
14. Dr. Karan Singh 
15. Shri Jana Krishnamuthy K 
16. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
17. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.S. Saxena - Director 
3. Shri Shiv Kumar - Under Secretary 
 
 At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report 
on the recommendations contained in the 13
th Report (13th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on “Working of Indian Council of Cultural Relations with special reference to Cultural 
Centres abroad”. The Chairman invited Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. 
 
2. The Members suggested certain modifications and desired that those be suitably 
incorporated in the body of the Report. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Action Taken Report 
and present the same to Parliament. The draft Report was then adopted. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 

  
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTEENTH 
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (13TH LOK 
SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total Number of Recommendations                  38 
II. Recommendations/Conclusions which have been a ccepted                      
by Government 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 2, 9,11,12,16,17,21,24,26,27,28,29,30, 
31, 32, 33, 35   
   
T o t a l                     1 7  
Percentage                            44.75% 
 
III Recommendations/Conclusions which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view  of the Government replies 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 7,8,14, 22 
   
Total                      4 
 P e r c e n t a g e                   1 0 . 5 %  
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government  have not been accepted by  
the Committee 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1,3, 4,5,6,10,13,15,18,19,20,23,25,34, 
36,37,38 
   
 Total                       17 
 Percentage                44.75% 
 
V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are 
 still awaited 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. Nil  
   
Total                Nil 
 Percentage              Nil 
 
 
 

  
 
APPENDIX  III 
 
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Ministry Observations/Recommendations 
1. 9 External Affairs The Committee feel that the Ministry 
have not taken their recommendation in 
its proper perspective. While the 
Committee have been insisting on 
strengthening our cultural relations and 
spreading our rich cultural heritage 
worldwide, ICCR is merely working on 
few countries without any visible plan of 
action to this effect.  The Committee are 
of the view that establishing a computer 
Kiosk for spreading IT Education, 
opening a museum of Asian textiles and 
cultural centres in one or two countries 
will not suffice.  The larger goal of  ICCR 
can not be achieved by these 
occasional steps. Promotion of culture is 
a continuous and ongoing process and 
hence ICCR needs to engage itself into 
the larger perspective of this continuous 
cultural promotion globally.  
2. 10      -do- The Committee once again wish to 
strongly stress on the fact that apart 
from consideration of proposals for 
opening new cultural centres in order to 
become an effective instrument of 
cultural promotion, the ICCR will have to 
come up with dynamic plans and novel 
ideas, which can widen its areas of 
activity such as there should be frequent 
cultural exchanges with our 
neighbouring countries as we share a 
common cultural heritage and political 
history, special thrust needs to be given 
to direct people to people contact 
through food festivals, art and crafts 
exhibitions, literary exchanges etc.  All 
these can go a long way in effectively 
portraying our rich and composite 
cultural heritage. 
3. 13  The Committee in their recommendation 
had stated that the ICCR in order to 
achieve its objectives, had to work in 
unison with the civil society, the Indian 
diaspora who have been the strongest 
promoters of Indian culture in forei gn 

  
countries.  This way the image of our 
country could be projected in a better 
perspective and at the same time the 
creative energies and subtle strength of 
these people could be utilised in the 
most efficient and productive manner.  
To this, the Ministry have replied that 
the Council is consistently engaged in 
cooperating with the Indian Diaspora 
overseas in organizing its activities and 
on many occasions sponsorships are 
obtained from the Indian Diaspora for 
organizing ICCR events. The 
Committee are not convinced with the 
reply put forward by the Ministry.  The 
Committee feel that whatever little 
initiatives have been taken by ICCR to 
engage Indian Diaspora in its activities, 
these are not up to desired level. In fact, 
there are many regional groups 
worldwide such as the Telegu 
Association, Marathi Association, 
Punjabi Association, Gujarati 
Association etc. which are better 
organised, more active in cultural 
promotion.  These groups are doing a 
commendable job in the preservation of 
their regional cultural identity. The 
Committee reiterate that Ministry of 
External Affairs and particularly our 
Embassies/Missions must keep in touch 
with such groups. The ICCR, on its part 
should make much vigorous efforts to 
involve such groups and utilize their 
potential in its drive for cultural 
promotion.  
4. 18   -do- The Committee had expressed their 
view that hardly any attention had been 
given to Bihar and Jammu & Kashmir 
who had contributed significantly to the 
country’s culture as they attract a large 
number of tourists.  Along with the 
removal of regional imbalances, these 
regions need to be strengthened.  
However, the Committee are dismayed 
to note that the proposal to open new 
regional centres has not even been 
initiated in the last seven months and a 
detailed proposal is still to be processed 
for consideration of the statutory bodies 
of the Council and desire that it should 
be expedited. 

  
5. 19   -do- The Committee are aware that States of 
Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have rich 
Buddhist Cultural Heritage and World 
famous Buddhists sites and 
monuments.  They attract a large 
number of Buddhist Pilgrims and 
tourists from the East-
Asian countries.  
In many Universities abroad, there is a 
department of Buddhist Studies.  The 
Committee suggest that these states 
have immense potential for spiritual 
Tourism and ICCR can encash this for 
intensive promotion of our diverse 
culture.  A large number of settlers in 
Mauritius, South Africa, West-Indies and 
Suriname belonged to Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh and their links to their roots can 
also help in Cultural diplomacy.  
Regional Centres in these States will 
definitely help in achieving our goal.  
Similarly, opening a Regional Centre in 
Jammu and Kashmir will respect the 
sentiments of the people of that state. 
6. 20    -do- The Committee are partially satisfied 
with the reply of Government that the 
Council is constituting “Advisory 
Committees” for each of the existing 
and proposed new cultural centres, 
These Advisory bodies will advise and 
recommend for further strengthening the 
activities of the Council. To the 
Committee, this signals a welcome 
development. However, at the same 
time, the Committee are apprehensive 
of the fact that these Advisory 
Committees may, in effect, turn into 
defunct advisory bodies because they 
might take their own sweet time to give 
their recommendations.  Thus, the task 
of opening as well as strengthening the 
activities of the regional centres may be 
stretched too far.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that this process 
must be completed at the earliest. 
7. 27     -do- The Committee are dissatisfied and 
note that inspite of repeated 
recommendations for the last several 
years on the urgent need to finalise the 
proposal regarding the setting up of 
Cultural Centre in Washington, the 
Ministry have failed to acquire the 
selected 
property and the deal has once 

  
again slipped out from their hands. It is 
only due to the extremely bureaucratic, 
rigid and cumbersome procedures and 
inept handling by the Ministry that the 
matter has once again come back to 
square one. The Committee feel that 
there is a need to review the very 
working of the Ministry to this effect so 
that opportunities do not continue to be 
lost like it happened in the present case. 
The Committee in their First Report (14
th 
Lok Sabha) had also expressed their 
deep anguish over the lapses 
committed by the Ministry in 
establishment of Cultural Centre in 
Washington and recommended that the 
Cultural Centre in Washington should 
be established at the earliest. The 
Committee again reiterate that 
immediate action should be initiated on 
the project on top priority so that a 
Cultural Centre is opened in 
Washington at the earliest and hope 
that it will be in place by the end of 
2005
. 
The Committee further desire that the 
process to open the Cultural Centre at 
Iran, Japan, Thailand, Cambodia and 
also in China should be expedited. 
8. 30    -do- In a written reply to a question whether 
non- availability of adequate fund 
restricted ICCR to increase its activities 
and programmes in the country as well 
as abroad, the Ministry itself had stated 
that the ICCR’s budget recorded only 
marginal increase over successive 
years.  If inflationary trends and rise in 
cost of living were also taken into 
account, ICCR’s budget, in real terms, 
actually stood reduced over the last few 
years.  However, subsequently in their 
action taken reply to the Committee’s 
observation on budget, the Ministry of 
External Affairs have stated that the net 
increase in actual allocation of ICCR 
during the two years 2002-2003 and 
2003-2004 has been Rs. 12.88 crores 
which is way above the normal trends.  
The Committee feel that such a reply is 
self- contradictory and should be 
avoided in future. 
9. 31     -do- The Committee note that Ministr y of 

  
External Affairs have also been 
incurring expenditure from its capital 
outlay on behalf of ICCR for 
construction/purchase of properties for 
use by the cultural centres abroad, in 
addition to payment of grants-in-aid 
which is not indicated separately.  The 
Committee further note that for the 
establishment of new cultural centres 
abroad, allocation of additional funds 
from capital outlay of the Ministry is to 
be considered by the Ministry to meet 
ICCR’s requirement for the 
purchase/construction of cultural centre.  
The Committee expect that paucity of 
funds which had been a major 
impediment in previous years will no 
more be there and through this new 
arrangement ICCR will be able to meet 
its future requirements and the target 
set for the purchase/construction of 
cultural centres will be achieved without 
any difficulty. 
10. 34     -do- The Committee note that the Ministry in 
general and the Council in particular 
have not made any progress in the 
matter of raising resources by working 
in close coordination with civil society 
and this keeps the Council high and dry 
as far as the budget is concerned. 
Getting mere discounts from hotels or 
donation of Rs. 10.00 lakh are not 
sufficient to achieve global objectives.  
The Committee are unable to 
understand as to why the Ministry/ ICCR 
are not exploring the possibilities of 
seeking coordination with important 
public and private companies of Indian 
origin and getting sponsorships for their 
cultural programmes in India and 
abroad to raise their resources. Even 
the advertisements of ICCR in 
Newspapers could be sponsored which 
will considerably reduce its financial 
constraints.  Coordination, cooperation 
and intermingling of trade and culture is 
the order of the day and need of modern 
age.  The Committee are of the view 
that in line with this trend, the Ministry 
should without any hesitation explore 
the possibility of coordinating trade and 
culture and benefit from it immensel
y.  

  
Further efforts should also be made to 
involve the civil society globally and 
Indian Diaspora in various countries in 
this cause. This, in the opinion of the 
Committee, is certainly one of the better 
options available to the ICCR to 
overcome their budgetary constraints. 
11. 37     -do- The Committee had expressed their 
desire that the ICCR should bring under 
its schemes the programme of sending 
Indian students abroad for studies to 
universities like Harvard University and 
others who may, perhaps, be willing to 
offer a couple of scholarships for the 
Indian students.  But ICCR has stated 
that their scholarship schemes are not 
linked to the foreign universities and it is 
unlikely that they would entertain any 
request for grant of scholarships to 
Indian students. The Committee are 
surprised to note how the ministry 
makes such a hypothetical assumption 
that foreign universities will not entertain 
any request for grant of scholarships to 
Indian students – without practically 
making any efforts in approaching 
foreign universities in this regard. Many 
of the foreign universities have full-
fledged Oriental Studies Divisions and 
Departments of Indology - imparting 
education of Hindi, Sanskrit and 
Buddhist studies etc.  The Committee 
are of the strong opinion that 
ICCR/Ministry can co-ordinate with 
these departments for obtaining 
scholarships for Indian students in 
foreign universities. Many Non-Resident 
Indians settled abroad have also been 
patronising and propagating Indian 
art/culture and music.  ICCR can seek 
the assistance of these people for more 
vigorous projection of our culture 
abroad.  The Committee further reiterate 
that ICCR/Ministry must make efforts to 
get scholarships for Indian students in 
foreign universities and for this purpose, 
if required, the help of the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development may 
also be taken. 
 
12. 40 -do- The Committee regret to note that the 
scholarship allocations meant for certain 

  
countries have not been optimally 
utilized. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the scholarship slots 
earmarked for scholars from a particular 
country should preferably go to that 
country and unutilized slots do not go to 
reserve candidates of other countries 
who have fully utilized their given slots.  
For this, the Committee recommend that 
ICCR should evolve such a system 
whereby if scholarship slots offered for a 
particular country remain unutilized – 
waitlisted candidates from that country 
should, in the first instance, be offered 
the scholarships and only in the event of 
waitlisted candidates not being 
available, the unutilized slots should be 
allowed to go to reserved candidates of 
those countries who have fully utilized 
their given slots. Further, the Committee 
are of the considered opinion that the 
number of seats as also the amount of 
scholarship being offered to students 
from the countries having maximum 
number of Persons of Indian Origin 
need to be increased so that the 
number of students coming to our 
country go up who in turn may act as 
brand ambassadors for promoting 
Indian culture abroad. 
13. 43 -do- The Ministry have stated that the 
question of offering additional airfares to 
foreign scholars would be considered in 
the context of availability of sufficient 
funds.  However, the Committee feel 
that efforts should be made to provide 
some additional funds for this purpose 
which in turn will go a long way to 
enhance our bilateral goodwill globally. 
The Committee reiterate that the 
number of airfares may be increased 
substantially covering central Asia as 
well as other parts of the world.  The 
Committee also reiterate that the ICCR 
should take appropriate steps to provide 
suitable hostel facilities to foreign 
students for their comfortable stay in the 
country to avoid their home sickness 
and easy adjustment with new 
environment.  As the Ministry have 
overlooked the Committee’s view about 
the review of scholarshi
p, the 

  
Committee would like to remind the 
ICCR that scholarships being paid to the 
scholars should be reviewed biennially. 
 
14. 46 -do- The Committee still hold the opinion that 
the council’s programme of establishing 
Chairs and deputing visiting Professors 
abroad to educate foreign university 
students in Indian studies and other 
related subjects are not at all 
satisfactory.  Visiting Chair and 
Professors abroad play an important 
role in educating foreign university 
students,  enlightening and influencing 
the mind of foreign students about India 
and assisting them to understand India’s 
position on various issues in the right 
perspective.  By maintaining only 17 
Chairs and professorship in whole world 
under the aegis of ICCR can not fulfill 
the vision and Mission of India’s cultural 
diplomacy.  Therefore, the Committee 
reiterate that more Chairs should be 
established under the programme and 
the number of professors being sent 
abroad to teach Hindi and other Indian 
languages, particularly where a large 
number of persons of Indian origin 
reside should also be increased 
substantially. 
15. 49 -do- The Committee are of the view that 
while much attention is being paid on 
performing arts and to send a number of 
troupes/groups for performance in 
various parts of the world, the ICCR is 
not making much efforts regarding the 
promotion of contemporary Indian art. 
The steps taken so far by ICCR to 
promote contemporary art are not 
sufficient and up to the desired level. 
Whatever little recognition Indian 
contemporary art has received is only 
through private galleries.  The 
Committee reiterate that to promote 
Indian contemporary art, to give 
exposure to Indian art and culture world 
wide and also to organise festivals and 
other activities and to exhibit Indian arts 
at least in key cities of the world, ICCR 
should come up with some specific 
action plan.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that more attention should be 

  
given to promote our contemporary art 
and the ICCR in collaboration with 
Indian Missions abroad should make 
sincere efforts in this regard. 
16. 52 -do- As per the reply of the Government, in 
pursuance of the recommendations of 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee, 
the Council has started the production 
of films within its meagre resources.  
However, the Committee are of the 
opinion that production of films in itself 
is a complicated, time consuming and 
expensive task and the Committee said 
nothing which suggested that ICCR 
should start producing films itself.  In 
any case, the Committee are happy to 
note that the council is producing a film 
with its limited resources.  The 
Committee also extend their full support 
to get additional budgetary resources to 
produce films on selected interesting 
subjects.  If sufficient budget is made 
available to the Council easily it may 
also prove to be an intelligent move.  
However, for the time being it will be 
wise on the part of the Council to get the 
rights for sponsoring Indian popular 
films/documentaries abroad. Our film 
industry and advertisement agencies 
are producing huge amount of useful 
films and documentaries and so many 
films/documentaries are also readily 
available which can be used for the 
purpose.  The Committee reiterate that 
ICCR may try to select these readily 
available films which can reflect our 
tradition and rich cultural heritage 
globally and manage to get the rights of 
these films with sub-titles into major 
languages. This is the easiest way to 
create impression worldwide in a short 
span of time and may prove to be useful 
in rapid promotion and dissemination of 
our culture across the globe. 
17. 57. -do- The Committee are not satisfied with the 
reply of Government that the 
recommendation is a inter-Ministerial 
subject and the Ministry is examining the 
matter.  The Committee believe that there 
is lot of scope to revamp and reorient the 
council’s functioning in keeping with the 
chan
ging circumstances the world over.  

  
The identification of organisations and 
institutions, which may supplement the 
efforts towards strengthening our cultural 
Diplomacy, is not a difficult task. The 
Committee are of the opinion that to 
achieve the objectives of ICCR and also 
enhance its activities, an increased 
coordination and greater involvement of 
different wings of Government of India is 
the need of the hour. The Committee 
reiterate that Ministry of External Affairs 
should make all out efforts to form a 
coordination Committee as early as 
possible, which may include 
representative from the Ministries of 
External Affairs, Tourism, Information 
Technology, Human Resources 
Development (Department of Culture and 
Education) and Commerce as its 
members.  This co-ordination Committee 
according to them should get together to 
work out annual plans for the purpose. 
Without the help of other 
Ministries/Departments it is not possible 
to achieve the goal.  ICCR is representing 
India in promoting Indian culture & 
civilisation abroad.  Hence, It is all the 
more necessary to coordinate with other 
Ministries in properly projecting India.  
Since all Government departments 
abroad are under the purview of Indian 
Missions, it is easier to coordinate with 
them. As Many State capitals of the World 
have Indian Tourist Offices, ICCR can 
coordinate with these offices for 
promoting culture as well.  Only such 
steps can bring about and ensure a 
symbiotic unity and all separate units 
working together can really lift our cultural 
diplomacy. The Committee are also 
hopeful that Ministry of External Affairs 
have by now may have initiated suitable 
steps in this direction and the Ministry will 
leave no stone unturned as far as the 
effective projection of our cultural heritage 
is concerned. 
18. 60 -do- Regarding inadequate staff strength, the 
Council has candidly accepted that at 
the level of Assistant Programme Officer 
(Section Officer) no direct recruitment 
had taken place since 1996 because 
Staff Selection Commission had 

  
declined to nominate candidates to the 
autonomous bodies.  The Council has 
also informed the Committee that it is 
still pursuing the matter with Staff 
Selection Commission.  The Committee 
are sorry to note that only after the 
passage of seven long years, the 
Council has now proposed an overall 
restructuring of the ICCR cadre in 
consultation with Cadre Cell, Ministry of 
External Affairs.  Further, the Council is 
also in the process of reforming its 
service rule in order to give more 
promotional avenues to the staff of the 
Council. The Committee feel that 
fulfillment of the staff strength, opening 
of more promotional avenues and 
incentives to raise the morale of the 
staff should be among the top priorities 
of the Council and the least the Council 
can do is to fulfill its sanctioned staff 
strength immediately. 
 