 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 18 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2007-08] 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 

EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2007-08] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2007  
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 

COEA NO. 67  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2007-2008………………………        (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………       (iv)  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...             4 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observ ations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……       26 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            28 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………           29 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Comm ittee held on 7.11.2007…       30  
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                           
 Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
14th Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….       32    
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2007-2008) 
 
LOK SABHA 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
7. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain* 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
10. Shri L. Rajagopal  
11. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
12. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
13. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
14. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
19. Shri M. Shivanna 
20. Shri Vanlalzawma 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
24. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
26. Dr. Ram Prakash  
27. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
29. Dr. Karan Singh  
30. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
5. Shri K.C. Pandey - Committee Officer 
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 30th August, 2007  
 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs (2007-2008) ha ving 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
18th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 15th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants  
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2007-08. 
 
2. The 15th Report was presented to  Parliament on 26 Apri l, 2007. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Report were received on 24 July, 2007. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Acti on Taken Report at t heir 
sitting held on 7 Nov ember, 2007. The Minutes  of the sitting of the Committee have 
been reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action tak en by Government on the recommendations  
contained in the 15 th Report of the Standing Commi ttee on External Affairs (14 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
12 November,  2007                                                     Chairman,                 
21 Kartika, 1929 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

CHAPTER – I 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Com mittee on External Af fairs deals with the 
Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
their Fifteenth Report on Demands for Gr ants (2007-2008) of the Ministry of  
External Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April, 2007. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been rece ived from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the obs ervations/recommendations contained in the report.  These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations , w hich have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 3 to 13 and 15 to 18 
 Total-16 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  w hich the Com mittee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No.  14 
Total-01 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of 
Government have not been accepted b y the Co mmittee and  
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
Total- NIL 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of  w hich final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Total-01 
 
3. The Committee are glad to note th at the Ministry of External Affair s 
have accepted/implemented most of the recommendations made b y the 
Committee in their fifteenth Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
observation/recommendation at Sl. No. 11. 
  
   
1

 
 
Kaladan Multi-Modal Transport Facility 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
5. The Committee had been informed that finalization of Kaladan Multi-modal 
Transit Project was getting delayed as there were certain issues still to be settled 
in the agreement to be signed with Myanmar.  The Co mmittee desired that these 
issues should be sorted out early and the project finalized for execution wit hout 
further delay so that the benefits expected to accrue on completion of the project 
become available to the public in time. 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs in  their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
“The Kala dan Multi-Modal Transit  Transport Facility envisag es 
connectivity between Indian Ports on the eastern s eaboard and 
Sittwe Port in Myanmar and then through riverine transport and by 
road to Mizoram, thereby providi ng an alternate route for transport 
of goods  to North-East India. T he Detailed Project Report on the 
facility was prepared by RITES in 2003 and has the concurrence of 
the Myanmar Government.  
Up till now, six round s of Seni or Officials Meeting o n the 
Project have taken place where the representatives of Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Co mmerce, Ministry of Road Transport 
& Highway s, Ministry of Shippi ng and RITES Ltd. participated.  
During these meetings, followi ng agreem ent/protocol hav e been 
negotiated and initialed: Draft Framework Agreement on the 
Project; Draft Protocol on Facilit ation of Transit Transport; Draft 
Protocol on Financial Arrangement s; and Draft Protocol on Joint 
Maintenance and Administration. 
  
   
2

 
Under the Protocol on F inancial Arrangements , the 
Government of Myanmar agreed init ially to contribute US$ 10 
million and free land for the proj ect while GOI agree d to fund the 
balance amount of approx. US $ 100 million, as well as be liable for 
any cost overruns.  Myanmar howe ver requested later on for a s oft 
loan for their contribution of US$ 10 million.   This has now been 
approved by the Ministry of Financ e subject to Cabinet approval. 
During the meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) which 
was held on 2 F ebruary 2007,  Mini stry of Finance approved t he 
proposal s ubject to fulfillment of  certain observations  made by 
Planning Commission. In March 2007 sixth SOM was held between 
India and Myanmar and some of t he outstanding iss ues remained 
unresolved. Revised drafts of Framework/Protocols have been 
submitted to the Myanmar side. Their response is awaited.” 
 
7. The Com mittee desire that the outstanding issues remained 
unresolved in regard to the K aladan Multi-Modal Transit Project be sorted 
out exped itiously to ensure earl y exec ution and timel y com pletion of the 
project. 
 
 
  
   
3

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
It is regrettable that the budget  alloca tions to the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2007- 08 has been pegged at a level st eeply below the 
projections made by the Ministry. As against the projection of Rs. 6429 crore, the 
budgetary allocation to the Ministry is just Rs. 4433 crore which is 31% less than 
the projection. Given the expanding nature of its co mmitments, the Ministry  
anticipates a poss ible need for augmentation of the allocation during the course 
of the year. It has been st ated that the reduction in  allocation will affect the 
cultural work, starting up new projects in neighbourhood and construction of new 
embassies and res idences. Considering the Ministry’s record of hea lthy 
utilization of allotted funds and to enable the Ministry to effectively perform India’s 
expanding role in global affairs, the Committee reco mmend that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should be allotted sufficient additional funds at the time of revised 
allocation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Finance would be appr oached for augmentation of the budget  
allocation at the RE stage as well as  by  way of s upplementary demands for 
grants in all such cases where the exp enditure incurred is committed and cannot 
be avoided and efforts will be made to fulfill all our commitments. The quantum of 
augmentation required would be known duri ng the c ourse of the financ ial year 
2007-08.  
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 Incidentally, discrepancies have crept into some figures shown in the 
Outcome Budget and Dem and-for-Grants doc ument presenting a misleading 
picture. The errors relate to sectoral  allocations shown in the outcome budget 
under the head, ‘Tec hnical and Economic  Cooperation’  and the head ‘Others’ 
and relate to the establishment str ength shown in the Demands-for-Grants 
document. The Ministry have since submitted corrected figures to the Committee. 
The Committee would, however, like to caut ion the Ministry that extreme care 
should be exercised in future to ensure that documents / information presented to 
Parliament are free of flaws.  
 
  
   
4

Reply of the Government 
 
All efforts are being made by the Mini stry to ensure t hat there are no 
discrepancies in the documents / information presented to the Parliament. The 
observation made by the Committee has been noted for compliance in future. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
ESTABLISHMENT STRENGTH 
  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Com mittee have been inf ormed that while the overall work of the 
Ministry in the last 10 years has increased manifold, the number of personnel has 
actually s hrunk. It has been stated in this  connection that I ndia's foreign trade 
has grown 7 times; passports issued doubled to 44 lakhs; Visas granted tripled to 
over 57 lakhs; the high leve l state visits by Heads of States and Governments  
and Official Visits of Foreign Ministers in creased by 165 per c ent and budget  of 
the Ministry tripled. Howev er, the Pers onnel strength of t he Ministry has gone 
down from 4,866 to 4,746 of which the size of the Officers belonging to the IFS is 
less than 700. Obviously, there is an urgent need to raise the manpower strength 
for the Ministry to cope with the expanding role of the Ministry. In this connection, 
it is heartening to learn from the Forei gn Secretary that a decision-in-principle 
has been taken at the highest level to increas e the size of the Ministry's cadre. 
The Com mittee suggest that an asse ssment of additional manpower  
requirements over the period of next five years, with due regard to the proposed 
outsourcing of certain per ipheral jobs, be made e xpeditiously and action to 
ensure that the projected level of personnel is in place at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A draft note for Cabinet on the propos ed expansion of the Ministry of 
External Affairs has been submit ted to D epartment of Expend iture, Ministry of 
Finance for their comments and the note wi ll be subsequently pla ced before the 
Cabinet for approval. Once the proposal is approved, Ministry of External Af fairs 
will expeditiously undertake the recruitm ent of personnel. In addition, variou s 
studies are being undertaken by the Mini stry to outsource peripheral job s 
including issuance of visa, protocol work, etc. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
BILATERAL AGREEMENT WITH USA 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Com mittee observe that India and t he United States  are presently  
engaged in negotiations on a bilateral ag reement that will ide ntify the specific 
parameters of civil nuclear  energy cooperation and two round of talks in June 
  
   
5

2006 and in March 2007 have been held in th is regard.  India and the United 
States are also reportedl y engaging Member-States of the Nuclear Supplier s 
Group to bring about adjustment of NSG guidelines with respect to India to 
enable full civil nuc lear cooperation.  Di scussions have also been held by India 
with IAEA for an India-spec ific safeguards  agreement.  The Committee desire  
that, in line with the assurance given by  the Prime Min ister in both Hous es and 
without compromising our sovereign and stra tegic interests, it should be ensured 
that all these negotiations are led to mutually agreeable agreements and fuel 
supplies to our civil nuclear plants resumed expeditiously with a view to achieving 
energy security. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recom mendation of the es teemed Committee has been noted for 
compliance.  It is submitted that curr ently India and the United States  are 
engaged in negotiations to conc lude a bila teral agreement, better known as  the 
“123 Agreement.”  Several official rounds of negotiations have been held.  Details 
of the most recent rounds since the esteemed Committee was briefed in April 
2007 are as follow: 
 
• Cape Town, South Africa – April 16-20, 2007 
• Washington D.C. – April 30,2007 
• London – May 21-22, 2007 
• New Delhi – May 31- June 2, 2007 
• Washington – July 17- 20, 2007 
  
The Agreement is expected to operat ionalise the understandings contained 
in the July 18, 2005 Joint Statement and March 2006 Separation Plan.  India is  
simultaneously eng aging in discussions with the IAEA for a n India-sp ecific 
safeguards agreements.  With regard to adj ustment of NSG guidelines to enable 
civil nuclear cooperation, the NSG has been approached as a group and several 
key members have been engaged bilaterally as well. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
SOUTH ASIAN FREE TRADE AREA (SAFTA) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 That despite less than full complia nce, South Asian Free Trade Area 
(SAFTA) has yielded positive results underlines the need for enlarging the scope 
of SAFTA to services and inves tments and ev entually to econo mic integration.  
The Committee are glad to note that this  has been partly achieved in the 14 th 
SAARC Summit held in the beg inning of April 2007.  It has now been agreed to 
expand the scope of SAFTA to cover trade in services.  It should be ensured that 
agreement on invest ment pr omotion and protection is finalized early and steps 
taken to reduce Non-Tariff Barriers. 
  
   
6

 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
To further enhance the scope of SAFTA to cover services and 
investments, a study on Potentials  for  Trade in Services  under SAFT A 
Agreement is being conducted by the SAARC Net work of Researchers on 
Global, Financial and Economic Issues with Research & Informati on System for 
the developing countries (RIS), New Delhi as the coordinator. 
 
 The Sev enth Meeting of the Sub- Group on Promotion & Prote ction of  
Investments will be held on August 23, 2007 at  the SAARC Secretariat,  
Kathmandu to discuss the outstanding paragraph in the draft Report on 
Promotion and Protection of Investments. 
 
 The Second Meeting of the SAFTA  Sub-Group on Non-Tariff Measure s 
(NTMs) will be he ld on August 29-30, 2007 at Lahore, Pakistan to discuss steps 
to reduce NTBs faced by SAARC countries in intra-regional trade. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
 
PROJECTS UNDER EXECUTION 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Committee find that out of eleven projects, each costing over  Rs. 50 
crores being executed in neighbouring countries under Technical and Economic 
Cooperation, there has been cost escalation in th ree Afghanistan projects, three 
Bhutanese projects and one N epalese project. The proj ects slipped up in 
adhering to time schedule and r un into variety of difficulties. It is not clear a s to 
what exactly is the role and resp onsibility of MEA in e xecution of these projects. 
In any case, the authority responsible for implementation of these projects should 
immediately take a critical review of t hese projects with a view to overcoming the 
problems and rectifying the deficiencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Afghanistan 
 
1. Construction of 218 km. road from Za ranj to Delaram being executed by  
Border Roads Organization (BRO) 
 
(i) Cost escalation and Time ove rrun: The estimated cost of the 
project has increased from Rs. 377 crores to Rs. 746.50 crores and 
the project completion time line fr om December 2007 to December 
2008 due to following reasons: 
  
  
   
7

• The sharp increase in t he cost of the major inputs for the project. 
The revised costs are based on DGBR SSR 2004 prices (the earlier 
Cabinet approval was obtained on DGBR SSR 1998 prices).  
• Volatile market condition, price fl uctuations and erratic supplies in 
Afghanistan.  
• Security has been a major issue in this project. There have been at 
least 10 attacks on or near the proj ect site in last six months. 
Initially cost estimates were pr epared with a consider ed view that 
local Security Guards will be av ailable in c heap and requirement 
will be minimal. However, the attacks and threats at and around the 
project site have incr eased as t he project progressed . After killing 
of a BRO employee by Taliban extremists, the IT BP security 
deployed for the project was increas ed from 38 to 254, whic h has 
now been increased to 388 due to increased threat level.  
• There was  no provision of Departm ental charges in the Cabin et 
approval. Howev er, BRO has inco rporated departmental charges  
@ 7% in the revised estimates. 
(ii) MEA’s role and responsibility in  execution of this project:  MEA is invo lved 
at all stages of selection (in cons ultation with the Afghan Government) , 
approval, implementation and financial as pects of the project. Diplomatic 
inputs are essential for the successful  implementation of  the project. 
Though the project, on ground, is being implemented by BRO, an 
Empowered Committee (EC) in Afghanist an comprising officials  from the 
Embassy and BRO Office in Afghanis tan, and a Project Review 
Committee (PRC) in New De lhi comp rising MEA and BRO He adquarter 
officials have been formed for effe ctive coordination and review o f 
progress of work. As the work is bei ng implemented in a foreign country, 
MEA’s inv olvement is essential to facilitate movement of personnel an d 
material from India, procurement of material from local market and other 
countries and any other issues like cu stom clearances etc that need to be 
taken up with Afghanistan and other concerned countries.  
(iii)Critical Review of the project by BRO:  We have written to BRO informing 
them about the recommendation of t he Standing Committee on External 
Affairs that BRO should immediately take  a critical review of the project 
with a view to overcoming the probl ems and rectifying the deficiencies.  
Meanwhile Hon’ble Raksha Rajya Mantri  took a meetin g of Border Road s 
Development Board, in which t his project was disc ussed. BRO has 
informed that the project now is progressing as per the revised s chedule 
and is  expected to be completed at the revised cost within the revised 
timeline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
8

2. Reconstruction and completion of Salma Dam Power Project in Herat  
province being executed by M/s WAPCOS 
 
(i) Cost escalation: The estimated cost of this project has increase d 
from Rs. 351.58 crores to Rs . 498.69 crores due to following  
reasons (there is no time overrun in the project): 
 
• The sharp increase in the cost  of the major inputs for the 
project and civil and electro-mechanical work.  
• Volatile m arket condition, price fluctuations and erratic 
supplies in Afghanistan.  
• Security problems.  
(ii) MEA’s role and responsibility in exec ution of this project:  MEA is 
involved at all stages  of selecti on (in consultation wit h the Afghan 
Government), approval, implementation and financial aspects of the 
project. Though the project, on ground,  is  being implemented by 
WAPCOS and its sub-contractors, an EC in Afghanistan comprising 
officials from the Em bassy and WAPCOS Office in Afghanistan, 
and a PRC in New Delhi comp rising MEA and WAPCOS 
Headquarter have been formed for effective coordination and 
review of progress of work. Diplo matic inputs are essential for the 
successful implementation of the pr oject. As the work is being 
implemented in a foreign country, MEA’s involvement is essential to 
facilitate movement of personnel  and  material from India,  
procurement of material from loc al market and other c ountries and 
any other issues like custom clear ances etc that need to be tak en 
up with Afghanistan and other concerned countries. 
(iii) Critical Re view of th e project by WAPCOS:  A PRC meeting was 
held at MEA in May 2007, in which MEA impressed upon WAPCOS 
officials need to resolve outstandi ng issues and problems so that  
the project could be completed within the revised cost and timeline. 
WAPCOS informed that the projec t proposal was submitted at the 
cost based on J uly 2004 prices, which was approved and awarded 
to them in January 2005. The c ost revision was done at December  
2005 prices due to increase in costs relating to civil and electro-
mechanical works. The cost e scalation was not due to any 
additions in scope of work or due to any delay. Other problem 
which could lead to delay is refusa l of Iran to permit transport of 
materials required for this projec t through its territory, which is  the 
other easiest and direct option in absence of land transit facilit y 
from Pakistan. At the moment, MEA is trying to secure the required 
material for this project from  other neighbouring c ountries of 
Afghanistan such as Uzbekistan, Ukraine and Turkmenistan. PRC 
and EC m eetings will be held frequent ly so that any  problems and 
outstanding issues can be resolved quick ly in order to avoid any  
further cost and time overrun and diplomatic interventions with 
neighbouring states of Afghanistan undertaken whenever required. 
  
   
9

 
3. Construction of Afghanist an’s Parliament buildin g (Parliament Building 
Project) being executed by CPWD 
 
 The estimated cost of the project has increased from Rs. 296.45 crores to 
Rs. 337.58 crores due to request by t he Afghan government for additional 
requirements in the building after CNE app roval of the project. The projec t has 
not yet commenced. CPWD is  presently  carrying out enabling works for the 
project. MEA is processing the proposal  for necessary approvals. Once the 
project is approved, it will be ensured that there is no time and cost overrun 
(except in circumstances bey ond our control due to v olatile market and sensitiv e 
security situation in Afghanist an) th rough tight monitoring v ia regular  and 
frequent PRC and EC meetings. 
Bhutan 
 
The Standing Committee on Exte rnal Affairs identified three projects above Rs.  
50 Crore, in Bhutan as hav ing cost escalations. Th e projects along with the 
nature of problems identified,  reasons for cost increase s and the revie w action 
taken are listed below. 
 
 Projects 
Revised 
Cost 
In Rs Cr 
Original 
Cost In 
Rs Cr 
Original Date of Completion/ 
Anticipated Date of Completion/ 
Reasons for Cost/Time Overruns 
and Action taken thereon 
1 
Tintibi - Tongsa - 
Bumthang Trans. 
Line 
61.70 34.38 
The contract for 37 kms. 132 kV. 
Tintibi-Yurmoo and 3 7 kms. 66 kV. 
Yurmoo-Bumthang transmission line 
was awarded to M/s Utkal 
Galvanisers, Orissa in joint venture 
with M/s Bhutan Engineering 
Company on 8 May 2006 at contract 
amount of Rs. 380 m. The contract 
is for 24 months and expected t o be 
completed by May  2008.  The 
contract for construction of 33 kV 
substations at Yurmoo, Trongsa and 
Bumthang along with staff quarters 
and 33 kV tower line from Yurmoo to 
Trongsa had been awarded to 
POWERGRID on 28.7.2006 at Rs. 
260 millio n, whic h inc ludes the 
consultancy cost. The cost was  
increased based on competitive 
bidding process. Matter was 
discussed in a meeting between 
representatives of  Department of 
Energy, RGOB, Bhutan Power 
  
   
10

Corporation Limit ed, MEA, Central 
Electricity Authorit y, India and 
PGCIL held on 17/4/ 2006. Ministry 
of Power vide UO No. 3/28/2006-
Trans dated 6.9.2006  stated that it 
has no views to offer on the cost 
estimates which hav e already been 
confirmed by the CEA. 
2 JDWNMH 
Expansion 71.60 65.69 
Construction works to be complet ed 
by June 2007. The cost has  
increased on the basis on approved 
work plan at the 3rd Pr oject 
Monitoring Committee held in April,  
2006. Revised estimates were 
vetted by AIIMS, New Delhi 
3 Pasakha - Manitar 
Road 55.60 54.01 
The road is exp ected to be 
completed by April, 2007 and the 
three bri dges w ould be completed  
by April, 2008. The revised cos t is 
on the basis of approved Det ailed 
Project Report.  
4 Construction of 
Supreme Court 31.58 12.6 
The in itial appro val was  for 
construction of High  Court at a cost 
of Rs 12.6 crores .  The January, 
2006 Plan Talks revis ed the cos t at 
Rs 100  million for Ninth F YP for 
Supreme Court instead of a High 
Court and noted spillover of Rs 220 
million in the Tenth  FYP  due  to 
expansion in scope of works. Royal 
Government of Bhutan, RGoB 
submitted a detailed scope of works 
and plans with an est imated cost of 
Rs 479 million. The project was   
examined from a technical viewpoint 
the designs, cost estimates and time 
schedule for completion of the 
Supreme Court and it was  
recommended that the estimated 
cost of Rs 433.5 6 million  be 
approved. Of the approved cost, Rs 
315.80 million is alloc ated for Ninth 
FYP and rest would spillover to the 
10th FYP.  
 
 
  
   
11

2. In case of Projects undertaken in Bhutan, a proper mechanism for  
monitoring and review of these projects  is already in plac e. The projects 
undertaken by Government of  India in Bhut an are moni tored under the bilateral 
agreement on ‘Implementati on mechanism  for project-tied assistance to RGoB’ 
signed on 20th October 2004  between the two Government. As per this  
agreement the main mechanism  for monitori ng the projects is the India-Bhutan 
Development Cooperation Talk s which ar e held annually to review the Gol 
assisted projects. 
 
3. The list of projects and the indic ative fund alloc ations for the plan period 
are agreed during the Plan Talks . The list of Projects is finalized on the basis o f 
project documents, cost estimates and wo rk plans. RGOB thereafter prepares 
and forwards the five-year Work Plans  with an annualiz ed statement of the 
estimated costs and fund requirements fo r each project to the Gol. The GOI 
releases 50% of the annual r equirement of the cost of the project as an initial 
release on receipt of the request from RGOB accompanied by the five-year Work 
Plan. Subsequent releases are based on the submission of an annual work plan,  
progress report and utilization certificate.  
 
4. By the same Agreement, the RGOB and the GOI agreed to reactivate the 
Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) to monitor and facilitate smooth 
implementation of project- tied assistance. The PMC, which meets twice a year 
and comprises 4 members each from GoI and RGoB, is the formal mechanism to 
facilitate smooth implementation of the projects funded by GOI u nder project-tied 
assistance, through joint monitoring including those wo rks awarded to 
consultants/executing agencies of the tw o governments. It is responsible for 
ensuring that the project objectives and outputs are achieved and funds ar e 
utilized efficiently and effectively. 
 
5. The main tasks of the PMC include: 
 
• Monitor overall progress and implem entation of the GOI pr oject-tied 
assistance through reviews and visits  to project sites as and when 
necessary.  
• Review physical and financial progress of the project.  
• Review any issues including causes of delay, if any, in the implementation 
of the projects and propose alternative solutions.  
• Review any major changes required in  the scope of the project and make 
recommendations to the two governments, as necessary.  
• Review and recommend, as necessa ry, any re-allocation of funds  
between the project activities  not  exc eeding the overall approved  
allocation of the project. 
 
 
 
 
  
   
12

Nepal  
 
The Standing Committee on Exter nal Affairs has identified one project in case of 
Nepal consisting over Rs. 50 crore. The detailed j ustification with regard to 
observations made in para 7 is as follows: 
 
Government of India is setting up a 200-bed Emergency and Trauma Care 
Centre in Kathmandu as part of Bir Hos pital Expansion. Initially the cost of  the 
project in March,2003 was estimated at Rs. 54.11 crore. The same was updated 
to Rs. 61.39 crore in December,2004 by adopting Plinth Area Rate method and 
was approved by the Committee on Non- plan Expenditure. Based on sam e 
method, item-wise break-up of approved estimates, accepted tendered cost  
along with justification is as  follows: 
 
Item 
 
Approv
-ed 
cost 
(in cr) 
 
Accepted 
Tendered 
cost  ( in 
cr) 
 
Remarks/Justification 
Civil w orks, 
Electrical and AC 
Work 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41.39 
 
50.64 
GON took some time in providing 
site free from all encumbrances. 
After award of Contract to M/s Unity  
Infraprojects through open bidding 
by M/s HSCC, Consultant  in 
September,06, construction work  
started i n end October,2006.  
Besides the increas e in c osts from 
December,2004, t he project site 
which is located in a congested 
area and the prevailing political and 
security situation in Nepal are also 
to some extent responsible for 
increase in costs. The completion 
period is  eighteen months. Bandhs 
and shutdowns in Kathmandu,  and 
in Terai region of  Nepal have 
adversely affected the supplies  in 
past and might  delay  the 
completion. However, the Executing 
Agency is trying its best to complete 
the work within the stipulated tim e. 
The accepted tendered cost is  
fixed, and is not subjected to any  
escalation. 
  
   
13

Medical Equipment, 
Computers, and 
Furniture 
17.88 
 
 
 
 
- 
 
Tenders will b e invited  by 
Consultant M/s HSCC so as  to 
coincide the commencement with 
completion of civil, electrical and AC 
works. Stipulated period for 
completion of supplies as per DPR 
is six months. 
Consultancy Fee 1.92 
 
1.92 
 
Consultant shall be paid fee of  Rs. 
1.92 cr or @4.5% of project cost 
excluding cost of  equipment plus 
1.5% of cost of equipm ent” 
calculated on the es timated cost or 
the tendered cost whichever is less, 
plus Servic e Tax as per app licable 
rates. Likely  to be Rs.1 .92 cr. 
Service Tax 
 
0.2 
 
0.2 
 
As per applicable Rates 
Total 
 
61.39 
 
- 
 
After tendering process is finalized 
for medical supplies, equipment and 
furniture , exact cost will be kno wn. 
If required, CNE will be 
approached. 
 
The expenditure is being met by non-plan “Aid to Nepal” Budg et of MEA. Nepal 
Section, Northern Div ision, in coordination with all conc erned is responsible for the 
implementation of the Project.  Consultant M/s HSCC is also providing the Project 
Management Service. Due diligence is being exercised at each and every stage.  
The Inter-Governmental MOU for the project provides for a Joint Project Monitoring 
Committee (PMC) for monitoring the implementation of the project and to provide its  
recommendations. It includes representatives from Northern Division and IF D, MEA, 
Embassy of India, Kathmandu, Consultant  and the Executing Agency as  well as  
from Government of Nepal. Three meetings  of PMC have been held so far. The last 
meeting was held in January 2007. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
On examination of whatever deta ils made available, the Committee 
received an impression that the Ministry does not have any in-house capability or 
organized set up for project delivery.  It is on ly now that the Ministry has  
proposed to set up an agency called I ndia International Development  
Cooperation Agency  whose mandate is set to include efficient project 
  
   
14

implementation.  The Committee hope that  the agency will be established soon 
and deficiencies in pr oject implementation removed and would like to be kept 
informed of the progress in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
EAM had addressed a letter to Finance Mi nister in response to which the 
latter included a reference to the proposal in his budget speech 2007-08 
announcing that the Govt. would set up an umbrella organization, India 
International Development Cooperation Agency to implement all India’s overseas  
development cooperation commitments. 
 
A Task Force was set up by the Forei gn Secretary, which included Heads 
of the concerned Divisions, including Finance under the chairmanship of 
Additional Secretary (ER) to submit final recommendations for a Concept Paper  
on the proposed Agency, now known as India Development Cooperation Agency 
(IDCA) for EAM’s approval.  The Task Fo rce submitted its recommendations to 
Foreign Secretary on Apr il 19,2007.  EAM approved the Concept Paper on April 
28, 2007. 
 
Subsequently a draft Note for the Cabinet has also been approved by 
EAM on May 11,2007.  The draft Note for the Cabinet has been forwarded t o the 
concerned Ministries, viz Ministerial of Finance (Dept. of Economic Affairs, and 
Dept. of Expenditure) , Commerce and Industry, and Planning Commission  as 
part of a wider process of inter-Ministeri al consultations, before the proposal is  
submitted for the Cabinet appr oval.  Fo reign Secretary already convened an 
interministerial consultation meeting for an exchange of views on the proposal, 
on 29 th May 07.  As agreed in that meet ing, Foreign Secretary has sinc e 
forwarded the draft Cabinet Note to Cabinet Secretary for its consideration by the 
Committee of Secretaries.  Meanwh ile, Planning Commission has responded 
approving the proposal without any reservation or qualification. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
  
Regrettably, not all relevant projec t details s uch as the origina l and 
anticipated dates of completion, factor-wise analysis of cost escalation, impact of 
cost over-run on viab ility of project (i n whichever case applic able) were mad e 
available t o the Committee. The Committee suggest that such details in future 
should be disclos ed in the Outcome Budget  of the Ministry for information and 
use of Members of Parliament.  
 
  
   
15

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Outcome Budgeting is a relatively new and evolving initiative. It has been 
the endeavor of the Ministry to engage all Divisions as well as Missions / Posts in 
this exercise to correlate quantifiabl e outcomes against outlays, wherever 
practical and to prov ide detailed informa tion on its activities in a c lear and 
transparent manner. T he valuable suggesti on made by the Com mittee for an in-
depth analysis of cost escalation and the impact of cost over-run on viability of 
projects in the Outcome Budget  of the Ministry will b e impleme nted durin g the 
exercise for the next Outcome Budget. These will also be included in the terms of 
reference for studies to be conducted by indepe ndent cons ultants for major 
projects. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee observe that 1020 MW  Ta la Hydro-electric project in 
Bhutan, funded fully by India (60% grant and 40%  loan of the total cost of  Rs. 
4124 crore) and com missioned on March 31, 2007, would supply the entire 1020 
MW power generation to India at a very  low cost. The Ministry intends to 
construct another 3,000 MW in the next 8-10 years.  Considering the cost 
effectiveness and other advantages of such projects, the Committee suggest that 
efforts should be directed at tapping the en tire hydro-power potential available in 
the region including Nepal in a time bound manner rather than lo oking at it in 
piece meal. The Com mittee would await an assessment of viable hydro-power 
potential in the region including Nepal and a perspective plan to exploit the same 
with the cooperation of Bhutanese and Nepalese Government. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Bhutan 
 
Mutually beneficial devel opment of water resources, particularly Hydro-
electric power in Bhutan have been an important element in our bilateral 
relations. Bhutan’s hydropower potential is estimated at 30,000 megawatts (MW).  
Out of this, 1470 MW (including 1024 MW added by Tala HEP in 2006) or a little 
over 5 percent of the total potential have been harnessed so far.  
 
The harnessing of hy dro-power potential in Bhutan is bein g carried out in 
a phased and planned manner. To ensure c ontinuity of the cooperation between 
India and Bhutan in the fi eld of hydro-electric power, an Agreement on Co-
operation in the field of Hydro-electric  sector was signed wit h Bhutan in July 
2006. Under this agreement inter alia India agreed to import 5000 MW of  
electricity from Bhutan by 2020. The Agreement lays down the framework for 
  
   
16

future bilateral cooperation between India and Bhutan in the field of hydroelectric 
power by  building upon the strengths of the two count ries and their existing 
mutually beneficial cooperation in the field of hydropower development.  
 
In addition to the perspective planning  in India, a Power System Master 
Plan for Bhutan (2003-2023) has also been prepared by Government of Bhutan 
to utiliz e th e ava ilable hydropo wer potential in  a p hased manner . Plan ning the 
development of additional hy dropower projects is ma inly based on the pot ential 
for exporting power to India. T he table below s hows the projected perio ds of 
construction for the identified power projects in Bhutan. 
 
Project Installed capacity (MW) Construction period 
Tala HEP 1020 1999-2005 
Punatsangchhu-I 1095 2007-2011 
Mangechhu 670 2009-2013 
Punatsangchhu-II 992 2011-2015 
 
All data are projection estimates based on preliminary studies. 
 
The Indian market currently absorbs around three-quarters of the electric  
power generated in Bhutan, and  exports from Bhutan wil l increase signific antly 
with the commissioning of the Tala hydrop ower project. Additional projects, the 
construction of which is planned to start during the Bhutanese 9th Five Year Plan 
and continue over to the 10t h and 11th Plan, will inc rease the surplus av ailable 
for exports.  
 
The three major hydropower projects  that are at various s tages of  
development and would see c ompletion in  the next 8-10 years include the 
following; 
 
Punatsangchhu-I Hydroelectric (1095 MW) 
 
The draft Detailed Project Report has been submitted by M/s WAPCOS in 
June 2006 and is in advanced stage of examination. Ministry of Power has 
conveyed techno-economic feasibility of the project. Planning Commission 
has given approv al for pre-construction activ ities. The Draft 
intergovernmental agreement is at  an advanced stage of negotiation.  
Budgetary provisions have already been made for some pre-construction 
activities. The Ministry has already started the proces s to obtain Cabinet 
approval for the project at the earliest.  
 
Punatsangchhu-II Hydroelectric Project (992 MW) 
 
The agreement for implementation of the DPR study for Punatsangchhu-II 
was signed at New Delhi on the 28t h September 2006 and is funded b y 
  
   
17

the GoI under the 9th Plan project-ti ed assistance to t he RGoB. The DPR 
is expected to be ready by November 2008.   
 
Mangdechhu Hydroelectric Project (670 MW) 
 
The agreement for implementation of the DPR study for Mangdechhu wa s 
signed on the 29th Sept ember 2006 and is  funded by the GoI under the 
9th Plan project-tied assistance to the RGoB.  The DPR is expected to be 
ready ahead of the deadline of December, 2008.  
 
Nepal 
 
The potential in Nepal to generate hy droelectric power is estimated at 
83,000 MWs of which as much as 45,0 00 MWs is known t o be technically  
feasible and economically viable.   
 
  India and Nepal hav e agreed, under the 1996 Mahakali  Treaty, to jointly  
develop the Pancheswar Multipurpose Project (5600 MW) on the Mahakali river, 
where it forms the border between the two countries.  The two governments are 
engaged in finaliz ing the DPR of the P ancheshwar Project. On the Sun-Kosi 
Sapta Kos i Project (around 3300 MW),  a Joint Project Office has been 
established in Nepal with GOI funds to carry out field investigations for 
preparation of the D PR. Prelim inary discussions hav e been als o held on the 
feasibility of 235 MW Naumure hydroelectric project.   
 
  Besides, Government of Nepal is currently evaluating proposals from 
independent power producers in  which several Indian co mpanies both in public  
and privat e sector have participated, for specific hy dropower projects namely 
Upper Kar nali (300 MW), Arun-III ( 402 MW) and Burhi Gandaki hydro-power  
project (600 MW) in Nepal. 
 
IL&FS Infrastructure Development  Corporation (IL&FS) and Nepal 
Electricity Authority (NEA)  signed an MOU on J anuary 5,2007 for setting up of  
four cross-border high voltage 220 KV tr ansmission links – (i ) Butwal (Nepal)-
Gorakhpur (UP), (ii) Dhalk ebar (Nepal)-Muza ffarpur (Bihar), (iii)  Duhabi (India)-
Purnea (Bihar), and (iv) Anarmani (Nepal ) -Siliguri (West Bengal). IL&FS & NEA 
have formed a JV for building transmission lin ks on the Nepalese territory  while   
IL&FS has already registered a company in India to build trans mission links on 
the Indian territory. The lines are required to  facilitate import of power to Nepal in 
short-to-medium term, and for export of pow er from Nepal to India in the long-
term. Nepal’s net import of power from India is around 80 MW. 
 
Framework of Cooperation 
 
The entire gamut of India-Nepal c ooperation in Water Resources is 
overseen by the Joint  Committee on Wate r Resources (JCWR) led by the two 
  
   
18

Water Res ources Secretaries.  Institut ional framework for discussing  various  
aspects of water resources dev elopment project, including flood management 
and inundation issues interalia in clude  sub-committees namely Flood 
Forecasting Committee, Standing-Commi ttee on Inundation Pr oblems (SCIP), 
Sub-Committee on Embankment Construc tion (SCEP), Coordination Committee 
on Kosi and Gandak, Joint Team of Experts  for Sapta Kosi / Sun Kosi High Dam  
Projects. In addition,  a Joint Task Forc e on Flood Control and Forecasting has 
been set up to review co-operation in a comprehensive manner and give its 
recommendations to the two Governments.  
 
Perspective plan to develop the hydro-power potential in Nepal and Bhutan 
 
 With Bhutan, Government have si gned an Agreement on Cooperation in 
the field of hydro-power sector in July 2006, details of whic h have b een 
enumerated in foregoing paragraphs. 
 
 In regard to Nepal, the framework of cooperation is given above.  It 
however needs menti on that progress in th e development of a perspective plan 
with Nepal depends on the cooperation of the Government of Nepal.  Due to the 
political situation prevailing in Nepal dur ing the last few years, the focus of the 
authorities in Nepal ha s been on the internal situati on.  However, Government is 
aware of possibilities  of mu tually beneficial cooperation wi th Nepal in this field, 
and looks  forward to working with the Gove rnment of Nepal in this regard.  
Government is also of the view that the priv ate sector of both countries can pla y 
a useful role in developing commercially viable projects for mutual benefit. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 It is learnt from the Fo reign Sec retary that fina lization of Kalada n Multi-
modal Transit Project is getting delay ed as  there are certain issues still to be 
settled in the agreement to be signed with Myanmar.  The Committee desire that 
these issues should be sort ed out early and the project finalized for exec ution 
without further delay so that the benefits expected to accrue on completion of the 
project become available to the public in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Facility en visages connectivity 
between Indian Ports on the eastern seaboa rd and Sittwe Port in Myanmar and 
then through riverine transpor t and by road to Mizoram,  thereby providing an 
alternate route for transport of goods to  North-East India. The Detailed Project 
Report on the facility was prepared by RITES in 2003 and has the concurrence of 
the Myanmar Government.  
Up till now, six rounds of Senior Officials Meeting on the Project have 
taken place where the represen tatives of Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs, Ministry o f 
  
   
19

Commerce, Ministry of Road T ransport & Highways, Ministry of Shipping and 
RITES Ltd. participated.  During thes e meetings, following agreement/protoc ol 
have been negotiated and initialed: Draft Framework Agreement on the Project; 
Draft Protocol on Fac ilitation of Transit Transport; Dr aft Protocol on Finan cial 
Arrangements; and Draft Protocol on Joint Maintenance and Administration. 
Under the Protocol on Financial A rrangements, the Government of 
Myanmar agreed initially to contribute US$ 10 million and free land for the project 
while GOI agreed to fund the balance amount  of approx . US $ 100 million, as 
well as be liable for any cost over runs.  Myanmar however requested later on for  
a soft loan for their contribut ion of US$ 10 million.   This has now been approv ed 
by the Ministry of Finance subject to  Cabinet approv al. Du ring the meeting of  
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) wh ich was held on 2 February 2007, 
Ministry of Financ e approv ed the propo sal subject to  fulfillm ent of certain 
observations made by Planning Commission. In March 2007 sixth SOM was held 
between I ndia and Myanmar  and some of the outst anding issues remained 
unresolved. Revised drafts of Framewor k/Protocols have been submitted to the 
Myanmar side. Their response is awaited. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
 The Com mittee find that technica l assis tance budgeted for African 
countries is abysmally low whic h account s for less than 3% of India’s total aid 
and loan budget for 2007-2008.   The figure may marginally go up when the 
commitment for Pan Africa Telemedicine a nd Tele education project is reflected 
in the budget at the time of revised allocation.  The Committee are not impressed 
by the figur es reeled out by the F oreign Secretary in this regard that over 1,000 
African officials received training and over 15,000 students studied in India.  The 
Committee are of the firm view that Indi a’s relations with Africa need t o be 
upgraded at various levels  especially  as a partner in their economic  
development.  The Committee hope that the Ministry will p lace sufficient 
emphasis on this. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs places emphasis on its relations with Africa 
and has undertaken a number of initiative s to upgrade India’s relations with the 
continent, especially in the economic arena.  Some of the significant programmes 
undertaken are as under: 
  
    Africa today is the largest reci pient of India’s te chnical cooperation 
programmes and we have so far extended more than US $ 1 billion worth of such 
assistance including training, deputatio n of experts and implementation of 
  
   
20

projects in African countries. Over 1000 officials from Sub-Saharan Africa receive 
training in India annually under ITEC.   
  
       Annually over 15,000 African students  study  in India and Indian 
Engineers, Doctors, Acc ountants, Teachers are widespread in several African 
countries.  To give an example one-four th of the Ethiopian Cabinet has been 
trained in India; 3 Nigerian Presidents studied in India.  
  
India supports the New Partner ship fo r Africa’s Dev elopment (NEPAD) .  
This has been crafted by reform orient ed African leade rs who have a vision for  
Africa.   As part of our support to Afri ca, we have announced a line of credit of  
US $ 20 0 million  to  assist th e NEPA D objectives . We also provide grant 
assistance in response to humanitarian r equirements or as smaller development 
projects under our ‘Aid to Africa’ programme.    
  
Under the HIPC initiative, past debts of a large number of countri es of the 
region have been written off. A line of credit of US $ 500 million under TEAM-9 in 
2004 to West and Central African countri es has been supplemented by a US $ 
250 million credit to ECOWAS in May 2006.  Bes ides, fresh concessional 
Government to Government lines of cr edit worth over US $ 500 million have 
been alloc ated to countries of the East ern & Southern Afric an r egion.  These 
combined credit facilities bring t he figure for Sub-Saharan Afric a close to US $ 
1.5 billion.  An amount of  US$ 1. 1 billion from these credits has b een allocated 
and sanctioned, of which  US$ 320 million has been disbursed.  
  
   India has joined as a full member of the Harare-based African Capac ity 
Building Foundation (ACBF) wit h a contri bution of US $ 1 million towards skill 
development and poverty alleviation programmes.  
  
Africa’s interest in developing a closer partnership with India is reflected in 
the tremendous response generated by the MEA s upported CII-EXIM Bank 
Conclaves on India-Africa Pr oject Partnerships, held in Delhi in 2005. This was  
followed by three regional conc laves held in Lusaka, Addis Ababa and Ac cra in 
April-May 2006.  Their deliberations we re consolidated at the Pan African 
Conclave held in New Delhi on 9-11 Oc tober 2006.  For 2007,  Conclaves  are 
being held in Mozambique, Uganda and Cote d’Ivoire in June-July. 
  
The Pan African e-Network project, und ertaken at the initiative of the 
Hon’ble President, brings a fresh dimensio n to India’s partnership with Af rica.  
The project is visualized to connect all 53 nations of  the African Unio n b y a 
satellite and fibre optic network that w ould provide effective communication  and 
connectivity among a ll the nations.  The  project will provide te le-education and 
tele-medicine facilities from India to region al centres and indiv idually to eac h of 
the member countries.  It will a lso enable voice an d video co nferencing facility 
among the Heads of State.  The project, being implemented by TCIL at a cost of  
Rs. 546 crores, will be financed entirely by a grant from the Government of India.   
  
   
21

  
 India has been one of the largest contributors to pe acekeeping in Africa.   
We currently have 3,500 troops in DRC, 3000 in Southern Sudan and about 1500 
in Ethiopia and Eritrea.   
  
India has been working towards better in tegrating, structuring and guiding 
its partnership through interaction with  Africa and the African Union.  The 
intention is to set up an India-Af rica Forum, which wo uld develop broad ba sed 
cooperation, inclu ding the follo wing elements: Supp ort for democracy, HRD,  
capacity building and poverty allev iation, cooperation in development of  
agriculture, SMEs, infrastructure, development of health sector, civil society/NGO 
cooperation, etc. A Working Group has been established  with the AU 
Commission to prepare for such a Forum / Summit meeting. The India-Africa 
Summit will be held in New Delhi in Apri l 2008. We have al so been engaged in 
dialogues with reg ional a nd s ub-regional g roupings s uch as  CO MESA, SADC, 
EAC and ECOWAS.  
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
 
INTRODUCTION OF E-PASSPORTS  
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 The Ministry of Exter nal Affairs expects by t he end of April 2007, the 
report of the National Instit ute of Smart Governance wh ich is  look ing into the 
problems in passport offices and the rela ted IT aspects.  The committee hope 
that on the basis  of the report, func tioning of the passport system will be 
streamlined and made efficient.  It should be ensured that stipulated time limit 
(end of 2008) for introduction of e-pa ssports/biometric passports for all 
categories of passports is strictly adhered to. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 National Institute of Smar t Government has submitted its report on the 
work study on the passport issuance system recently. The report when 
implemented will enable the Mini stry to deliver pass port related services to the 
citizens in a timely, transparent, more  accessible & reliable manner through 
streamlined process es and c ommitted, tr ained & motivated workforce.  The 
recommendations of the study are proposed  to be implemented expeditiously in 
a time bound manner. 
 
Work on the pilot proj ect for conversion of existing diplomatic and officia l 
passports to e-passports is progressing.   Based on the experience of the pilot  
project, the Government would take necessa ry steps to implement the project on 
introduction of e-passports/biometric pass ports for all categories of passports by 
the end of 2008. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
  
   
22

 
 
FUND ALLOCATION TO ICCR 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
 India is gr owing as a major cultur al power-house and there is great  
potential for cultural diplomac y. Acco rding to the Foreign Secretary, the 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 70 crore in 2007-08 for the Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) is vastly inadequate.  It has been stated that there are plan s to 
open new cultural centers at Kabul, Kathm andu, Dhaka, Beijing and Tokyo in the 
near future and that the possibility of setting up centers at Washington, Paris and 
Bangkok is being explored during the year .  Implementation of all these in 
addition to the other cultural activities will necessitate substantial augmentation of 
allocation to ICCR.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that fund allocation to 
the ICCR should be substantially enhanc ed so as  to be commensurate wit h its 
plans and activities. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Minist ry of Finance would be approached at the RE stage for  
augmentation of budgetary allocation to ICCR. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
WORLD HINDI SECRETARIAT 
 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that not much has been done for 
construction of the W orld Hindi Secretariat, the found ation stone for whic h was 
laid as early as in November, 2001 in  Mauritius. A bila teral agreement was  
reportedly signed in this regard between India and Mauritius in November, 2003.  
The establishment of the World Hindi Secr etariat is aimed at promoting Hindi as 
an International Language and to  institutionalize the or ganization of World Hindi 
Conferences. It is not clear whether the Secretariat has already been functioning 
and if so, what are its functions and w hether any plan for construction of the 
Secretariat Building has bee n drawn up and if so,  t he details of cost and 
schedule of completion. The committee woul d await full details  and the present  
status of the project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pursuant to the bilat eral agreement signed between the Government of 
India and Government of Mauritius in Nov ember 200 3 for setting up of World 
Hindi Secr etariat in Mauritius both the sides have been activ ely engaged in 
establishment of the Secretariat. As pe r the agreement the Se cretary General of 
the World Hindi Secretariat will be from Mauritius for three-year term and Deputy 
  
   
23

Secretary General will be from India fo r three-year term. The Se cretary General 
selected by Mauritius side took c harge in January  2007 and with that the 
Secretariat has started functioning. De puty Secretary Gene ral from India has 
also been selected and nec essary appr ovals for his appointment are being 
obtained.  
 
 The functions of the World Hindi  Secretariat inclu de organiz ing 
International Confer ences, seminars, group disc ussions in Hindi, Kav i 
Sammelans and similar activities, establishing Hindi chairs throughout the world, 
setting up documentation center for re search in multimedia, information 
technology, setting up of International Hi ndi Library, organizin g International 
Hindi Book fairs etc. Howev er the secretar iat will bec ome fully functiona l after it 
has full complement of staff. 
 
2. The construction of building for the World Hindi Secretariat is a jo int Indo-
Mauritius project. While the plot  of  land measuring 2 acres (8441 sqm.) was  
allotted by the Government of Mauritius in Phoen ix (Mauritius), the planning and 
construction of building would be done by  the Government of India. The 
executive board of the Se cretariat, which met on 24th and 25th May 2007 in 
Mauritius discussed t he steps for construction, the space requirements of the 
Secretariat, building regulation etc. The discussion was  followed by a visit by the 
two delegations to the site. The Maurit ian authorities have been requested for 
certain essential inputs for preparation of  a design brief, after which short listed 
local architects would be invited to take part in a design competition, leading to 
selection of an architect. The selected architect would prepar e the preliminary  
cost estimates and concept drawings etc. T he project is likely to be completed in 
about 4 years from the date the agreement with the selected Architect is signed. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
WELFARE OF INDIAN FISHERMEN 
 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
The committee express their deep concer n at the deteriorating law and 
order situation in Sri Lanka, the effects of whic h are increas ingly spilling over 
India. The Committee feel that  the Indi an Government should safeguard the 
welfare of  India Fis hermen who are oft en taken capt ive by  the Sri L ankan 
authorities.                         
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India has emphasised to the Government of Sri Lanka that  
the only solution to the ethnic problem is a negotiated, political settlement that is 
acceptable to all communities in Sri Lank a. We hav e also emphasised to the 
Government of Sri Lanka the need to revi ve the political dialogue in order to 
move the peace process forward. We have als o conveyed that continued 
hostilities and any escalation of  violence wil l result in an increase of refugees  
entering India and in civilian casualties. 
  
   
24

 
Government has been promptly taki ng up with the Government of Sri 
Lanka, the matter of apprehension by th e Sri Lankan authorities of Indian 
fishermen straying int o Sri Lank an waters, and sec uring their early release and 
repatriation from Sri Lankan custody. The need for the Sri Lankan Navy to act 
with restraint and for our fishermen to  be treated in a hum ane manner has been 
repeatedly emphasised to the G overnment of Sri Lank a. Currently, there are no 
bona fide Indian fishermen in Sri Lankan custody. Recently there have been 
several incidents of firi ng on our fishermen in the Palk Bay. India has taken up 
this matter strongly with Sri Lanka. In re sponse, the Government of Sri Lanka 
has denied that their Navy ev er enters Indian territori al waters and claimed that  
their Naval ships were not deployed in areas where the incidents occurred. It has 
also come to light that  the LTTE has bee n involved in firing and abduction of our  
fishermen. The proposal of “coordinated patrolling” along with  other issues is 
under consideration to prevent recurrence of any incidents of firing on Indian 
fishermen. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
ACTION AGAINST CRIMES/UNLAWFUL ACTS BY NRIS 
 
Recommendation No. 18 
  
The Com mittees desire that the NRI s c oming to India and c ommitting 
crimes/unlawful acts should not be allowed to escape from long hands of Law. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Whenever complaints against NRIs having committed crimes/unlawf ul 
acts are received by t he Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs, the same are forwarded to 
Ministry of Home Affairs for appropriate action. 
 
However, if the complaint is a gainst an NRI who has alread y left this  
country, this Ministry initiates  invest igation into the complaint through its 
Missions/Posts abroad.  The matter is, in turn, taken up by the concerned Indian 
Mission/Post abroad with the ho st government which is requested to investigate 
and take appropriate action.  It may also be  mentioned that Ministry of Overseas 
Indians Affairs has been ent rusted with the r esponsibility of dealing with matters 
concerning NRIs and Persons of Indian Origin abroad. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
  
   
25

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES  
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
 The Com mittee would als o lik e to be informed of the action taken to 
amend the gender restrictive regulation wh ich requires consent of the husband 
for issue of passport to wife.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
the issue of opening of District Passports Cells in 129 districts which do not have 
passport cells at present. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 At present, there is no gender r estrictive regulation u nder the Passport 
Rules 1980 requiring consent of the hus band for issuance of passport to wife.   
Therefore, the question of amending the same does not arise. 
 
 The Ministry of External Affair s has been im pressing upon the concerned 
State Governments to open DPCs in the re maining Districts of the country as  
early as possible and within a reasonable ti meframe as desired by the esteemed  
Committee. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
Further Information sought from the Government 
 
It was observed that reply of the Government to the abov e 
recommendation was contrary to the subm ission made by the F oreign Secretary 
during the oral evidence which is reproduced below: 
 
“There is a problem about issuing passports to wives  living away  
from husbands but are not divo rced. Unfortunately, under the 
present regulation the husband has to consent to the issue of  
passport in such cases. We will certainly do what  we can and  we 
will try an d chan ge t his. As wa s said, I d o not think  this make s 
sense in today’s day and age to do this.” 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs were therefore asked to clarify the position 
vide O.M. dated 8th August, 2007. 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 
It is a fact that there is a probl em in issuing passports to wives  
living away from husbands, but not di vorced.  The problem is that 
the present passport application form has provisions only for 
unmarried/married/divorced/widow/widower categories.  In cases  
where the wives and hus bands are separa ted, while f illing up the 
  
   
26

passport applic ation form, as they  are not divorced, they are 
required to  fill in t he name of the spouse.  There ma y be case s 
where an applicant may be hesitant to give the name of the spouse.  
While this problem exists, as s uch, there is no gender restrictive 
regulation in the pas sport rules,  which require cons ent of the 
husband for issuanc e of pass port to the wife and vice ver sa.  
Unfortunately, it was inadvertent ly stated that the husband has to 
consent to the issue of passport to the wife in such cases.  
 
            [Letter No. 7683/JS(CPV)/2007 dated 21st August, 2007] 
  
   
27

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
- NIL -
  
   
28

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM (MIS) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 The outcome budget of the Ministry has attempted quantitative evaluation 
of outcome of activities, which are amenab le for such quantification. The F oreign 
Secretary said in this  connection during evidence that to develop indicators for 
outcome budget, an outside agency will be engage d to go into the issue and that 
a Management Information Sys tem within the Ministry will  be put into place. The 
Committee appreciate the initiatives in this  regard and trust t hat outcome of the 
proposed exercis es will lead to an objec tive performance appraisal of the 
Ministry. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of these 
exercises.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The grants-in-aid to neighbouring count ries form a very significant portion 
of the total Plan and non-Plan allocation of the Minist ry. Hence as a first step, in 
order to strengthen the repor tage in Outcome Budget, it has been decided t o 
engage the services  of inde pendent professional institut ions as  Consultants to 
develop indicators and to assess the im pact and efficiency of implementation, 
initially, of major infrastructure projec ts with outlays exceeding Rs. 100 crores, in 
the neighboring countries. For other pr ojects, the Ministry conducts regular  
review of project implement ation and outcomes, often in cons ultation with the 
foreign government, where the project is located. 
 
 A Management Information Sy stem (MIS) is being developed by the 
Ministry to provide greater control over  r esources at our dis posal s o as to 
enhance coordination and efficiency in our ac tivities. The MIS is expected to be 
implemented soon.  
[File No. AA/125/Parl/57/2007 Dated: July 20, 2007] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                          DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
12 November, 2007                              Chairman,  
 21 Kartika, 1929(Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs  
  
   
29

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 7TH NOVEMBER, 2007  
   
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi  
   
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
7. Shri Mukeem Mohammad 
8. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
9. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
10. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
11. Shri P.A. Sangma 
12. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
13. Shri M. Shivanna 
14. Shri Vanlalzawma 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
16. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
17. Dr. Ram Prakash 
18. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
19. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
20. Dr. Karan Singh 
21. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
  
   
30

 
2.  XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the fo llowing draf t Reports f or 
consideration and adopted the same:- 
i) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX   
ii) Draft Report on Actio n Taken b y the Go vernment on the  
recommendations contained in the 15th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2007-2008.  
iii) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX   
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Action 
Taken Reports and present the same to both Houses of Parliament.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXX Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
  
   
31

  
   
32
Appendix -II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTEENTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations                                       18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3 to 13 and 15 to 18 
 
    Total-16 
Percentage: 88.8% 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Total-01 
Percentage: 5.6% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
Total-NIL 
 Percentage: 0% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Total-01 
Percentage: 5.6% 
 
 
 
 
         
 