 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
                             FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
20 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2008-2009) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16th April, 2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15th April, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 69  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2008 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

CONTENTS 
      P A G E  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ………………  (ii)  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………..  (iii)   
PART-I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
I. Implementation of the Committ ee’s Recommendations….   1  
II. Budgetary Allocatio n………………………………………….       2  
III.  Establishment Strength…..……………………………………           9 
IV. Technical & Economic Cooperation………………………….  13  
A. Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Project.………………...  13  
B. Tamu-Kalemyo-Kalewa Road…………..…………….  15  
C. Tala Hydro Electric Project……………………………  15 
D. Projects in Nepal………………………………………  18 
E. ITEC, SAARC and SC AAP Programme.……………..  18 
F. Delivery and Evaluation of Projects/Schemes..……………  20 
 
V. Cooperation with neighbouring countries…………………………  23 
    
VI. Passport and Visa Services……………………………………  26 
A. Re-issue of Passports…………………………………  26  
B. Working of Passport Offices………………………….  32 
C. Passport Office Website………………………………  35 
D. Unauthorized Collection of Fees……………………..  36 
E. Passport Seva Project…………………………………  39 
F. Visa Services………………………………………….  42 
G. Acquisition/construction of Passport Office Buildings..  44 
 
VII. Other Matters…………………………………………………  45  
A. SAARC University………………………………………  45 
B. Prisoners in Pakistan Jails.………………………………  47  
C. Management Information System (MIS)………………..  49 
D. Propagation of Hi ndi Abroad..………………………….   50 
E. UN Democracy Fund…………………………………..   50 
 
PART II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 53
  
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held………………   60 
on 03.04.2008 
II. Minutes of the sitting of  the Committee held………………   62 
            on 11.04.2008 
 III Passport Office-wise statement showing ……………….   64 
re-issue of passports during 2007 
IV. C ircular issued to all Missions/Posts abroad by MEA on Visa Services 65
  
(i)

 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2007-2008) 
 
LOK SABHA 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
7. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
10. Shri L. Rajagopal  
11. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
12. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
13. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
14. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil 
15. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
16. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
17. Shri M. Shivanna 
18. Shri Vanlalzawma 
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
20. Vacant @ 
21. Vacant  # 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
24 Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
25. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
26. Dr. Karan Singh  
27. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan  
28. Vacant* 
29. Vacant* 
30. Vacant* 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
 
@  Change of Nomination of Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu to Committee on Finance  
      w.e.f. 24.3.2008 
#   Shri P.A. Sangma ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 20.3.2008 consequent on his 
     resignation as M.P. 
*   Shri S.M. Laljan Basha, Dr. Ram Prakash and Smt. Prema Cariappa ceased to be Members 
     of the Committee on retirement  w.e.f.  9.4.2008 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Ex ternal Affairs, having been authorized by 
the Committee to present the Report on their be half, present this Twentieth Report o f the Standing 
Committee on External Affairs (2007-2008) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of 
External Affairs. 
 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
on 3rd April, 2007.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted th is report at their sitting held on 11th April, 2008. 
Minutes of the sitting s of the Committee he ld on 3rd and 11 th April, 2008 are given in Annexure I 
and II to the Report. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express th eir thanks to the Ministry of External Affairs for placin g 
before them the material and information which they desired in connection with examination of the 
Demands for Grants (2008-2009).  The Committee also wish to express their thanks in particular to 
the rep resentatives of  th e Minis try of  External  Aff airs f or appear ing bef ore the Comm ittee a nd 
placing their considered views before them. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI           DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
11 April, 2008                                                      Chairman,  
22 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

CHAPTER I 
  
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
 The 15 th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs on Demands for 
Grants of Ministry of External Affair s for the year 2007-2008 was presented on 26 th April, 
2007.  The Report contained 18 recommendations/ observations.   
 
1.2 In compliance of Direction 73-A of the Di rections by the Speaker, the Minister of 
State for External Affairs made a statement in Lok Sabha on 30 th November, 2007 giving the 
status of implementation of  the recommendations made by the Committee in their 15 th 
Report (14th L.S.).  An analysis of the Ministry’s statement showed that the Government had 
accepted all the 18 recommendations.  Out of these, 5 recommendations were implemented 
by the Government, 12 recomm endations were under process of implementation and the 
Committee did not pursue one recommendation. 
 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken replies receiv ed from the Ministry of External Affairs 
on the above mentioned Report, the Committee presented their 18 th Action Taken Report to 
the Houses on 20th November, 2007.  The Committee in their 18 th Action Taken Report have 
commented on the Action Taken reply furn ished by the Ministry in respect of 
recommendation No. 11 contained in the 15 th Report.  The final reply in respect of 
recommendation no. 2 is still awaited.  Fina l Acton Taken Statement on the comments 
contained in the 18th Action Taken Report is yet to be received from the Ministry. 
 
1.4 As regards the status of implementati on of the Committee’s recommendations is 
concerned, the Foreign Secretary informed the Committee, during the course of evidence on 
Demands for Grants (2008-2009) as follows: 
“…..We have taken note of all the recomm endations and observations and we have 
taken steps to implement most of them….’’ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
The Ministry of External Affa irs is mandated to look after all aspects of external 
relations with other countries.  In the performance of this role, the Ministry pursues India’s 
national interests and the interests of its  citizens abroad in the political, economic, 
commercial, cultural, consular and other areas through bilateral, regi onal and international 
interactions at the headquarters in New Delhi and through 168 Missions, Posts and 
specialized offices and centres across the world and representative offices in different parts 
of the country.   
 
2.2 The budget of the Ministry has traditionally  been Non-Plan in nature with a small 
Plan component. 
 
2.3. The total Demand for Grants of the Minist ry of External Affairs for the year 2008-
2009 are for Rs. 5062 crore whic h is 14.17% more than BE 2007- 08 and 5.83% more than 
RE 2007-08.  Out of the BE of Rs. 5062 crore, Rs. 4483 crore is under Non-Plan and Rs. 579 
crore under Plan. 
2.4 The Non-plan component of the BE 2008-09 is  same as the Non-Plan of RE 2007-08.  
There are no extra funds allocated for non-plan projects in BE 2008-09.  The allocation under 
the Plan Head of BE 2008-09 is however Rs. 5 79 crore, which is Rs. 279 crore more than the 
RE of 2007-08 (which is Rs. 300 crore).  Owing to this increased allocation under Plan Head, 
the total BE 2008-09 is Rs. 279 crore more than the RE of 2007-08. 
 
2.5 Outlining the overall budgetary proposals of the Ministry for 2008-2009, the Foreign 
Secretary stated during evidence as follows: 
“……..Overall, there are really three qu estions which one co uld ask of this 
Budget. One whether we have estimated  the budget properly or not; whether 
we have actually spent it properly in 2007 . I think, we have done better than 
we have ever done before. I do not say we  are perfect yet. But, I think, we are 
progressing well as we systemise our wo rk with the help of the Committee.  
The next question is: Is th is the best way of using the resources? I would say 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
that given our resource constraints, etc., yes.  If you notice, about the 
establishment expenditure, what we really deliver is quite 
improving.……..only 3 per cent of our entir e Budget is what is really spent on 
the Secretariat. That proportion has re ally shrunk over time. But the big 
question is: Does this Budget serve ou r larger foreign policy goals? Frankly 
speaking, the answer is “yes”. We think we coul d do better. But given the 
amount of money, ye s, we have tried to prior itise it in the areas where our 
major priorities are. “ 
 
2.6 The total budgetary allocation for the Ministry of External  Affairs year-wise since 2004-
05 along with Revised Estimated (RE) for the resp ective years including Ac tual & shortfall in 
utilization of RE is as follows:                                           
                        (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Increase 
at RE Stage 
Shortfall in 
Utilization of RE 
2004-05 3641 3885 3756 244 129 
2005-06 3928 4182 4089 254   93 
2006-07 3695 4095 3949 400 146 
2007-08 4433 4783 - 350 - 
2008-09 5062 - - - - 
 
2.7 It may be seen fro m the table above that the initia l budgetary allocations during the 
last 4 budget years were raised at RE stage. The actual utilization were, however, less than 
the increased allocation made at RE stage resu lting in shortfall in utilization of funds every 
year. When asked if there was any shortfall in utilization of  the revised allocation made 
during 2007-08, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“The total expenditure as on 31.0 1.2008 for the year 2007-08 was Rs. 3026.77 
crore, which was 63.28% of RE 2007-08. As on 29.2.2008, this was Rs. 3687.70 
crore, which was 77.10% of the RE 2007- 08. The complete picture on the actual 
utilization of RE 2007-08 will be known once all the expenditure has been booked 
by the Office of the Principal Chief Cont roller of Accounts, MEA. Considering 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
the trend, however it is expected that the funds allocated under RE 2007-08 will 
be fully utilized.” 
 
2.8 According to the Outcome Budget, the utilization of funds was only 57.44% utp 31 
December, 2007.  When asked the reasons for low utilization in the first three quarters of the 
year, the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
“An important feature of the major chunk of the Ministry's BE 2007-08 is in 
designing and implementation of projects  and programmes ab road. Progress of 
such projects is thus dependent on the internal political and security developments 
in the recipient countries. This makes it necessary for this Ministry to have regular 
consultation with a sovereign government  in order to conclude a mutually 
acceptable agreement on project concep tion, design, terms of financing and 
technical assistance, management, impl ementation and its monitoring. It often 
takes time to identify the projects and co nclude an agreement with the recipient 
country. It has been observed that by the time such projects have been identified 
and the implementation process started, seven-eight months of the FY has elapsed. 
As a result, most of the expenditure on such projects  have been incurred during 
the last four-five months of the FY. Contribution to International Organizations 
are paid during January-March of the year. Under Capital Section also, the pace of 
expenditure is slow as the acquisition of a number of properties did not take place 
as anticipated.” 
 
2.9 In this context, the Foreign Secretary said during evidence that: 
“………..we find that in our case there are so many Drawing and Disbursing 
Officers scattered around the world. We do take slightly longer to book 
expenditures. We are working with our  Pay and Accounts Officers to try and 
computerise that process and make sure that it becomes much quicker and more 
efficient.  But we are conf ident that we will improve in  terms of ex penditure of 
our allotted Budget and the implementation of recommendations of the Committee 
is one big reason for that.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.10 Taking into account the tr end of under-utilization of fu nds sought by the Ministry 
during the past 4 years, the Ministry was asked as to what it propose to do to arrest this trend, 
in a written response it submitted as follows: 
“An Expenditure Monitoring Committee (EMC) under the Chairmanship of the 
Foreign Secretary has been set-up for regular monitoring of expenditure and 
utilisation of the budget allocation of the Ministry. The EMC reviews expenditure 
plans of all concerned Divisions of the Mi nistry each quarter on regular basis for 
all the ongoing Plan and Non-Plan sc hemes / programmes to examine the 
expenditure pattern of the Ministry at th e end of each quarter to oversee whether 
targets set in percentage for each quarter was being utilized as planned. During the 
year 2007-08, the Expenditure Monitori ng committee has regularly reviewed the 
expenditure pattern of the Ministry. Sp ending Units found lagging behind in the 
utilisation of their budget allocation were  requested to increase their pace of 
expenditure.”  
2.11 The total proposed outlay under Plan He ad for the year 2008-09 was Rs. 768.54 crore 
but only Rs. 579 crore has reportedly been appr oved.  On being asked about the areas that 
will be affected due to non- allocation of proposed outlay and possible fallout on its 
commitments with lesser allocation, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“Budget allocation has been approved by the Planning commission as proposed by 
the Ministry for most of the proj ects/schemes except for one scheme 
(development of road infrastructure in the Terai region in Nepal) for which budget 
allocation of Rs. 200 crore was proposed but Rs. 40 crore has been approved by 
the Planning Commission for preparation DP Rs (Detailed Project Reports) for all 
schemes/programmes in Nepal.  As of now , it appears that the Ministry will be 
able to fulfil its commitments with the Pl an Head with the f unds allocated at BE 
2008-09. In case it is felt that additional funds would be required, the Planning 
Commission would be approached at the RE stage for higher allocation.” 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
2.12 The Committee had in their 15 th Report on Demands for Grants noted the 
discrepancies in the figures shown in Outcome Budget (2007-2008) under the Head 
Technical and Economic Cooperation and cautioned the Ministry that extreme care should be 
exercised in future to ensure that docume nts/information presented to Parliament are 
flawless.  It has been observed again that as in last year discrepancies have crept into the 
figures shown under the same head i.e. Technical and Economic Cooperation in the Outcome 
Budget and Demands for Grants documents.  As ked the reasons for the discrepancies in the 
figures shown in the budget documents, the Ministry stated: 
“The reason for discrepancy between the figures of allocation for 2008-09 
pertaining to the Head ‘Technical and Econonic Cooperation’ as shown in the 
Outcome Budget (Rs. 2070.48 crore) and the Demands for Gr ants (Rs. 1880.94 
crore) is due to an inadvertent error during the preparation of the ‘Outcome 
Budget’ document and the sa me is rregretted.  This error occurred due to the 
inclusion of the demand for Plan Grants  projected under ‘3605’ instead of the 
amount approved by the Planning Comm ission.  While the Outcome Budget 
document included the projected Plan requirement of Rs. 633.94 crore proposed to 
the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission actually approved the 
reduced allocation of Rs. 444.40 crore, wh ich, inadvertently, was not taken into 
account in the Outcome Budget.  The error is explained below: 
Amount projected to the 
Planning Commission under 
Head ’3605’ 
 
Rs. 633.94 crore 
Amount approved by the 
Planning Commission under 
the Head ‘3605’ 
 
Rs. 444.40 crore 
Amount shown under the 
Head ‘3605’ inadvertently in 
the Outcome Budget 
 
Rs. 1880.94 crore + (Rs. 
633.94 crore - Rs. 444.40 
crore) = Rs. 2070.48 crore 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Outcome Budget, the estimated cost of individual projects proposed to be 
undertaken during the financial year in vari ous countries has been indicated against 
them although the funds available for mee ting the same are presently not fully 
available.  In the case of Bangladesh, onl y the major projects along with the cost 
thereof (totaling Rs. 14 crore)  have been included in th e Outcome Budget against the 
allocation of Rs. 16 crore mentioned in the Demands For Grants.  Apart from the said 
projects, some more projects requiring smaller amount of funds are also to be taken 
up during the next financial year.  In Bhutan, the cost of projects listed in the 
Outcome Budget is more than the approve d allocation indicated in Demands for 
Grants.  The additional funds required, ther efore, would be s ought at the Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage, depending upon the expenditure incurred until that time. 
The figure in respect of ‘Others’ men tioned in the Outcome Budget (Chapter 
I) are the remaining Heads against which f unds have been sought in BE 2008-09.  It 
is, thus, indicative of the f unds available for undertaking the remaining activities.  
‘Other Expenditure’ indicated in the Demands for Grants is a distinct Minor Head 
which caters to Schemes such as Demarca tion of Boundaries, Special Delegations, 
Expenditure on Haj, etc.  The discrepanc y in the figure appearing in the Outcome 
Budget has already been corrected.” 
 
2.13 The Committee in their 15 th Report had also regretted the absence of relevant project 
details such as original and anticipated date s of completion, factor-wise analysis of cost 
escalation, impact of cost over-run on viability of projects and have, therefore, recommended 
that such details should be disclosed in the Outcome Budget.  The Ministry in its Action 
Taken Reply have assured th at recommendation of the Committee will be implemented 
during the exercise for next Ou tcome Budget.  It has, however, been observed that the 
assurance made to the Committee has not b een fulfilled in the Outcome Budget (2008-2009) 
of the Ministry.  When asked about the reas ons for not implementing the recommendation of 
the Committee, particularly when  an assurance to this effect was made, the Ministry in their 
written reply stated as follow: 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
“It is true that precise project details su ch as original and anticipated dates of 
completion, factor-wise anal ysis of cost escalation, impact of cost over-run on 
viability of project etc., could not be incorporated in the Outcome Budget for 
2008-09. Unlike other Ministries which exec ute projects in India, the projects 
implemented by the Ministry of External Affairs are outside the country. Political 
and security developments in the countries where the projects are being 
implemented have a significant effect on the pace and costs of implementation. 
Every aspect of the project right from th e stage of conception has to be negotiated 
with the sovereign Government of the country for mu tually acceptable 
arrangements. Though these projects have a detailed implementation schedule and 
a monitoring process drawn up by us, it would be appropriate to project 
anticipated date of completion, etc., only after an agreement is  reached with the 
recipient Government. Still th e Ministry is making efforts to collect up-to-date 
information on such projects to be incorpor ated into a separate corrigendum to the 
Outcome Budget for 2008-09.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
ESTABLISHMENT STRENGTH 
 
 The Committee had in their 15 th Report (2006-07) observed that there was an 
urgent need to raise the manp ower strength of the MEA to c ope with its expanding role 
and had suggested that an assessment of  additional manpower requirements over the 
period of next five years, with due regard to the prop osed outsourcing of certain 
peripheral jobs, be made expeditiously and action taken to ensure that the projected level 
of personnel are in place at the earliest. 
3.2 In response to the recommendation made in their 15 th Report of the Committee, 
the Ministry stated that, a draft note for Cabinet on the proposed  expansion of the 
Ministry has been submitted to Deptt. of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for their 
comments and the note was to be subsequently  placed before the Cabinet for approval.  
The Ministry had further s ubmitted that once the propos al was approved, MEA will 
expeditiously undertake the recruitment of personnel.  Various studies were also reported 
to have been undertaken by the Ministry to outsource peripheral jobs including issuance 
of visa, protocol work etc. 
3.3 In this regard the Foreign Secr etary stated during evidence that: 
“…….Last time, the Committee had also spok en of the need to expand the size of 
the Ministry. We are still working on that . Within the Government, I think, there 
is a decision at the highest level that there should be an increase in the size but we 
are still working on how we can do that…..” 
3.4 Dwelling upon the issue of the shortage of manpower in the Mi nistry, the Foreign 
Secretary stated during evidence for Demands for Grants (2008-2009) as follows: 
“……Our staff strength has shrunk over th e last ten years, but our functions 
have increased much more.  If you look at the figures that we have either for 
the visits from abroad or th e number of passports or vi sas issued, they have all 
gone up.  We issued last year about 50 lakh passports for the first time with no 

 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
increase in staff strength.  The number of visas that we have issued has crossed 
37 lakhs last year.  Our revenues have gone up, but our non-plan allocation is 
exactly the same as last year’s Revised Estimate.  If you add the other 
workload, in terms of foreign investment or foreign trade, I think, we can claim 
that we are more productive than we have  been in the past.  So with the same 
resources we are delivering much more in terms of work.  However, we are 
still not perfect and there is still a lot that we feel we have to do…..” 
3.5 It is observed from the Detailed Demands  for Grants 2008-2009  of MEA that the 
total number of employees in position as on 1 st March, 2008 was 6400 as against the 
sanctioned strength of 7250.  The shortfall was as much as 850.  Asked about the reasons 
for huge number of posts remaining vacant in different grades, the Ministry in a written 
submission stated as under: 
“Posts shown as presently vacant in th e Ministry’s statement are spread across 
different grades and scales, and include pos ts within the Ministry as well as in 
subordinate offices like the Central Passport Organisation. Some of these posts are 
meant to be filled through direct recr uitment and some th rough prom otion of 
personnel from subordinate ra nks. The vacancies at the le vels meant to be filled 
through direct recruitment arise because the selection process for these posts is 
usually through UPSC/SSC and it often takes a long time to complete the selection 
formalities. Moreover, due to various reasons including some court cases, SSC and 
UPSC have not been able to  hold examinations or decl are results in some of the 
recent years. Even after results are declared , there is a time-lag before the selected 
personnel, some of whom are already employed in other Government departments, 
are able to actually join the Ministry. As  for the vacancies th at are to be filled 
through promotion of officials, the vaca nt posts have arisen because at this 
moment there are no officials who have completed the minimum qualifying 
service in the lower grade, to become eligible for promotion.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.6 The number of posts, and their levels, that  were proposed to be  created as per the 
Cabinet Note submitted by Ministry of External Affairs are as follows: 
“The proposal on expansion of the Ministry of External Affairs examines the Human 
Resource needs in a ten year perspective,  taking into account India’s evolving 
international profile, increased global enga gement, deepening linka ges with bilateral 
and multilateral partners and increasing e xposure to global commerce and finance.  
Ministry of Finance was consulted on the proposal.  MEA’s Cabinet Note was not 
aimed just at seeking approval for expans ion of the cadre strength of MEA, but 
sought Cabinet approval for its long term organizational and Human Resource plan to 
met the challenges of the 21
st Century.  The proposal on  expansion has three major 
components: (a) Opening of 12 new Missions  and 8 new Posts; (b) Upgradation of 
some existing posts to levels of Secretar y and Additional Secretary; and (c) creation 
of new posts at Headquarters and Missions /Posts to augment human resource at 
middle and junior levels (85 posts at Directors level, 229 posts at US/DS level and 
200 supporting staff).  Cabinet was presented a holistic view on the proposal, keeping 
in mind the expansion of MEA’s roles a nd responsibilities brought about by India’s 
increasing international engagements.  Th e Ministry is continuing to pursue the 
proposal appropriately for an early decision.” 
3.7 On being asked about the present status of the proposal for expansion of its cadre 
strength, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as follows: 
“….…. A Cabinet Note detailing the proposa l on expansion of the cadre strength 
of MEA was prepared and forwarded to Ministry of Finance for comments. 
Ministry of Finance had raised a number of objections. These issues were clarified 
in the Cabinet Note, which was forwarde d to Cabinet Secretariat for securing 
approval of the Cabinet. Cabinet Secretar iat, however, returned the Cabinet Note 
with the following comments, "the note has been examined in the light of the 
Rules of Procedure in regard to proceedings of the Cabinet and the standing 
instructions on the procedural requirement and it is noticed that since posts below 

 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
the level of Joints Secretary can be created with the approval of the Ministry of 
Finance, it is advised that the matter may be sorted out in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance.” The matter will be pursued further appropriately. “ 
3.8 When asked if the Ministry was not aware of the procedure with regard to the creation of 
posts below the level of Joint Secretary on which a Cabinet note was moved/returned, the 
Foreign Secretary stated during ev idence that the issue in the Cabinet note was not merely about 
vacancies in the Ministry but it included expansion of our functions, our institutions like ICCR or 
ICWA revival etc.  It also included creation of IIDCA.  The reply of the Cabinet Secretariat was 
more bureaucratic.  The proposal of the Ministry was for expansion and therefore, the matter will 
again be taken up with the Cabinet. 
3.9 When asked about the number and level of posts that were  proposed to be created as 
per the Cabinet note, the Ministry furnished the following details: 
“The Cabinet Note was aimed not just at s eeking approval for expansion of the cadre 
strength of MEA, but was meant to keep the Cabinet apprised about the Ministry's 
planned strategy on how to augment and refine  its capacities and functioning in light of 
the changing international context and increas ing diplomatic requirements. The proposal 
on expansion has three major components: (a ) Opening of 12 new Missions and 8 new 
Posts; (b) Upgradation of some existing pos ts to levels of Secretary and Additional 
Secretary; and (c) creation of  new posts at Headquarters and Missions/Posts to augment 
human resources at middle and junior level.  Cabinet was presented a holistic view on the 
proposal, keeping in mind the expansion of MEA's roles and responsibilities brought 
about by India's increasing international engagements.  The Ministry is continuing to 
pursue the proposal appropriately, and it is hoped that approval for the proposed 
expansion would be secured expeditiously. “ 
3.10 Elaborating further on the sta ff strength of the Ministry, the Foreign Secretary stated 
during evidence as under: 
“……We have gone to the Ministry of Fi nance with a note on our cadre strength. 
To some extent, the Sixth Pay Commissi on will solve our pr oblem by offering 
running pay grades. This problem of stagna tion at certain grades, to a very great 
extent, will be met. But our problem of vacancies because of the UPSC and SSC, I 
am afraid, will remain…….” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
TECHNICAL & ECONOMIC COOPERATION 
 
 Promoting economic and technical cooperation with  other developing countries is said to 
have acquired a new dimension in India’s promo tion of relationship with other countries and 
regional groupings.  Sizeable chunk of the Mi nistry’s outlay in 2008-2009 are allocated to 
implementation of projects and programmes in other countries.  The Ministry’s mega-projects 
are located in Bhutan and Afgha nistan and are budgeted out of pl an allocations.  The Ministry 
has also now embarked on setting up mega-projects in Africa and Myanmar. 
4.2 The allocation for technical assistance to neighbouring countries and other developing 
countries for the year 2008-09 is around Rs. 2011.34 crore which accounts for 35 % of the total 
budget of the Ministry.  The principal beneficiar ies of the aid and loan programmes as per the 
revised estimates of 2007-08 (RE) and Budget Estimates of 2008-2009 as per Outcome Budget 
of the Ministry is as follows: 
Allocation (in Rs .in Crore) 
Country/Region RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09 
(Proposed) 
Bangladesh 60.00 16.00 
Bhutan 731.00 953.00 
Nepal 100.00 140.00 
Sri Lanka 28.00 34.00 
Maldives 19.50 17.77 
Myanmar 20.00 56.00 
Other developing countries 180.08 176.57 
ITEC  60.00 65.00 
African countries 50.00 80.00 
Central Asia 20.00 28.00 
Afghanistan 434.00 445.00 
Total Aid Budget 1702.58 2011.34 
 
A. Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Project 
4.3 The Kaladan Multi-Modal Tran sit Project envisage connectivity between Indian Ports on 
the eastern seaboard and North Eastern Region of  India via Myanmar.   Once implemented, this 
will assure better connectivity w ith the North Eastern States of  India reducing distance, saving 

 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
fuel and time.  Budgetary allocation of Rs. 40.41 crore was made for this project during 2007-
2008 but negotiations concluded only in December,  2007 after a mutually acceptable text was 
arrived at. 
4.4 An outlay of Rs. 41 crore has now been al located in 2008-2009 for this project.  The 
Planning Commission and, subsequently, the Cabinet have approved the pr oject and the stated 
time-line for completion as per the Outcome Budget  2008-2009 is 5 years.  Asked the details of 
the new proposals received from the Myanmar Government, the Ministry stated the following: 
“All proposals from both si des were negotiated in an  ongoing process including 
the seven Senior Officials Meeting (SOM ) between India and Myanmar. During 
the seventh SOM held in December 2007  in Yangon, all outstanding issues were 
resolved and draft Framework Agreement and draft Protocols were finalized and 
initialled. A Cabinet Note seeking cabinet approval was placed before Cabinet for 
its consideration. During the meeti ng held on 27 March 2008, Cabinet has 
approved the project at a total cost of Rs. 535.91 crore. The Framework 
Agreement and Protocols are proposed to be signed on 2 April 2008, during the 
visit of H.E. Vice Senior General Maung Aye, Vice Chairman, SPDC to India.” 
 
4.5 When asked about the revised target if a ny, that has been fixed for completion of the 
project, the Ministry in a written submission stated as follows: 
“……The revised cost estimate and the targ et for completion of the project is as 
follows: 
                         (Rs. in crore) 
Project Activity      Total 1st Year 2nd year 3rd  
year 
4th year 
Total (Ports + Roads) 535.91 8.50 119 207 201.41 
 
The project will be executed by Inland Water ways Authority of India. Since the 
DPR has been prepared approximately 5 ye ars back, a reconnaissance survey will 
be required initially to assess the present ground situation in the project area 

 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
before the various components of th e project are designed and tendered. 
Approximately one month will be re quired for reconnaissance survey. 
Reconnaissance survey will essentially i nvolve making a realistic estimate of the 
sea dredging, river dredgi ng (both soft and hard) qu antity/requirements. The 
design and tendering process will take  approximately 1 year. Thereafter, 
approximately 2 months will be needed by the contract or for mobilization of men 
and machineries. Thereafter, actual work on various components of the project 
will commence which is expected to take around 48 months.” 
B. Tamu-Kalemyo-Kalewa Road 
4.6 Funds totaling Rs. 17.14 crore were provided to Border Roads Organization (BRO) in 
2006-2007 for construction/maintenance of the 160 km. Long Tamu-Klemyo-Kalewa Road, with 
the projected outcome of promoting cross-borde r trade and tourism, facilitating control of 
insurgency, arrest arms smuggling and drug tra fficking.  An outlay of Rs. 26.66 crore has now 
been made in 2008-2009 for this project.  The timelin e for completing this project is stated to be 
within 2008-2009. 
4.7 The Committee has been informed that the pr ojected target date for completion of this 
project was March 2008.  The Mini stry has also informed that Border Roads Organization has 
sought an extension upto March 2009 for the completion of the project. 
 
C. Tala Hydro Electric Project 
4.8 An allocation of Rs. 141.6 crore was made  in BE 2007-2008 towards setting up of the 
1020 MW Tala Hydro Electric Project in Bhutan from which India will receive hydro power 
to address its demand/supply ga p. As per the Outcome Budget th is plant was to be fully 
commissioned by 31 March 200 7 and handed over to Royal Gove rnment of Bhutan (RGoB) 
in 2009. All turbines are reported to have been  commissioned and surplus electricity is being 
supplied to India. A sum of Rs. 50.50 crore has again been allocated for this project in BE 
2008-2009.  When asked the reasons for allocating Rs. 50.50 crore again despite all the 
turbines having been commission ed and surplus electricity already supplied to India, the 
Ministry in a written reply stated as follows: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
“The original cost to completion for the Tala Hydroelectric project was Rs 4327 
Crore. By 2007 an amount of Rs 4185.4 Crore had been released for the project. 
The balance of Rs 141.6 Crore was earmarked for release in Financial Year 2007-
08. In 2007, the Tala management informed that th ere would be savings in the 
project on account of earl y commencement of sale of  electricity and due to 
recoveries from arbitration cases and sale of surplus machineries amounting to Rs. 
91 Crore. Tala management also indicated that the fund reserves available with 
the project would be sufficient to meet the requirements for the Financial Year 
2007-08. Therefore no funds we re released to Tala Project in the Financial Year 
2007-08. However Tala mangement had projec ted that the balance amount of Rs. 
50 Crore, after discounting the savings of Rs. 91 Crore, would be required in the 
Financial Year 2008-09. Hence the appropriation has been made.” 
 
4.9 Speaking of the hydro electric project, the Foreign Secretary stated during the 
evidence that: 
“………in the Bhutanese case on the hydro power projec t, actually it was just 
completed. There was no cost escalati on whatsoever. There was some trouble 
in balancing the turbine. They kept on  testing it and that problem was solved 
by the end of last year and they w ill be commissioning it. The project was 
completed at a cost of Rs. 4,327 crore which was the estimated cost. In fact, we 
had made a savings of Rs. 90 crore on that…..” 
 
4.10 On being asked the reasons for delay in handing over the power project to the Royal 
Government of Bhutan (RGoB), the Ministry in a written submission stated as under: 
“As per the requirement of  the Intergovernmental Ag reement between India and 
Bhutan on the execution of the Tala hydro electric project, the project is to be 
handed over the Royal Government of Bhutan 2 years after it is fully 
commissioned. This is to ensure the stability of the project and to solve any 
teething problems associated with the project. The Tala project was commissioned 
fully in April 2007- therefore it is to be  handed over to R oyal Government of 
Bhutan by April 2009. Some balance/fini shing work is also required to be 
completed in this period. This includes the following; 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
• Construction of the Plunge Pool dow nstream of the Dam and Diversion 
 Tunnel which started only after closur e of the diversion tunnel in April 
 2006. 
• Balance and finishing works of the Headrace Tunnel adits and Power 
 House Complex. 
• Finishing works of Power House Colony at Sinchekha/Arekha, construction of 
which was started only after the site was taken over from  the contractors, 
who, due to paucity of land in the steep hilly terrain, had  been allotted the 
area to set-up their temporary facilities.  
• Balance works of Sub-Station co lony at Malbase (although sanctioned 
 earlier) construction of wh ich got delayed due to late availability of land. 
• Finishing works of fire fighting, ventilation/air-conditioning, lifts, 
 modification of radial gates, etc. 
• Establishment charges including term inal benefits like gratuity, leave 
 encashment, etc. and Audit & Accounts charges. 
• Payment of contractors’ final bills and settlement of claims. 
• Framing of O&M Manuals & Completion Reports.” 
 
 
4.11 When asked about the extent to whic h the surplus electricity from the Tala 
Hydroelectric Project would help India tid e over its demand/supply gap in power, the 
Ministry in their written supply stated as follows: 
“The allocation of power imported from Tala to various units within India is made 
by Ministry of Power. The allocated MW of electricity from Tala project is as 
follows for the entire capacity:-  
 State SEB/PSU Electricity (in MW) 
WEST BENGAL 390.15  
ORISSA 43.35  
BIHAR 260.10 
JHARKHAND 116.90 
DELHI 30  
RAJASTHAN 15  
PUNJAB 30  
HARYANA 15  
JAMMU &KASHMIR 18  
UTTAR PRADESH 45  
DVC 56.50 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Projects in Nepal 
 
4.12 Budgetary proposal of Rs. 200 crore for proj ects in Nepal has reportedly been reduced 
to Rs. 40 crore by the Planning Commission, when  asked if there was any specific reasons 
for the Planning Commission to reduce the alloca tion so drastically, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as follows: 
“The budgetary allocation of  Rs. 40 crore for the initial stages of preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR) under the 11 th Five Year Plan should be adequate.  
Should the political situation in Nepal improve after the Constituent Assembly 
Elections, making faster implementation of  the projects possible, additional funds 
would be sought at RE state.”  
 
E. ITEC, SAARC and SCAAP Scholarships Programme 
 
4.13 The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) and its sister programme, 
the Special Commonwealth Assi stance for Africa Programm e (SCAAP), centered on the 
sharing of experiences, transfer of technology and capacity building is said to have formed 
an important component of India’s interaction with the developing world. 
4.14 An outlay of Rs. 65 crore for ITEC, Rs . 20 crore for SAARC and Rs. 8 crore for 
SCAAP programmes have been made this year. 
4.15 On examination of the details regardi ng the number of scholarships available and 
actual utilization during the last two years under Indian Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (ITEC), South As ian Association for Regiona l Cooperation (SAARC) and 
Special Commonwealth Assistance for Africa Programme (SCAAP), it has been observed 
that as many as 1210 slots remained unutilised during 2007-2008 under ITEC/SCAAP.  
Likewise, utilization of scholarship slots unde r SAARC during the last two years was only 
26%.  When asked about the reasons for the gr oss under-utilization of the scholarship slots 
and the measures proposed to be  taken to ensure full utiliza tion, the Ministry in a written 
reply submitted as follows: 
“The under-utilization arose because of the streamlining/improvement of the overall 
delivery introduced during the year both in terms of cour se content, logistics and 
facilities. The guidelines were also more cl early defined to avoi d mismatches and to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure quality of participation. A new de dicated on-line system was introduced mid-
year. The change-over resulted in delays and more rejections. There is an overall 
pattern that the quality of the participan ts has improved considerably. Despite the 
higher rejection rate, overall utilization in  2007-08 is still higher as compared to the 
previous year.  The on-line submission of applications has reduced delays 
considerably. Applications can now be cleared in 24 hours whereas under the old 
system, it used to take 6-8 weeks. The system has become paperless and we are 
confident that full utilisation will be realized in 2008-09.” 
4.16 The Ministry of External Affairs, Hu man Resource Development and Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (which offers 100 sc holarships under the Kn ow India Programme), 
offer scholarships and conduct their own exam ination in various countries without any 
coordination among them.  Asked if upgrada tion of standards would be possible by 
coordinating the activities of the various Mini stries offering scholarships,  the Foreign 
Secretary responded during evidence as under: 
“You mentioned about scholarships. Certainly, we will start this  exercise. In fact, 
we have been asked to do an exercise about foreign students in India. We have 
done one study along with ICCR, but we will a dd this also about scholarships that 
we are giving abroad. We do have certain standardised tests for students who 
come to India. Ed. CIL has been running them for us at other places. Maybe, we 
will work with ICCR, with MOIA, with e ach of them and say that these are the 
criteria for foreign students coming to India and this is what we lay down. We will 
try and systematise it in a better way. “ 
4.17 It has been stated that outcomes of the training programmes conducted under ITEC 
Programme are assessed on the basis of the feedba ck report from the participants.  Asked if 
the feedback received from pa rticipants is objective and sufficient to assess the outcome of 
efficacy of the programmes, the Ministry in reply to the query stated that efforts are to ensure 
that the feedback reports are objective. In addition to the reports from the participants, we 
also get feedback from the Governments de puting participants.  Our Missions/Posts in 
ITEC/SCAAP countries also hos t ITEC Days where we get l onger-term perspective on the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
usefulness of the course conducted under I TEC/SCAAP.  There is feedback that the 
participants, after training, get promoted or are able to get better job opportunities. 
 
F. Delivery and Evaluation of Projects/Schemes 
 
4.18 The Ministry in their Outcome Budget (20 07-2008) have stated that an agency to be 
named India-International Deve lopment Cooperation Agency (IIDCA) was proposed to be 
set up to provide better manage ment of aid and technical assistance to other countries.  
During the examination of Dema nds for Grants (2007-2008), the Ministry in their written 
submission to the Committee ha d stated that IIDCA was pu rsued with an objective of 
concluding it in about 3 months.  However, th e Ministry has now submitted that cabinet 
approval is being sought for establishing IIDCA  and the Agency should start functioning in 
5-6 months time.  When asked about the reas on for not establishing the IIDCA during the 
previous financial year, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 
“Following the announcement regarding setting up of IIDCA by the Hon'ble FM in his 
Budget Speech for the FY 2007-08, MEA, in  March 2007, constituted a Task Force, 
chaired by the then AS(ER), to give recommendations on the struct ure, mandate etc of 
IIDCA. The Task Force held three meetings in April 2007 and submitted a Concept 
Paper with its recommendations on IIDCA.  
A Draft Cabinet Note was prepared on the basis of the Concept Paper in May 2007 
and circulated to Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Co mmerce and Industry, Planning 
Commission and PMO for their comments.  
An inter-ministerial meeting was held on  29th May 2007 for consultations on the 
Draft Cabinet Note. The mee ting decided that the proposal regarding setting up of 
IIDCA should be considered in the Committee of Secretaries.  
A consultation meeting of Foreign Secr etary, Finance Secretary and Commerce 
Secretary was held on 28th July 2007. Finance Secretary observed in the meeting 
that the Draft Cabinet Note should be re drafted specifying objectives, lessons of 
experience etc. These comments were fo rmally received on 28 th November 2007. 
Accordingly, the Draft Cabinet Note  was redrafted to incorporate views of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance. Views of the Minist ry of Commerce and I ndustry were sought 
on the revised Note and were incorporated  in the revised Note. Due to long drawn 
process of inter-ministerial consultations,  IIDCA could not be established during 
the previous financial year. The revised Draft Cabinet Note taking on board the 
views of Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry on setting 
up IIDCA has been submitted for Cabinet's approval on 7th March 2008.” 
 
4.19 According to the Outcome Budget (2008-2009) in order to further improve the system 
of project evaluation and mon itoring the Ministry proposed to introduce the following 
additional measures: 
• In the case of large projects, with an outlay of over Rs. 150 crore, it is 
proposed to conduct a detailed evaluation through an independent 
professional organization. 
• In the case of projects of a technical nature (e.g. Pan-African e-network), it is 
proposed to evaluate implementation against Service Level Agreements, 
have a technically competent Project  Monitoring Unit and organize peer 
reviews. 
• A post-completion evaluation is proposed to be obtaine d from the local 
authorities and the Embassy to assess if  the desired outcomes of the project 
have bee achieved.  Wherever possible, it is proposed that feedback will also 
be obtained from the beneficiary community. 
• For training programmes under ITEC and for cultural activities under ICCR, 
feedback is proposed to be obtained from trainees/participants. 
 
4.20 Asked when these additional measures w ill be introduced, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as follows: 
“(i) As has been mentioned earlier, c onsultations are held with the concerned 
sovereign Government about their readiness to have a project carried out in their 
country by India. Thereafter, a bilateral agreement is signed between India and the 
beneficiary Government on the execution of the project. The agreement also 

 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
stipulates the project concept, desi gn, implementation, and its monitoring, 
management, and terms of financing/a ssistance. MEA also enters into an 
agreement with the company (ies) involved in the execution of the projects 
abroad.  
(ii) Most projects have a mechanism of setting up a Project Monitoring 
Committee (PMC) to take stock of thei r implementation. These are generally 
bilateral mechanisms to mon itor the progress of a project and meet at intervals to 
appraise the execution of the projects. Th e PMC for the Project tied Assistance of 
the Government of India to Bhutan meets twice every year. The agreement on 
establishing the Pan-African e-networ k has the mechanism of setting-up a 
technically competent Project Monitoring Unit.  
  (iii) Evaluation of projects by an i ndependent professional organization from 
India would require approval of the be neficiary Government. We are holding 
consultations with some beneficiary Governments about such evaluation of 
projects by an independent outside agency with an outlay of over Rs. 100 crore. 
The Ministry is aiming at engagement of independent evaluators before December 
2008. 
 (iv) All institutes that are impa rting training under ITEC and SCAAP 
Programmes have been advised to obtain an  evaluation/ assessment report at the 
conclusion of the training programme from each participant attending the course 
conducted by them. Indian Missions also in teract with the participants upon their 
return to their country. Th ese feedbacks on the programme s from the participants, 
who have attended under ITEC and SCAAP programmes, are useful for any 
course corrections.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
CO-OPERATION WITH NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES 
 
India’s foreign policy seeks to promote an environment of peace and stability in the 
region and in the world so as to enable Indi a’s accelerated socio-economic development and 
safeguard national security.  To this end, vigorous efforts have been made to develop friendly 
and cooperative relations with all its nei ghbours and to strengthen engagement with the 
major powers of the world. 
 
A. Nepal  
5.2 Regarding the need for having an agreemen t with Nepal to generate electricity, the 
Foreign Secretary during his deposition before the Committee stated th at the position of the 
Nepalese Government has been  very fragile during the last two years and they are 
apprehensive about starting hydro-power projects with India.  Foreign Secretary also stated 
that once Nepal has a stable Government in pl ace all the big projects will be started.  The 
Foreign Secretary also assured the Committee that all efforts will be made to start projects on 
roads, railways etc. in the Terai region.    
 
5.3 On being asked whether there was any nexus between the Maoist in Nepal and their 
ideological counterparts in India and the stra tegy of the G overnment to deal with the 
situation, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“There are reports of ideological linkage s between the Maoists and the Left Wing 
Extremists groups. However, there is no conclusive evidence of operational 
linkages. In view of the open border betw een the two countries, any deterioration 
in law and order situation in Nepal coul d have adverse implications for India 
particularly in our border states. Sa shastra Seema Bal, deployed all along the 
India-Nepal border, remains on high alert. Measures have been taken to enhance 
co-operation with Nepal for effectiv e border management and intelligence 
sharing.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
B. China 
 
5.4   In response to a parlia mentary question, the Ministry ha d stated that China disputes 
the international boundary between India and Ch ina.  Since 1993, the two Governments is 
said to have agreed to maintain peace a nd tranquillity along the Line of Actual Control 
(LAC) as well as the boundary qu estion.  It was also stated that, in the meantime, pending 
final settlement, both sides ha ve agreed to clarify the LA C and to take up perceived 
violations through established mechanisms including the Joint Working Group, the Expert 
Group, border personnel, flag meetings and di plomatic channel.  Regarding the boundary 
issue, the Foreign Secretary stated that: 
 “Both sides are committed to maintaining the status quo and the status quo means 
the Line of Actual Control.  But we have the differences on where the line is also in 
some areas. That is one exercise - peace and tranquillity, maintaining the status quo 
and the LAC.  The other exercise which the special representatives do is to try and 
see whether they can find a settlement of the boundary - a co mmon understanding of 
where the boundary is, they have not done so yet.  They will continue their efforts.” 
 
5.5 The Foreign Secretary stated that India al so have an accelerate d programme of road 
building and other infrastructure works includi ng the ones announced by the Prime Minister 
when he visited Arunachal pradesh. 
 
 
C. Iran-Pakistan-India Gas Pipeline 
5.6 In connection with the Iran-Pakistan-India Gas Pipeline, four bilateral Joint Working 
Group Meetings with  Iran, six bilateral with Pakistan and six trilatera l meetings with Iran 
and Pakistan are reported to have been held so fa r.  It is stated that in the trilateral meeting 
held in January, 2007, a pricin g formula  was agreed between Pakistan and Iran which we 
agreed to consider subject to the transit fee and transportation tariff issue being concluded 
with Pakistan.  It is further stated that India’s position is to bilaterally conclude with Pakistan 
the issue of transit fee and transportation tariff on the basis of which a decision on the gas 
price issue could be taken. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7 When enquired about the present status of the gas pipeline project, the Foreign Secretary 
stated during evidence as follows: 
“On the Iran-Pakistan-India gas pipeline, India has been always very keen that we 
do this, but we do it in a way where it ha s a real chance of it taking place and 
where the risks are mitigated, where we are not left, at the end of $ 6 billion 
pipeline and making an investment of $ 30 billion in plant, but being dependent on 
somebody else who can turn the tap on or off……. This is one of the items very 
high on our agenda. We will start the talks. The challenge here is to find a way of 
doing this project where everybody has an equal stake in making it work. The 
Iranians must have an equal stake in continuing supplies, and Pakistanis in 
permitting it to go on. There are different ways  of structuring it. So, one needs to, 
I think, still do a fair amount of work on this. I am being ve ry honest among 
ourselves. It is a wonderful idea. Yes, it will link us all and so on, but we need to 
do it in a way where we are not one-side dly dependent on some body else. So, we 
will try and find a way, if we could.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER VI 
  
PASSPORT AND VISA SERVICES 
 
 Central Passport and Emigration Organi zation (CPO) was created in 1959 as a 
subordinate office under the Ministry of External Affairs.  The CPO is currently composed of 
34 Passport Offices, 15 Passport Application Collection Centres and 463 DPCs.  All Passport 
Offices are computerized and they issue Machin e-printed and machine readable passports as 
per the guidelines laid down by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). 
 
6.2 On the functioning of the Passport Office s, the Foreign Secretary stated during 
evidence that: 
“…..the central passport organization, with no increase in staff increased its output 
by over 13 per cent and issued about 50 la kh passports.    This demand will 
continue to grow.  The earnings from passport services have also grown to Rs. 567 
crore.  We have taken three significant steps within the last  year to try and 
improve passport services.  These are to really change the wa y in which we are 
working because to keep trying to make  incremental improvement on the existing 
system cannot cope with an increase of  18 per cent every year in the demand for 
passports. Physically it is just not possible…..” 
 
A. Re-issue of Passports 
 
6.3 According to the information furnished by the Ministry, employees in Government 
services and Public Sector Undertakings and their immediate family members, whose 
identity is certified by the Head of Depart ment will be issued passport without police 
verification.  When the Committe e desired to know as to when  this practice was introduced 
and if any time limit was fixed fo r issue of passports in such cases, the Ministry in a written 
reply stated that: 
“The practice of issuing passport without police verification to employees in 
Government services and Public Sector Undertakings and their immediate family 
members, whose identity is certified by the Head of th e Department was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
introduced w.e.f. 23.12.2006.  Time target for issue of passports in such police 
verification exempt cases is 30 days from date of application.  Passports can be 
obtained during 1-14 days under Tatkal Scheme on payment Tatkal fees.” 
 
6.4 When asked to indicate the total number  applications received (complete in all 
respects) region-wise, under this category during each of the last two years and the number  
of applications disposed of within 15 days, 16 to 30 days and afte r 30 days, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
“Passports under this categor y are normally issued within  the time target of 30 
days.  However, detailed data on specific ti me taken for issue of these passports is 
not available, as applications of Gove rnment servants are not captured as a 
separate category. 
 
6.5 The Committee have been informed that under the new rules, in the absence of any 
negative information concerning an applicant, no police verification will be necessary for re-
issuance cases either before or after issue of passports.  On being aske d when this new rule 
was made and if any time  limit has been fixed for re-issue  of passports, the Ministry in a 
written reply stated as follows: 
“The rule for exempting police verification in respect of re-issue cases came into 
effect from 09.11.2001.  However, police verification is sought in cases where the 
system does not indicate receipt of cl ear police report in respect of the old 
passport.  There are specific stipulations for re-issue of passports for applications 
from J&K and Nagaland.  Time target for re-issue of passports at present is 15 
days.  Applicant can also apply under Tatk al scheme for re-issue of passport in 3 
working days.” 
 
6.6 The details of applications received (w ithout negative information) region-wise, under 
this category after implementation of the new rule and the number of passports re-issued 
within 15 days, 16 to 21 days, 22 to 30 days and after 30 days are given in Appendix-III. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.7 When asked to explain the reasons for taki ng over 15 days for re-issue of passports in 
cases where there was no negative information, the Ministry in a written submission stated: 
“Passports under this categor y are normally issued within  the time target of 15 
days.  However, this time target is exceeded in a number of cases where the 
system does not indicate receipt of clear police report in respect of old passport.” 
6.8 The data received in re gard to re-issue of passports reveal that RPOs have taken more 
than 15 days for re-issue of passports in as  many as more than 50 % of the cases.  The 
position is observed to be worse in passport offices at Bhopal (61.36%), Guwahati (62.64%), 
Lucknow (60%), Pune (62%), Nagpur (71%),  Surat (81%) and Visakhapatnam (83%).  
Asked about the reasons for such delay in i ssuance of passports in re-issue cases, the 
Ministry submitted that: 
 “For reissue of a passpor t, the Passport Office is required to check Passport 
Information System On Net (PISON) which started functioning from 2003 with data 
pertaining to passports issued from 1994 onwards by Passport Offices. Police 
verification is not required for re-issue, provided there is no negative information 
about the applicant in PISON. Since the PISON contains old data scanned from 
records prior to 2003, when the Passport Offices were not fully computerized prior 
to introduction of Machine Readable Passports in 2003, in many cases data is either 
not available or is incomplete on PISON. Such of these cases, where there is no 
negative information, are requi red to be sent for police verification or reference to 
the original Passport Issuing Authorities which results in issue of passports beyond 
the stipulated 15 days. However, after in troduction of Machine Readable Passports 
in 2003, automatic updation of PISON was started.  Rapidly growing workload of 
the Passport Offices is also contributing to delays.” 
6.9 In the case of issue of passports to Government employees and their immediate 
family members, whose identity is certified by the Head of the Depart ment, the applicants 
are required to file an affidavit attested by a Notary Public.  The Co mmittee desired to know 
if it was a fact that even in re-issue cases, the Government employees are required to file 

 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
affidavit attested by Notary Public.  The Comm ittee further desired to know the justification 
for placing unnecessary hassle on Government employees requiring them to file affidavit 
attested by Notary Public, since in re-issue ca ses, in the absence of negative information, no 
police verification is required.  In response to the queries of the Committee, the Ministry in a 
written submission stated as under: 
“No.  In re-issue cases involving Gove rnment employees, neither Identity 
Certificate nor affidavit is required.  However, defence personnel, officials in the 
Defence Ministry and officials in the sensitive departments such as Atomic 
Energy Commission, Indian Space Resear ch Organization etc. need fresh ID 
certificate and affidavit, for re-issue of passports” 
6.10 When asked if affidavit ar e required to be filed by all applicants for re-issue of 
passports or only by Government employees, the Ministry responded as under: 
“No affidavit is required for re-issue of passport for the general public as well as 
for the Government employ ees subject to the exempt categories mentioned 
above.” 
6.11 It has been stated that in the case of  re-issue of passports involving Government 
employees, neither identity certif icate nor affidavit is require d except in certain specified 
cases.  Police verification is also exempted and time target for issue of police verification 
exempt cases is stated to be 30 days.  It is learnt that in spite of this rule, affidavits are being 
demanded and applicants are being harassed in various pass port offices.  Asked about the 
reasons for this state of affairs and the remedial steps taken for the strict compliance of these 
rules  uniformly in all passport offices across the country, the Ministry responded as under: 
“In cases where records re lating to initial applicati on for passports are not 
available on PISON to check whether or not the NOC was initially furnished by 
the passport applicant or the applicant was not a Government servant when the 
earlier passport was issued, the RPOs are advising the applicants to furnish 
identity certificate and affidavit.  The in structions relating to non-requirement of 
identity certificate and affidavit have been reiterated recently for strict 
compliance.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.12 When asked to justify the prescribed 30 da ys time in police verification exempt cases, 
the Ministry in their written submission said: 
“The time target for issue of fresh passports to Government servants is 30 days 
and for re-issue it is 15 days, and no distinction has been made between 
Government servants and the general public. This time frame has been fixed 
taking into account the overa ll workload and resources available in Passport 
Offices. However, the time will be re duced to three working days under the 
Passport Seva Project, which is currently under implementation.” 
 
6.13 The Committee desired to have the total number of applications received during 2007 
passport office-wise, showing details relating to: 
i) The number of cases, passport office-wis e, where PVR has been received within 
21 days, within 30 days and after 30 days. 
ii) The number of cases where passport has b een issued, after receipt of PVR within 
7 days, 15 days and after 15 days.  The Mi nistry in their reply stated that the 
information is being collected. 
 
6.14 Government employees applying for passports are required to furnish identity certificate 
from their office and also an affidavit.  When asked to justify the requirement for Government 
employees to furnish affidavit attested by not ary public and if furnishing only self-attested 
certificate by Government employees will not serv e the purpose, the Ministry responded to the 
queries of the Committee as under: 
“Whenever the Government servants re quire passports for official purposes, 
official/diplomatic passports are issued to them without a ny affidavit or any 
Identity Certificate. However, in cases where Government servants are requesting 
for ordinary passports for private reasons , Identity Certificate and affidavit are 
required from them for issue of fresh pa ssport. While the passport is issued 
without police verification, as such no distinction is made between the 
Government servants and general public in  this regard.  The Identity Certificate 
(in lieu of earlier NOC) and the affidavit were pr escribed only from 23.12.2006. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
In the light of the experience gained duri ng the last one year, Ministry is in the 
process of reviewing these provisions.” 
 
6.15 The Ministry have stated that in the re-issue cases involving Government employees, 
neither identity certificate nor affidavit is required subject to certain exempt categories.  When 
asked if this clarificat ion has been given in th e instructions governing pa ssport applications, the 
Ministry submitted that, the instructions relating  to non-requirement of identity certificate and 
affidavit have been reiterated recently for strict compliance. 
 
6.16 In the absence of specific definitions in  passport rules/instructions, various terms are 
interpreted differently by different passport offi ces.  For instance, the term ‘dependent of 
Government employee’ is interp reted to mean only persons be low 18 years of age in some 
RPOs, while some other RPOs keep 25 years as upper limit for the purpos e.  Asked, is it not 
desirable to define various terms used in co nnection with issue of passport and make them 
available to the public for their information, in response, the Ministry stated that: 
“Instructions specifying that “dependent children of Governme nt employee” mean 
only children up to 21 years of age have been reiterated to all Passport Offices. 
These clarifications will be suitably incorporated in the revised passport 
application form/information booklet and will be updated on the web.” 
 
6.17 The Ministry in a written submission to  the Committee made an unqualified assertion 
that under the new rules, in the absence of a ny negative information concerning an applicant, 
no police verification will be necessary for re-issu ance cases either befo re or after issue of 
passports.  However, the Ministry in its reply dated 13 March 2008 have  shifted its stand, 
stating that in re-issue cases, pol ice verification is sought in certain cases.  Asked why the 
partial and misleading info rmation was furnished to th e Committee and the same be 
construed as misleading statement before the Committee, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
“In the presentation (and the related written submission) on ‘Issue of Passports – 
modernizing and upgrading the passport i ssuance system’ that was made on 6 th 
February 2008 to the Hon’ble Standing Co mmittee on External Affairs, the focus 

 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
 
 
was on broad policy measures that were taken by the Ministry in modernizing and 
upgrading the passport issuance system. On  the efforts to reduce crowds at 
Passport Offices and simplify the system, the presentation included the policy 
measures announced by the Ministry to  the media on 21.12.2006 which inter alia 
included ‘in the absence of a negative information with the Passport Issuing 
Authority, no police verification will be necessary in the case of re-issuance of 
passport’. However, in responding to a written question, specifically on the re-
issue of passports without police ve rification, on 13.3.2008, the Ministry gave 
detailed information including the fact that there are specific stipulations for re-
issue of passports for applicants from J& K and Nagaland. Therefore, there was no 
attempt by the Ministry to furnish partial and misleading information or to shift its 
stand.” 
 
B. Working of Passport Offices 
 
6.18 During the course of their visit to va rious Regional Passport Offices (RPOs), the 
Committee have observed that ther e have been long queu es of public waiting in front of the 
counters.  It was learnt in almost all cases, the applicants have to waste the whole day for 
getting clarification on miscellaneous issues regarding their passport.  When asked how these 
problems are proposed to be addressed, the Ministry responded as under; 
“While the Ministry has been addressi ng these problems on a continuous basis 
through decentralization of application co llection, simplification of procedures, 
facility of submission of on-line application, setting-up of special desk s manned by 
ex-servicemen, widows and physically challe nged persons to facilitate filling up of 
the forms, introduction of token system, et c., Passport Offices are finding it difficult 
to manage with the available manpower to meet the increase in demand, which has 
resulted in long queues and crowded conditions  at Passport Offices. To address this 
issue, under the Passport Seva Project, 68 Pa ssport Seva Kendras will be established 
all over the country. This nu mber can be expande d further in the light of growing 
demand. The number of public dealing counters country wide will go up from 345 to 
1250 and public dealing hours per working da y from the present 4 to 7. It is also 

 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed that the average time taken for s ubmission of applica tion by an applicant 
should not exceed 45 minutes.” 
6.19 C&AG in their Performance Audit Report (Para 7.1.2, 2007) have mentioned that there 
were significant delays in the i ssue of Passport.  In the 12 selected RPOs/POs, only 19% of 
passports were issued within the prescribed time limit. In 9 of selected RPOs/POs only 12% 
passports were issued on time after receipt of Po lice Verification Reports (PVRs).  In 10 of these 
RPOs/POs even where police verification was wa ived, only 38% of the passports were issued 
within the prescribed time.  When asked to explain such poor performance by RPOs and the kind 
of supervision undertaken by the Ministry to ensure that stipulated time limits are adhered to by 
the RPOs, the Ministry made the following submission: 
“There are several reasons for delays in th e issue of passports. These include: delays 
in receipt of Police Verification Reports (PVRs) (C&AG in their Performance Audit 
Report have also mentioned that PVRs are not received in time in 75% of the cases), 
receipt of adverse/incomplete PVRs; delay in  receipt of applications from District 
Passport Cells (DPCs), and furnishing of in complete information and/or documents 
by the applicants. Rapidly growing worklo ad of the Passport Offices is also 
contributing to pendencies. 
The Ministry has instructed all Passport O ffices to submit weekly pendency reports 
which are reviewed by it. Strict instructi ons are given to Passport Offices whenever 
there is delay in processing of applicati ons. During the inspection of Passport Offices 
by various officers of the Ministry, special emphasis is given to the issue of 
pendency. Pendency clearance drives are also undertaken from time to time including 
regular Passport Adalats. The Passport Offices  have been asked to  have close liaison 
with the police authorities and to have periodic meetings to expedite police 
verification. As for incomple te applications received mo stly through DPCs, efforts 
are being made to eliminate the same, through training of DPC personnel.” 
6.20 When asked to suggest how the performances  of RPOs can be improved, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
“While all efforts are being made to impr ove the performance of Passport Offices, 
rapidly growing demand (from about 22 lakh passports in 2000 to about 50 lakh 

 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
 
 
 
passports in 2007) has put considerable strain on manpower and infrastructure 
leading to delays in issuance of pass ports and crowded conditions in Passport 
Offices. Further, while all our Pass port Offices are fully computerized, 
considerable scope exists to introduce la test Information Technology to improve 
issuance system. Moreover, to cater to the fast growing de mand for passports, 
phenomenal increase in Gove rnment manpower and offi ce space will be needed, 
which is simply unsustainable. Therefore, the Ministry commissioned the National 
Institute of Smart Government (NISG) , Hyderabad, to undertake a study for a 
comprehensive reform of the passport issuance system to improve the 
performance levels. The Ca binet approved implementation of the Passport Seva 
Project, based on the NISG report, in Sept ember 2007. The project is expected to 
be completed in a time frame of 19 months  and we expect to award the contract 
during this month. All services involv ing issuance of a new passport booklet will 
be rendered in three working days in cas es not requiring police verification or 
requiring post-service police verifica tion. In cases requiring pre-police 
verification, the service level will be th ree working days plus the time taken for 
police verification. There will also be a Tatkal or emergency passport service 
rendered on the day of the applicati on itself on the basis of payment of a 
prescribed higher fee. Cases such as change of address, requiring endorsements on 
the existing passport booklet, will be disposed of on the day of the application 
itself. It is also proposed that the average time taken for submission of application 
by an applicant should not exceed 45 minutes.” 
6.21   C&AG in its Performance Audit Report (Para 7.1.9.1, 2007) has mentioned that in 
RPO, Delhi, in 114 cases of revoked/imp ounded passports, entries regarding their 
revocation/impounding were not made in system.  These passports could go unnoticed by 
PIAs, immigration officers and other security agencies.  Asked if responsibility for such 
lapses was fixed and the action taken against those found guilty including measures to ensure 
such lapses do not recur in future, the Ministry made the following submission: 
“C&AG in its Performance Audit Repor t (Para 7.1.9.1, 2007) has mentioned that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
‘In RPO, Delhi, during test check of records for the period from April 2000 to 
June 2005, it was noticed that in 114 cases, entries regarding 
revocation/impounding of passports were not made  in the system’. The 
Performance Audit Report has also mentio ned that RPO Delhi has stated that 
circulars in respect of the cited cases were issued to the concerned authorities (as 
per the then existing instructi ons). It may be noted that Ministry’s instructions to 
make entries on impounded/revoked passports in the computer system were issued 
in December 2005 to all Passport Offices. 
During the inspection of Passport Offices by various officers of the Division, 
special emphasis is given to timely impounding/revocation of passports. 
Passport Seva Project, when implemented, would automatically enter the data on 
impounded/revoked passports on the comput er system and would also notify all 
nodal points.” 
 
C. Passport Office Website 
6.22 A number of instan ces have been brought to the notice of the Committee pertaining to the 
status of applications given on the website of the passport office.  After the Police Verification 
Report (PVR) is received, the status in the website shows that ‘Passport will be dispatched 
within a week’.  Apparently, the passports are ne ver dispatched within th e time as given on the 
website.  When asked, if this indicates ineffec tive control or monitori ng of the functions of 
passport offices, the Ministry replied as under: 
“When a passport is not issued as per the date indicated on the website, the system 
automatically shows that the passport will be dispatched with in a week. Due to 
shortage of manpower combin ed with rapidly increasing workload, there have been 
delays in the issue of passports within the indicated period.  
However, it may be noted that there has be en significant growth in passport demand 
particularly in the last few years. The number of passports processed has doubled 
since 2000, when about 22 lakh passports were issued. Despite constraints, the 
Central Passport Organization increased its output by over 13% on the previous year 
and issued about 50 lakh passports in 2007. The number of passports issued per 
employee per annum of the Central Passport Organization increased from about 1300 
in 2000 to about 2100 in 2007. In 2007, while the passport applications received were 
48,95,855, the number of passports issued was 49,41,560. This has been possible due 
to constant monitoring of the issuance of passports.”  

 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
 
 
 
 
 
6.23 When asked about th e mechanism in the RPOs to ensu re that the general information 
on the website is updated regularly and is made more accurate and user friendly, the Ministry 
submitted that, website of all passport office s have been made uniform and linked to the 
Ministry’s website.  The Ministry also stated that the websites are being updated regularly. 
6.24 The Committee pointed out that the Passport Rules availa ble on the website are not 
downloadable, when asked by when such shortcom ings will be rectified, the Ministry stated 
as under: 
“The Passport Rules, available on the website were scanned in the image-mode 
and therefore, will have to be downloaded page by page. Howeve r, this is being 
rectified to make it more user-friendly.“ 
6.25 When the Committee desired to have Passp ort Rules with up to date amendments, the 
Ministry could only furnish a photocopy of 9 March 2004 March publication.  Asked why 
the Ministry does not have an authentic versi on of upto date Passport Rules, the Ministry 
responded as follows: 
“In response to the request received fro m the Hon’ble Sta nding Committee on 25 
March 2008, five copies of Passport Act, 1967, along with the Passports Rules, 
1980 (as amended in 2006 and issued in 2008), and copies of Gazette 
Notifications amending the Passport Rule s since then were furnished to the 
Committee on 26 March 2008.  The Ministry has the authenticated copy of 
Passport Rules, 1980, which forms part of a file. However, with a view to provide 
all subsequent amendments in a user-frie ndly manner at a single place, copies of 
the printed publication was provided to the Hon’ble St anding Committee.  It may 
be noted that the Publisher of this publication has been authorized by the 
Government and is being given copies of the amendments officially. “ 
 
D. Unauthorized Collection of Fees 
6.26 Article 265 of the Constitution has laid down that no tax shall be levied or collected 
except by authority of law. In this context, the Committee on Subordinate Legislation of Lok 
Sabha have time and again emphasized that no  charges or fee can be levied by Government, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 
 
 
 
 
unless there is an express authorization theref or by Parliament. Section 5 of the Passports 
Act, 1967 has delegated powers to the executive to levy fee for (i) Issue of passport in order 
to meet the expenses incurred on special security paper, printing, lamination; and (ii) other 
connected miscellaneous services in issuing pa ssports and other travel documents. It appears 
that the fee (Rs. 1000) prescribed for issue of  ordinary passport and lesser fees ranging from 
Rs. 100 to Rs. 700 prescribed for miscellaneou s services are covered by Section 5 of the 
Passports Act. The same is not the case as regards additional fees (Rs. 1500) charged by 
MEA for issue of passport under ‘Tatkaal Scheme’. There appears to be no express 
authorization by Parliament to charge additional fee for out-of-turn issue of passport under 
Tatkal Scheme which is neither a miscellaneous service nor the additional fees charged are to 
meet the expenses incurred on sp ecial security paper and printing. Additional fees prescribed 
by the Ministry of External Affairs under the Passport Rules obviously are outside the scope 
of the powers delegated by the Parliament under Section 5 of the Passports Act.  The 
Committee desired to know  that by prescribing additional f ees for issue of passport under 
Tatkal Scheme, if the Ministry  have exceeded the powers delegated by the Parliament under 
Section 5 of the Passport Act.  In response to a query, the MEA have stated that the Ministry 
has acted within the powers delegated by the Parliament in prescribing the additional fees for 
issue of passport under Tatkal  scheme and has not violated the Constitution.  Issue of 
passports on out-of-turn basis under the Tatkal scheme was reportedly introduced in 2000.  
 
6.27 Section 5 of the Passports Act, 1967 provide s “such fee as may be prescribed to meet 
the expenses incurred on special security pa per, printing, laminati on and other connected 
miscellaneous services in issuing passports an d other travel documents.”  Thus, the Act has 
authorized the Ministry to prescribe fee only on two counts:- 
(a) to meet the expenses on special security paper, printing and 
lamination.  (Fee of Rs. 1,000 pres cribed for issue of ordinary 
passport apparently meets this purpose) and 
(b) to meet the expenses in other connected miscellaneous services in 
issuing passports.  For miscellaneous services, the Ministry of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
External Affairs has prescribed fees ranging from Rs. 100 to Rs. 
700. 
6.28 Asked whether according to MEA the tatkal scheme constitutes a miscellaneous 
service, MEA has clarified that: 
“Tatkal Scheme does not constitue a misc ellaneous service. The rationale for 
charging higher fees for Tatkal reportedly includes expenditure related to: 
-  additional staff deployment requ ired to ensure that Tatkal 
applications are processed in a time bound manner within the Tatkal 
period. 
-  verifying the Verification Certif icate with issuing authority by fax 
and phone. 
- dedicated counters for Tatkal app licants.  Tatkal applications are 
accepted directly from applicants and reissue passports are also 
delivered under Tatkal across th e counter, additional physical 
infrastructure in terms of counters and public area in the Passport 
Office is required.” 
 
6.29 When asked if by prescribing additional fees under Tatkal  Scheme, the Ministry of 
External Affairs has exceeded the powers delegated by the Parliament under Section 5 of the 
Passport Act, the Ministry responded as under: 
“The Tatkal scheme was introduced in 2000 with the concurrence of the Ministry of 
Law which had observed in June 1999 that ex tra fee for Tatkal Passport would relate 
to the services referred to in Section 5, and would also be commensurate with the 
expenses incurred in providing these services and as such there may not be any legal 
objection to the charging of such additional fee for processing and issuing a Tatkal 
Passport.” 
 
6.30 MEA, however, stated in a writte n reply that the Ministry would make a reference to 
the Ministry of Law on the issue of tatkal fee. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
6.31 The Foreign Secretary stated in th is regard during evidence as under: 
“…….we will consult the Law Ministry about whether or not an amendment is 
required. After all, we have changed the fee. We have laid it on the Table of 
the House. We have gone through the whole process already. We will consult 
the Law Ministry specifically on this.” 
 
6.32 The Foreign Secretary also added that: 
“For us to stop issuing Tatkal passports now would be a public relations 
disaster.” 
 
E. Passport Seva Project 
 
6.33 The Foreign Secretary info rmed the Committee during eviden ce that the Ministry has 
taken three significant steps within the last year to improve passport services, these three 
steps includes the Passport Seva Project, Issu e of e-passports and Ce ntralized Printing of 
Passports for about 140 Missions. 
 
6.34 Elaborating further on the Passport Seva  Project, the Foreign Secretary said: 
“……….The Passport Seva Proj ect is really a Public Pr ivate Partnership and the 
idea is to establish a series of passport seva kendras which collect applications 
from the applicants.  The service levels which we have laid down are very high.  
No applicant should take more than 45 minutes to submit his application in any of 
these kendras and he should be able to fi x an appointment before hand, go in at 
the time that suits him, submit it and be out of there.   The issuance and printing of 
passports is something that government will do as a back office function.  The 
service level that we have promised to  the public is that new passports not 
requiring police verification will be issued in three days.  There will also be Tatkal 
Passports which will be issued on the same day. We will open 68 such centres; we 
will also increase the numb er of counters dealing with  the public from 345 at 
present to about 1250 which will be a qu antum increase.  We will increase the 
working hours from 4 to 7 hours a day, because today th ey deal with the public 

 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
only for four hours as the same staff then goes and does other functions.  In fact, it 
is our hope that by using IT, by keeping government’s functions separate from the 
facilitation to   the   public,   that   we   will be  able  to   guarantee   first   in   first 
out.   So    nobody    will    jump     the     queue.     There     will     be     a     tatkal  
service on the same day and we will be able  to track the process and the data on 
passports applications much be tter than we have been able  to so far.   Should we 
need to expand the service even  more than that, we hope to  be able to do that also 
in the second stage.  I must make it clear that these service centres and 
outsourcing will take place only for non-s ensitive functions. The approval and 
actual issue of passports will still be th e government’s job and our staff will 
therefore concentrate on those aspects…….” 
 
6.35 With private players coming in all the RPOs, the Ministry was asked, how will it be 
ensured that confidential information are no t compromised with in cluding the checks and 
balances proposed to monitor the working of pr ivate players, the Ministry in their written 
submission stated as follows: 
“……..In the Passport Seva Project, which has been elaborated in consultation 
with all concerned Govern ment departments and agencies, only front-end non-
sensitive activities such as applications co llection, data entry, acceptance of fee 
and capturing of photo etc. will be perf ormed by the service provider selected 
through an open bidding process.  All sensitive aspects of passport issuance, 
including verification of documents, check-lists, the decision to grant a passport 
and the handling of blank passport bo oklets will remain with Government 
employees as hitherto.  The project will not compromise national security in any 
manner whatsoever. The new system  will be introduced only after a 
comprehensive third party security audit by a Government agency. Such audit will 
thereafter be repeated ever y year. The data of passport holders will remain in the 
Government domain with strict access control. The ownership and strategic 
control of the core and critical assets of the project i.e. a pplication software, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
 
 
 
 
system software and data centres will remain with the Ministry of External 
Affairs. Data coming to the possessi on of the service provider when the 
application is submitted w ill only be used by him to feed the Government data-
base and the service provider will be held strictly accountable for any misuse of 
data.” 
6.36 Under the new passport rules of December  2006, an applicant submitting 3 out of the 
list of 14 stipulated documents, can get a passport on the basis of  post-issuance police 
verification. 
6.37 When the Committee drew the attention of the Fore ign Secretary on media reports 
wherein the Intelligence Bureau (IB) is reported to have said that th e Passport Seva Project 
represents a major security risk, the Foreign Secretary submitted as follows: 
“The whole system has been designed al ong with IB and MH A. They are on 
board on this because it he lps them also to have a mu ch clearer record of what 
we have done. We do not broadcast th is, but unless we can manage our own 
data of our own individuals and unless we  know what kinds of applications we 
have and where they have come from, it becomes much hard er for us to see 
about the ones that are really dangerous . Otherwise, for dealing with these 
numbers, 50 lakh or so, we need the ab ility to sort out a nd deal with this 
properly. That is why, we devised the Passport Seva System along with IB and 
MHA as a means of tightening it up.  But for obvious reasons, we do not go 
around saying this that it would be possible for us to know immediately 
whether somebody who claims to be an In dian abroad is or is not an Indian. 
We will get all these advantages.  
6.38 The Foreign Secretary elaborated on the Passport Seva Project as under: 
“We are also adding another whole layer of security. In the new Passport Seva 
Project, we will be taking fingerprints. S o, we will be putting biometrics into the 
system. Frankly speaking, today in India, without an ID-card system, we rely on 
people’s word. If not the person himself, then somebody else signs an affidavit on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
 
his behalf. Today, we are a very trusting system. What  we need to do is to 
increase the levels of secur ity and the confidence in the data that we deal with. I 
would assure you that once we will do w ith this Passport Seva System with 
biometrics, with computerised records and centralised records with the 
Government, then we will be able to do much better. I am sure that there are many 
people who get worried about how it will work in future. I do not want to say this, 
but there are many interests in inefficiency…..”  
 
F. Visa Services 
 
6.39 The Annual Report (2007-2008 ) of the Ministry states that forty Indian Missions 
and Posts abroad have been authorised to outsource visa application collection work.  The 
Committee drew the attention of  the Ministry towards a repor t carried in San Fransciso 
Chronicle on 2 February 2007 which reported th e irresponsible dumping of sensitive data 
at recycling centre by the Indian Consulate.  Asked how the Ministry would ensure that 
security aspects are taken care of and confid ential information is handled responsibly, the 
Ministry responded as under: 
“The proposal for outsourcing of visa services envisages outsourcing of only non-
sensitive aspects, such as collection and collation of visa applications. All security 
related aspects are to be handled by the Embassies/Consulates. The Contract with 
the service provider specif ically provides that he  shall ensure complete 
confidentiality of the information provided by visa seek ers and will further ensure 
that it is used for no purpose other than processing of visa. In addition, the service 
provider shall indemnify the Embassy/Consul ates in the event of any leakage of 
such information and a consequential claim made by visa applicant/applicants. 
 With regard to the reference to a report in San Francisco Chronicle on 2 nd 
February 2007, as per information available,  there was an incident in which some 
old application forms were found lying at the premises of the recycling company, 
prior to their destruction. The Consul ate in San Francisco took immediate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
corrective measures and put into place sy stems, which would ensure that the 
confidentiality of the personal data in  visa/passport and other forms is fully 
safeguarded. It should be noted that th e outsourcing of visa services in San 
Francisco started from 1 October 2007. With  a view to avoid recurrence of such 
incidents, a circular was issued to all our Missions/Posts abroad which is 
reproduced at Appendix-IV. 
6.40 On the problems faced by Passport/Visa app licants in the Missions abroad the Foreign 
Secretary stated during evidence that: 
“……..On passports and visas in Missions, it is true there is a problem, especially 
in renewal of old passpor ts. And the reason, as I said, is before 2003, those 
records were not fully computerized.” 
 
6.41 Elaborating further on the problems faced by passport and visa applicants in Missions 
abroad, the Foreign Secretary stated as under: 
“The trouble is they will have a passport which was issued by an RPO in India ten 
or twenty years ago. Some passports are even twenty years old. Now, they will 
come with this old passport and say I wa nt a new passport. Now they have to 
verify with the issuing authority under the present system. Now, if the issuing 
authority is an RPO in India, they send a message. This can take for ever. In fact, 
when the C&AG looked at delays in pa ssport issuance, 75 per cent of it was 
because of police verification. Now, what we  need to do is to create a system 
where we know which passports have been issued. You check immediately online 
and you issue.” 
 
6.42  When asked about the backlog of the old, pre-computerized passports, the Foreign 
Secretary stated that: 
“That is what we need to bring into th e system. We will have to work on that to 
bring those in. The other problem is many people who have either lost their 
passport or have overstayed and then they want to regularize. Then, we have an 
impossible situation. At one stage, we ha d 7,000 people in Lisbon; they had heard 
a rumour that they were goi ng to be legalized if they had a passport. Now, these 
are people who had been there for ten, twelve, fifteen years. Now, it is a 
humanitarian problem, frankly. The only ultima te answer is to make sure that our 

 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
database includes all these old passports that we have issued. It may not be a 
perfect data, but at least some data that we have. Then, we can take a decision that 
yes, we can give him a passport, if he ever had a passport before. This we will 
work on. But this will take a little longer fo r bringing them into  the system. What 
we will do is lay down service levels for Missions which are the same as the ones 
that we will have here under the Pass port Seva Project. In other words, new 
passports will be issued in much less time; others will be  given in three days; and 
other services in a day. But the answer really is technology. If we do not do that 
communication and that technology, then this will always go on. They will 
complain rightly.  It is a real problem. We will try and do our best. I think there 
has been an improvement in visas. Now, all Missions tell us that they issue visas 
in 24 hours to people who come to the window. But the problem is with the 
passport.” 
 
6.43 When asked why someone who visited Indi a several times earlier could be denied 
visa later, the Foreign Secretary stated: 
“In fact, this is the other thing.   What we need to do is issue much more long-term 
tourist visas multiple entry. People should not have to keep coming back for a visa 
every time. If he has been he re once, twice, you know that he is reasonable. Then, 
the onus should not be on him each time to get a clearance. Th e onus should be on 
us to stop somebody who has done some thing wrong. We have to issue longer 
term visas so that he does not have to come back for a visa. That is what we hope 
to do.” 
G. Acquisition/Construction of Passport Office Buildings 
 6.44 During evidence, the Committee observed that several passport offices do not have 
building of their own and, therefore, felt that in States where the Ministry have offices to 
provide passport services, it should try to acquire land from the concerned State Government.  
The Foreign Secretary concurred with the view of the Committee and said initial effort is to 
talk to State Governments to provide land or build ing.  He also said that in 17 places we own 
the Passport Office buildings.  There are few States where it is difficult to secure 
land/building. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
OTHER MATTERS 
 
A. SAARC University 
 
 Setting up of a South Asian University is stated to be one of the important 
initiatives of MEA The update on the pr ogress made so far in setting up and 
operationalization of SAARC University is stated to be as follows: 
 
(a) India, Bangladesh and Nepal ha ve ratified the In tergovernmental 
Agreement signed during the 14th South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation (SAARC) Summit (April 3-4, 2007).  
(b) The first Intergovernmental St eering Committee Meeting (May 29-30, 
2007, New Delhi) approved India’s proposal  to set up a Project Office for 
the South Asian University in New Delhi. The Project Office, headed by an 
Interim CEO from India, will be established for the period of two years 
inter alia, to acquire la nd of the University, over see construction, draw up 
its Charter, Bye-Laws, Business Plan, Governance Structure, Course 
Curricula etc. The Interim CEO will be assisted by three experts or senior 
academics from the region. 
(c) A Search-cum-Selection Committee und er the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S. 
Swaminathan is in the process of fi nalizing the name of the interim CEO 
and two alternate candidates. The inter-governmental Steering Committee 
is meeting on April 16-17, 2008 to fo rmalize the appointment of the 
interim-CEO. 
(d) Discussions are going on with De lhi Development Authority (DDA) and 
Haryana Government for acquisition of land for the University. DDA has 
identified 100 acres of land in Narela.  
(e) Legislative bill & Headquarters  Agreement for the University 
incorporating the views of Ministry of Finance and Protocol Division have 
been prepared.   
(f) Internal approvals of total anticip ated expenditure of Rs. 6.9 crore are 
being sought for the establishment of the Project Office.  
 
 The University is likely to start its first academic session from July 2009.” 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.2 Elaborating further on the setting up of the SAARC university, the Foreign Secretary 
submitted, during evidence, as follows: 
“…….about the position on the SAARC University, the South Asia University. 
Land has been identified in Delhi – a hundred acres next to the Indira Gandhi 
National Open University. We have a Se arch and Selection Committee which has 
three people who could be the project dire ctors to start up this project. We will 
hold a meeting of the inter-governmen tal Steering Committee on which all the 
SAARC countries are represented later next month in De lhi where they will make 
the selection of somebody to start up th e project office and we also have 
suggestions to make. Ultimately, decisi ons have to be taken by the inter-
governmental body and we have suggestions to them for setting up separate 
academic Committee, separate business Committee and a separate Committee for 
the sheer logistics of it, th e land, the construction and al l that. We hope that all 
that activity will start within the next two months.  
 So, we have made considerable progress in the planning and in the 
preparation. But it now needs to be endo rsed by the eight member countries of 
SAARC formally and then they will appoi nt somebody to actually run the project. 
Unlike other Universities this is an in ternational body to whic h we are offering a 
home in India. So, we are performing this as an inte rnational obligation and we 
will also do a privileges and immunities agreement with them.” 
7.3 When it was suggested about setting up of an Advisory Committee consisting of the 
SAARC Members including people who may be interested so that the university comes up as 
an institution of excellence, the Foreign Secretary stated during evidence as under: 
“I thank you for the idea of having an  Advisory Committe e for South Asia 
University. I think, this is an idea we would recommend very  strongly. As you 
said, it is an opportunity to build so mething different, something unique and 
something excellent at the same time.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Prisoners in Pakistan Jails 
 
7.4 An estimated 199 Indian prisoners are said  to be in Pakistan Jails.  Of these 
nationality status in respect of 13 is confirmed.   Confirmation of nationa lity status in respect 
of 26 others is reportedly being done by the Ministry of Home Affa irs.  The Indian High 
Commission in Islamabad is also said to have  been repeatedly seeking Consular Access to 
the remaining 160 prisoners.  The Ministry has also informed that the Pakistani side is yet to 
respond to the repeated requests made by the Indian High Commission.  The Ministry further 
informed that precise number a nd details of prisoners can only be confirmed after provision 
of consular access. 
 
7.5 In addition to the above, 372 Indian fisher men are reportedly in Pakistani jails.  Out 
of these, only 97 of them are said to have  been provided Consular access and Consular 
access to the remaining fishermen has reportedly been sought by Indian High Commission.  
Some more fishermen have reportedly been taken into custody over the past few weeks. 
 
7.6 When asked about the steps taken by the Gove rnment of India to ensure the release of 
Indian prisoners in Pakistani jails, the Ministry  in a written reply stated  that, the matter has 
been raised at different fo rums of the Composite dialogue . There has been a detailed 
discussion at EAM, FS and Home Secretary levels. Prime Minister had also raised the matter 
with the Pakistan counterpart during the SAARC summit in Delhi in April 2007. 
 
7.7 Elaborating further on the steps taken by th e Government to ensure  release of Indian 
prisoners in Pakistan, the Ministry in a writte n submission stated that, a judicial Committee 
comprising 4 retired judges each from India a nd Pakistan has been formed to speed up the 
repatriation of all prisoners who have completed their tenure.  The Ministry further submitted 
that, during the first joint meeting of the Comm ittee, certain measures were recommended to 
both the Government including ex change of consolidated list with full particulars in each 
others’ jails by 31.3.2008.  It was also reporte dly agreed that fish ermen in custody whose 
nationality status is confirmed be released and in remaining cases, consular access be 
provided by 31.3.2008. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
7.8 Asked if the consolidated list of prisone rs were exchanged and consular access was 
provided to the remaining fishermen as re commended by the Judi cial Committee, the 
Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 
“The consolidated list of prisoners in each other’s jails were exchanged on 31-3-
2008 as recommended by the Ju dicial Committee.  Details in respect of 147 
Pakistani prisoners were handed over to Pakistan High Commission.  This 
includes a list of 28 prisoners to whom Travel Documents have been provided, 62 
Gohar Shahis who are awaiting repatriation after nationality status is confirmed by 
Pakistan for all of them, 43 Internees in Amritsar Jail whose nationality status is 
yet to be confirmed by Pakistan and 14 fishermen who have been granted 
Consular Access and confirmation of nationality status is awaited.  Pakistan had 
given the list of only 53 civil prisoners – 14 to whom Consular Access is awaited, 
26 for whom nationality status is awaite d from India and 12 for whom nationality 
status has been confirmed by us.The  Committee had recommended that by 31
st 
March 2008, all those fishermen whose na tionality status has been confirmed 
would be released and Consular Access woul d be granted to the others.  There are 
no Pakistani fishermen in India whose na tionality status has been confirmed.  
However, as recommended, Consular Acce ss was granted to all the 14 Pakistani 
fishermen at Jamnagar to the Pakistan High Commission authorities on 5 th March 
2008.  We are aware that ther e are a total of 436 Indian  fishermen in Pakistani 
jails.  Out of these 436 Indian fisherme n, 97 were provided with Consular Access 
and their nationality status has been confirmed by India, wh ile we have been 
repeatedly requesting for Consular Access for the remaining 339.  
It is disappointing to note that Pakistan  had not released the 97 Indian fishermen 
whose nationality status has been confirme d.  Neither have they given Consular 
Access to the remaining 339 Indian fishermen as per our records.  This was 
conveyed to the Pakistan High Commission on 31 st March 2008, when the list of 
Pakistani prisoners was handed over to them.” 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Management Information System(MIS) 
 
7.9 In order to have quantitative evaluation of outcome of activities, the Foreign 
Secretary during the course of evidence for Demands for Grants (2007- 2008) stated that an 
outside agency would be engaged to go into the issue and that a MIS within the Ministry will 
be put into place.  When asked about the curren t status of the MIS and the expected time for 
its implementation, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 
“The contract pertaining to the develo pment of an Information Management 
System (IMS) to support a few critical business functions of MEA has been 
already awarded. The propos ed IMS is expected to bring about increased 
efficiency and effectiveness of the ma nagement control over these functional 
areas. The system would address the requirements related to the following 
business functions of the MEA:  
• Budget and expenditure 
• Database of personnel 
• Foreign Visits information 
• Parliamentary questions  
 The designing and implementation of the IMS is expected to be completed by 
June 2008.” 
 
7.10 During the course of evidence for Demands fo r Grants 2008-2009 of the Ministry, the 
Foreign Secretary added: 
“…..In order to make our own work more efficient, we have also worked on an 
Information Management System within the Ministry which would 
computerise our management of the Bu dget and expenditure data, personnel 
data, information on foreign visits and so on, and on Parliament Questions. We 
hope to begin implementing this by the end of June, 2008…..”  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Propagation of Hindi Abroad 
 
7.11 According to the Annual Report (2007-2008) of the Ministry, the Ministry of External 
Affairs has a well formulated scheme for propagation of Hindi Abroad and extends support 
to various Universities and other educational institutions through Indian Missions abroad for 
Hindi related activities. 
 
7.12 During the course of evidence, the Co mmittee stressed upon the importance of getting 
recognition for Hindi at the international leve l as there are many People of Indian Origin 
abroad who speak Hindi, particularly in Mauritius.  Ignoring this would alienate the next 
generation of People of Indian Origin from India.   
 
7.13 Responding to the observation made by the Committee, th e Foreign Secretary stated 
during evidence that the Ministry organized the World Hindi Conference last year in New 
York, two regional Hindi Conf erence meetings were held at Budapest and Seoul.  The 
Foreign Secretary, went on to state that, in or der to spread information about Hindi and to 
promote foreigners who are interested in Hi ndi, the Ministry need to make much more 
efforts.  The Foreign Secretary also stated that Indian Universities should work with 
universities abroad by providing scholarships to students for propagating Hindi 
 
E. UN Democracy Fund 
7.14 On perusal of the statement of contribu tions made by different countries to the UN 
Democracy Fund, it has been seen that India is  the second highest cont ributor after USA.  
The contribution made by other developed countri es are relatively less than India.  When 
asked if there was any specific reasons for the high contribution made by India, the Ministry 
in a written reply submitted as under: 
“As a founding member of the United Nations, India has consistently and 
significantly contributed to various areas of its functioning. As the world’s largest 
democracy, it was natural for India to be  among the first countries to support the 
initiative for the establishment of the United Nations Democracy Fund (UNDEF). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
 
 
 
 
 
Hon’ble Prime Minister was a Guest of H onour at the international launch of the 
Fund at the UN Hqs. in New York on 14 September 2005 during the World 
Summit 2005.   
2. The primary purpose of UNDEF is to promote democracy around the 
world by providing assistance for project s that consolidate and strengthen 
democratic institutions and facilitate de mocratic governance in new or restored 
democracies. The Fund would strengthen the UN’s capacity to respond to requests 
for assistance.   
3. Contributions by member states to UNDEF are on voluntary basis, to be 
made by them as and when they wish to do so. Given our universally acclaimed 
democratic credentials a nd our strong support for th e objectives of UNDEF, GoI 
had decided to make an initial contributi on of US $ 10 million to the Fund. As the 
Fund’s recipients would mainly compri se project proponents in developing 
countries, our contribution is also in line with our policy of providing assistance to 
other developing countries.  
4. India is a member of UNDEF’s Advi sory Board since its inception, and 
continues its constructive engagement in implementing the Fund’s activities. 
GoI’s decision to make a further ple dge of US $ 10 million, as announced by 
Hon’ble External Affairs Mini ster in his speech at the General Debate of the 62 nd 
Session of the UN General Assembly on 1 October 2007, is a reaffirmation of our 
commitment to this multilateral initiative.  Out of the pledge  announced by EAM, 
an amount of US $ 5 million was released during Financial Year 2007-08.” 
 
7.15 Justifying further on the contribution made to UN democracy fund, the Foreign 
Secretary stated during evidence that: 
“On the UN Democracy Fund, we found that quite frankly, as the world’s largest 
democracy, we have an interest in democr acy and we have seen that even in our 
own neighbourhood, whether it is Nepal or whether it is Pakistan, we have seen 
that their movement towards democracy actually coincides with the policy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
 
 
 
 
outcomes that we desire.  But we have found that the UN is a useful vehicle. 
Many countries find it easier to do the kind of work that we do. For instance, we 
bring parliamentarians here for training courses, or we assist them with their 
parliamentary procedures or when the Elec tion Commission does a lot of work 
with the new Election Commissions in Bhutan or Nepal etc. We find that a lot of 
it is much easier if you do it with a UN flag. People find it easier to accept 
because this is a sovereign function and this  is an internal affa ir where a foreigner 
is interfering. That is one reason why we work through the UNDEF. It is true, our 
contributions are large. But, I think, our  commitment to democracy is also large 
and we have the largest democracy in the world.” 
 
7.16 The Foreign Secretary further informed that: 
“…….this is a voluntary contribution and it is  not a regular feature.  It does not 
have to happen before..…..” 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
 
 
PART - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Committee observe that as agains t the projection of Rs. 768 crore under 
plan head, the Ministry of External Af fairs has been provided only Rs. 579 crore 
during the year 2008-09.  The shortfall is to the extent of Rs. 1 89 crore.  MEA has 
stated that in case additional funds are required, the Planning Commission would be 
approached at the RE stage for higher allocation.  Considering the healthy utilization of 
funds by Ministry of External Affairs, the Committee suggest adequate additional 
allocation be made to MEA.   
 
2. The Committee in their 15 th Report had pointed out discrepancies in the budget 
documents and cautioned the Ministry to take extreme care and ensure that 
documents/information presented to Parliament are flawless.  Unfortunately, the 
Ministry of External Affairs does not seem to have taken care of this aspect.  It is 
observed that this year too there are discrepancies in the figures shown under 
Technical and Economic Cooperation in the Outcome Budget and the Demands for 
Grants documents for 2008-2009.  The Committ ee view this lapse seriously.  The 
Committee hope that the matter  will be looked into at se nior level and responsibility 
fixed.   
 
3. The Committee had desired (15 th Report) that all relevant project details such as 
original and anticipated dates of completion, factor-wise analysis of cost escalation, 
impact of cost over-run on viability of proj ects should be disclosed in the Outcome 

 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
Budget.  The Ministry of External Affairs a ssured in the Action Taken Reply that this 
suggestion will be implemented during the ex ercise for next Outcome Budget.  The 
Committee are disappointed to see that the desired information has not been shown in 
the Outcome Budget of 2008-09.  The Committee have been informed that Ministry of 
External Affairs is making efforts to collec t up-to-date information to be incorporated 
into a separate corrigendum in the Outc ome Budget for 2008-09.  The Committee 
would await the corrigendum for Outcome Budget of 2008-09.  
 
4. The Committee had comm ented upon in their 15 th Report (2007-08)  the need to 
raise the manpower strength of the Ministry of External Affairs to cope with the 
expanding role of the Ministry.  The Committe e are of the view that cadre strength of 
Ministry of External Affairs is grossly inadequate and needs to be substantially 
increased.  The Ministry of External Affair s has since made a proposal to create 514 
posts out of which 314 posts are at middle and junior level.  The Committee have been 
informed that Cabinet Secretariat has advised Ministry of External Affairs to sort out 
creation of these posts in consultation with  the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee 
urge that there should be no further delay in deciding the proposed expansion of the 
cadre strength, keeping in view MEA’s en larged roles and responsibilities brought 
about by India’s increasing international engagements. 
5. It is heartening to note that the Ta la Hydro Electric Project in Bhutan has 
already commenced sale of surplus electr icity to India and that the project has 
reportedly made savings to the tune of Rs . 90 crore.  The Committee hope that the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
 
 
surplus electricity from the project will help India tide over its demand/supply gap in 
power to some extent.   
6. The Committee note that the framew ork agreement and protocols for the 
Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Project were expected to be signed on 2 April 2008.  The 
project envisages connectivity between Indi an ports on eastern seaboard and North 
Eastern Region of India via Myanmar.  This project will assure better connectivity with 
North Eastern States reducing distance, saving  fuel and time.  The project is expected 
to cost Rs. 536 crore and time line for completion is 5 years.  The Committee desire that 
there should be periodical monitoring of the project to ensure that the project is 
completed in time and without cost escalation. 
 
7. The Committee note there has been ha rdly any progress, regarding the Iran-
Pakistan-India gas pipeline project.  Four bilateral Joint Working Group meetings with 
Iran and Pakistan and six trilateral meetings with Iran & Pakistan have reportedly 
been held so far on the project.  It has b een stated that a pricing formula was agreed to 
be considered subject to the transit fee and transportation tariff issue being concluded 
with Pakistan.  The Committee have been in formed that talks on the gas pipeline will 
be resumed shortly.  The Comm ittee hope that th e matter will be taken up on priority 
basis to arrive at an acceptable agreement on issues involved, keeping in view our 
concerns on energy front.  
 
 
8. Regarding cooperation with Nepal, th e Committee desire that once the popular 
government is in place in Nepal, the question of starting hydro electric projects, road 

 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
 
 
 
projects, railways etc. be taken up on priori ty basis which will benefit both countries 
mutually. 
 
9. In order to have an organized set up of  project delivery, an agency by name 
‘India-International Development Cooperation Agency (IIDCA)’ was proposed to be 
set up during 2007-08.  Regrettably, the prop osal has suffered delay and is now 
expected to start functioning in 5-6 months time.  The delay is attributed to the long 
drawn process of inter-ministerial consultations.  The Committee feel that delay in such 
consultations could have been avoided, had there been inter-ministerial meeting to 
discuss and decide such issues.  The Committ ee expect the Ministry of External Affairs 
to take necessary steps to ensure that there is  no further delay in implementation of the 
proposal.   
10. There were as many as 1210 slots of scholarship under ITEC, SAARC and 
SCAAP that remained unutilised during 2007-08.  The under utilisation is attributed to 
change-over on account of st reamlining of the ov erall delivery system, introduction of 
dedicated on-line system, etc.  The Committee  in this connection find that scholarship 
schemes are administered by different agenci es within the Government, each holding 
separate examination for grant of scholarship.   The Committee feel that there is a need 
for holistic look at the whole issue with a view to bringing about proper co-ordination 
among the agencies in all aspects of administ ering scholarship schemes to ensure better 
standard and delivery. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
 
 
 
 
11. There has been a great deal of confusion and resultant delay in Passport Offices 
due to lack of clarity regarding rules/instructions, norms, etc. which necessitates 
applicants to undertake several visits to passport authorities and leads to harassment of 
public as illustrated in Chapter VI of this Report.  The issues inter-alia relate to absence 
of precise definition of terms used in passport related matters, ambiguity in instructions 
leading to different interpret ations by different Passport O ffices, non-display of norms 
of time limit prescribed for issue of ordinary  passport and re-issue of passport, lack of 
public accessibility to rules, instructions and clarifications issued by the Chief Passport 
Officer.  All this calls for a fresh look at the entire gamut of 
rules/instructions/clarifications and the public display system regarding passport 
matters with a view to making the function ing of passport offices more effective and 
people friendly and see that pr evailing state of confusion is not shifted to the proposed 
Passport Seva Project under Public Private Pa rtnership.  The Committee hope that 
action will be taken accordingly. 
12. The Committee have been informed th at the system of post-issuance police 
verification on submission of stipulated documents has been designed by MEA with a 
view to bringing down the time lag in issu e of passports.  The Committee desire that it 
should be ensured that the system does not pose any security risk. 
13. The Committee observe that Section 5 of the Passport Act, 1967 has delegated 
powers to the Executive to prescribe fee on two counts: (i)  to meet the expenses on 
special security paper, printing and laminati on (ii)  to meet the expenses on other 

 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
connected miscellaneous services.  Under these provisions, the MEA has prescribed a 
fee of Rs. 1,000 for ordinary pa ssport apparently to meet the expenses on printing, etc. 
and fee ranging from Rs. 100 to Rs. 700 fo r rendering miscellaneous services.  In 
addition to above, the Ministry of External  Affairs has prescribed additional fee for 
issue of passport under tatkal scheme, wh ich admittedly does not constitute a 
miscellaneous service.  The additional fee is reportedly to meet the expenses in 
providing tatkal service.  This is obviou sly outside the scope of Section 5 of the 
Passports Act.  According to Foreign Secret ary, to stop issuing tatkal  passports now 
would be a public relations disaster.  He has promised that Law Ministry will be 
consulted as to whether or not an amendment is required in the Passports Act.  
Irrespective of whatever opinion that might be given by the Ministry of Law, the 
Committee hold that powers delegated by  the Parliament under Section 5 of the 
Passports Act have clearly be en exceeded and the Committee  have been presented with 
a fait accompli.   Nevertheless, the Committee would await the opinion of the Ministry 
of Law on the need for Amendment of the Act to legitimise the collection of tatkal fees. 
14. The Committee are of the view that the proposed SAARC University to be set up 
in India would provide a tremendous oppo rtunity to establish an institution of 
excellence without replicating the universities that exist today.  The University could be 
designed to particularly highlight the inter- connectedness of the politics, the economics, 
the sociology, the literature and the culture of the SAARC  countries.  The Committee 
feel that these issues can be better addr essed, if there is an Advisory Committee 

 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
 
 
 
 
 
consisting      of      the    SAARC     Members    and     a   few   eminent   and   interested  
people.  T he Committee suggest that the i dea of setting up an Advisory  Committee in 
this regard could be recommended to SAARC for their consideration. 
15. An estimated 199 Indian prisoners and 436 Indian Fis hermen are reportedl y in 
Pakistan jails and the nationality status of 39 prisoners and 97 fishermen has been 
confirmed by India.  MEA has informed th at Consul ar Access to the remaining 160 
prisoners and 339 fishermen has been rep eatedly sought b y the Indian High  
Commission in Islamabad.  It has been stat ed that the Judicial C ommittee (comprising 
4 retired judges each from India and Pakist an) which had been fo rmed to speed up the 
repatriation of all prisoners who  had completed their tenure had recommended that by 
31st March 2008 all those fishermen whose nationality s tatus had been confirmed would 
be released and Consular access provided to the others.  Th e Committee regret to learn 
that this has not happened.  The Committ ee hope th at the matter will be taken up  
vigorously with Pakis tan to ens ure safe and quick releas e of the 97 fish ermen and  
Consular Access to the remaining 339 fishermen and the 160 prisoners.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
 11 April, 2008                                      Chairman,  
22 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)                            Standing Committee on External Affairs  

 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 3 APRIL, 2008 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Room No. 62, 
Parliament House. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
3. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
4. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
5. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
6. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Dr. Ram Prakash 
8. Dr. Karan Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of External Affairs 
 
 
1. Shri Shivshankar Menon  - Foreign Secretary 
2. Shri Sharat Sabharwal  - AS (AD) 
3. Shri Vivek Katju  - AS (Pol) 
4. Dr. J. Bhagwati  - AS (ER) 
5. Dr. Pavan K. Varma  - DG (ICCR) 
6. Shri Ashok Kumar  - ADG (ICWA) 
7. Shri N. Bala Baskar  - AS (FA) 
8. Mrs. Primrose Sharma - JS (TC) 
9. Shri Malay Mishra  - JS (MER) 
  10. Shri V.P. Haran  - JS (AD) 
11. Shri R. Swaminathan  - JS (CPV) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry  of External Affairs to the sitting of the Committee.  The 
Chairman then drew attention of the witnesse s to Direction 55(I) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the re presentatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs in connection with examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2008-2009. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 11TH APRIL, 2008  
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committe e Room No. 53, 
Parliament House.  
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
6. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
7. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
8. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
9. Dr. Karan Singh 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Director 
3.   Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Me mbers to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consider ation the draft Report on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2008-2009. The Committee 
adopted the same, subject to the following additions/modifications: 
(i) In Recommendation No. 6, the following to be deleted:  
“….and will also boost bilateral trade.. ….” 
(ii) In the first sentence of Recommenda tion No. 7, the words “not much of…..” 
to be substituted by the words: “….hardly any….”  
(iii) In Recommendation No. 12, the word s “….. along with the Intelligence 
Bureau and the Ministry of Home Affairs…..”  a nd  “…..such steps as may 
be necessary should be taken to ensure…..”  to be replaced by the words 
“……by MEA with a view to bringing down the time lag in issue of 
passports…..” and  “…..it should be ensured……” respectively.   
 
4. XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalize the Report after factual 
verification from the concerned Ministry and present the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

Appendix-III 
 Passport Office-wise statement showing re-issue of passports during 2007 
(Vide Para No. 6.6 of the Report) 
 
RE-ISSUE CASES S. 
No. 
PASSORT 
OFFICE 15  
days 
16-21 
days 
22-30 
days 
After 
30 days 
Total 
1. Ahmedabad 15512 6241 4295 4185 30233
2. Bangalore 22461 7754 7035 16336 55116
3. Bareilly (Breakup Data not available) - - - - 4721
4. Bhopal 2897 1473 1572 1555 7915
5. Bhubaneswar 2125 506 377 788 3840
6. Chanigarh 1133 804 411 1178 3526
7. Chennai 24028 3556 3625 13019 45869
8. Cochin 15002 4216 2701 5963 28907
9. Delhi 6534 674 541 1322 9071
10. Ghaziabad 1233 1307 1469 1665 5674
11. Guwahati 1025 333 328 1058 2972
12. Hyderabad 15448 7087 4604 3098 30327
13. Jaipur 9986 645 494 2313 13438
14. Jallandhar 3396 89 56 197 3829
15. Jammu* - - - - -
16. Kolkata 17637 4552 2678 1091 25958
17. Kozhikode 8846 2170 2455 3990 17534
18. Lucknow 8011 3828 4120 3938 19897
19. Madurai (Functioning w.e.f. 17.12.2007) - - - - -
20. Malappuram(Functioning w.e.f.28.8.2006) 12739 3991 - 17199 33929
21. Mumbai 17093 4960 5228 10590 38150
22. Nagpur 1049 277 436 1844 3695
23. Panaji 4292 90 105 225 4753
24. Patna 3445 1971 476 659 6570
25. Pune 6356 7170 2439 865 16433
26. Raipur (Functioning w.e.f.(17.12.2007) 6 - - - 6
27. Ranchi 3341 135 493 4018 7987
28. Shimla(Functioning w.e.f. 16.03.2007) 1970 - - - 1970
29. Srinagar* - - - - -
30. Surat 2188 1422 3057 4524 11294
31. Thane 8946 1535 2009 14133 26623
32. Tiruchirappalli 16430 6252 7594 17859 48135
33. Thiruvananthapuram 20352 2267 1813 1922 26649
34. Vishapatnam 951 46 228 4503 6316
 Total 254432 75351 60639 140037 535267
 *  In case of J&K residents passports are re-issued after police verification. 

Appendix-IV 
Circular issued to all Missions/Posts abroad by MEA on Visa Services  
Vide Para 6.39 of the Report  
Quote 
 
Dear HOM/HOP, 
 
 It has come to our notice that an Indian Post abroad, which does not have 
shredding or incineration facilities of its own was handing over old visa 
applications meant for destruction to a re-cycling company from time to time. It 
would appear that there was a time gap between the handi ng over of these 
applications to the company concerned and  their destruction through re-cycling. 
During the intervening period, the applicat ions in question were stored in an 
unguarded yard accessible to public. This matter came to the attention of a local 
newspaper and has also attracted serious objections from the persons whose 
applications were found lying in the open. 
 
2. It will be appreciated that the inform ation given by applicants in their visa 
applications (such as name, address, profession, purpose of visit, etc) is meant for 
the specific purpose of issuance of a visa. Its appearance in the public domain can 
invite serious objections of breach of trust and careless handling of privileged 
information. Further, lobbies in the We st, opposed to outsourcing of business 
information processing to Indian compan ies, often use the argument that our 
handling of privileged information leaves much to be desired. Therefore, 
incidents, such as the above, can also provide an added argument to those 
opposing our BPO sector. 
 
3. In view of the foregoing, it may be not ed that any document, such as visa 
or passport application, containing privileged information, should not leave the 
premises of a Mission/Post without being destroyed either through cross-
shredding or incineration. Further, the de struction of such documents should be 
done in the presence of a responsible officer not below the level of an Attaché who 
should certify in writing the period for which the visa/passport applications have 
been destroyed. 
 
4. We have separately asked some of our Missions/Posts to outsource visa 
applications collection to service provid ers. The agreement with the selected 
service providers should contain, inter a lia, a guarantee that the service provider 
will ensure complete confidentiality of the information provided by visa seekers in 
their applications. 
 
5. The above instructions may please be  noted for strict compliance and also 
brought to the notice of all concerned officials” 
 
Additional Secretary (AD& CPV) 
February 6, 2007 
 Unquote 