itra, 1921 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
        (2004-2005) 
 
                                  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 2 
 
 
MINISTRY OF NON-RESIDENT INDIANS AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
2004-2005 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2004/Bhadrapada, 1926 (Saka) 
 
 

SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF THE NON-RESIDENT INDIANS AFFAIRS 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
2004-2005 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.8.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  25.8.2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2004/Bhadrapada, 1926 (Saka) 
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
A. Background and Objectives 
 
B. Budgetary Proposals 
 
C. Projects and Schemes 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held  
          on 10.08.2004 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held  
           on 23.08.2004 
III. Statement of obser vations/recommendations 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2004-2005) 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey   -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Omar Abdullah 
3 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
4. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigouda 
7. Shri Vinod Khanna 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
9. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
11. Shri Dinsha Patel 
12. Shri Somabhai Patel 
13. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
14. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
15. Shri P .A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada  
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
20. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
21. Vacant* 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. K. Maheshwari 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Dr. Karan Singh 
25. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
26. Shri Arun Shourie 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
29. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
30. Shri Fali S. Nariman 
31. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri John Joseph  - Additional Secretary 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
Shri U.S.Saxena  - Director 
Shri Shiv Kumar  - Under Secretary 
Dr.(Smt.) Sagarika Dash - Committee Office r 
 
* Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee ceased to be a Me mber of the Committee consequent upon his 
resignation w.e.f. 13.8.2004 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Ex ternal Affairs having been authorised 
by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf,  present this Second Report (14 th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grant s of the Ministry of Non-  
Resident Indians Affairs for the year 2004-2005. 
 
2. The Standing Committee on External Affairs was constituted on 5th August, 2004. 
One of the functions of the Standing Committee as laid down in Rule 331E of the Rules  
of Procedure and Conduct of Bu siness in Lok Sabha  is to cons ider the Demands for 
Grants of the concerned Ministries/Departments and make a report on the same to both 
the Houses. The Report shall not suggest anything of the nature of cut motions. 
 
3. The Committee (2004-2005) took evidence of  the representatives of the Ministry 
of External Affairs on 10th August, 2004. The Committee wish to express their thanks to 
the officers of the M inistry of External  Affairs for placin g before the Committee the 
material and information which t hey desired in connection with the examin ation of the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 2004-2005 and for tendering evidence before the 
Committee. 
 
4. The Committee (2004-2005) considered and adopted t he report at their sitting 
held on 23rd August, 2004. 
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of t he Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
6. For facilit y of reference a nd conve nience, t he obser vations a nd 
recommendations of the Committee have been prin ted in thick ty pe in the body of the 
Report and have als o been reproduc ed in consolidated form in  Appendix III of the  
Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
23rd  August, 2004                                Chairman,  
Bhadrapada 1, 1926(Saka)                   Standing Committee on External Affairs 

  
REPORT 
A. INTRODUCTORY  
 
  The Ministry of Non-Resident I ndians Affairs have been created vide 
notification dated 27 th May, 2004 (Doc. CD-160/2004) , issued by the Hon’ble 
President of India under clause (3) of Article 77 of the Constitution regarding 
amendment to the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961. 
 
2. As per the Government of India (A llocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the 
Ministry have been assigned the following functions:- 
                                        
“Relations with Overseas Indians excluding entries specifically allotted to 
other departments.” 
 
B. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES  
 
3. A High Level Committee on the Indian Diaspora was appointed by 
Government of India vide its order dated 18 August, 2000 to look into the affairs 
of Indian Diaspora. This High Level Commi ttee submitted its report to the Prime 
Minister on 8 th January, 2002. After making an in-depth study of the 
characteristics and aspirations of the I ndian Diaspora, comprising of both NRIs 
and PIOs, this Committee had made seve ral recommendations for forging a 
mutually beneficial relationship with the Di aspora, for facilitating their interaction 
with India and their participation in India’s economic development. The 
Committee noted that the single refrain from the cross-section of the Indian 
Diaspora was to create a mechanism that obviates the requirement of reference 
to a multiplicity of organizations and departments, whenev er NRIs and PIOs 
looked to India for interaction.   
 

  
4. The High Level Committee in its recommendations suggested formation of 
an organization on the lines of  the Planning Commission to  look after the affairs 
of the Overseas Indians.  The Hon’ble Prime Minister has, however, decided to 
have a full-fledged Ministry to look after th e affairs of the Overseas Indians. The 
emphasis given by the new Government  on forging relations with Overseas 
Indians was amply reflected in Para 53 of the Presidential Address before the 
Joint Session of the Parliament on the 7th June, 2004: 
 
“Indians abroad have not only been success ful in many walks of life, but 
have also been a source of inspirati on for their brethren back home. The 
new Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs, which reflects our 
recognition of their values, will tap their potential for contributing to our 
economic growth.”  
 
5.  Earlier that the matters relating to non-resident Indians Affairs were being 
dealt with by the Ministry of External affairs and, now, in  view of the fact that a 
new Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs had been created, the Committee 
desired to know as to what was the pr esent status as obtaining in the new 
Ministry about jurisdiction of this Mini stry and also the manner in which this 
Ministry planned to work in co-ordination wi th the Ministry of External Affairs and 
other Ministries with regard to the matters relating to the non-resident Indians. 
 
6. To this, the Ministry in a writt en submission informed the Committee that a 
meeting of the Committee of  Secretaries was held on June 29, 2004 to discuss 
the allocation of subjects to  the Ministry of Non-Reside nt Indians Affairs. It was 
decided that all policy issues relating to  Overseas Indians Affairs should be 
allocated to the Ministry of Non-Resident  Indians Affairs. Later on the Ministry 
informed the Committee that the Group of Ministers met on 6 th August, 2004 and 
decided that the following subjects may be allocated to the Ministry of NRI 
Affairs: 
 
Direct Non-Resident Indians/Persons  of Indian Orig in investment 
admission of NRI/PIO students in various educational, technical and 
cultural institutes in India, scholarship to NR I/PIO students for study in 

  
India under different schemes, general  policy regarding the employment 
assistance to Persons of Indian Origin coming from various countries, 
organisation of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, matters relating to Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman Awards, Pravas i Bharatiya Kendra, guidance, 
cooperation and coordinat ion with the State Governments on matters 
relating to Overseas Indians, External Publicity relating to Overseas 
Indians Affairs, representation in I ndian Council for Cultural Relations, 
Representation in the Foreign Invest ment Promotion B oard and Foreign 
Investment Implementation Authority, matters relati ng to overseas Indian 
Volunteers Programmes in India and all other matters relating to Overseas 
Indians excluding entries specifically allotted to other Departments.   
 
7. The powers in respect of certain subjects, however, are to be exercised by 
the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affair s in consultation with other Ministries 
such as Home, External Affairs,  Finance, Commerce and Labour and 
Employment.  These are: Single point window for matters relating to (i) PIO Card 
Scheme and dual Citizenship issues (ii) FCRA matters of NGOs of Overseas 
Indians, Non-Resident Indian and PIO contributions to Government and Parental 
Organisations, all matters relating to development, operation and maintenance of 
Special Economic Zones for Overseas Indians, policies and administration 
regarding vocational and Technical traini ng of skilled and semi-skilled workers 
keeping in view the demand of Indian wo rkers overseas and External Publicity 
relating to Overseas Indian Affairs. 
 
8. Some of the unresolved issues in res pect of allocation of  subjects to the 
Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affa irs and to be  discussed further by the 
Group of Ministers are: Foreign Invest ment Promotion Board for Overseas 
Indians, all emigration under the Emigrati on Act, 1983 (31 of 1983) from India to 
overseas countries and the return of em igrants, setting up and Administration of 
Centres for Overseas Indian Affairs in countries having major concentration of 
Overseas Indians and development of ma rketing and communication strategies 
to ensure strong links between Overs eas Indian community and India and 
develop a classified data-base of Overseas Indians. 
 No time frame has been suggested for implementation of the above 
decisions. 

  
9. During the course of evidence, the Committee desired to have the latest 
update in regard to the positi on as obtaining in respect of the organisational set 
up and functioning of the Minist ry of the Non-Resident I ndians Affairs. Upon this, 
the Foreign Secretary informed the Committee as under: 
 
“I will give you the latest updates on this.  A meeti ng of the Cabinet 
Secretary was held with the various Mi nistries.  Some of the functions 
which involved this Ministry, for ex ample, the Ministry of Labour on the 
aspect of, for example, protection of emigrants going abroad, the question 
of explicit promotion, how do we target the NRIs for investing in India.  So 
at that particular meeting, various comments were asked from different 
Ministries about these functions being ta ken away by these Ministries.  A 
number of opinions were expressed at that meeting as a result of which 
the Prime Minister appoi nted a group of Minister s under the chairmanship 
of Shri Pranab Mukherjee.  That meeting took place two days ago.  
Various Ministers gave their viewpoin ts as a results of which certain 
recommendations were made concerning the new Ministry.  But, there 
were differences of opinion on a number of areas which were supposed to 
be allocated to the new Ministry.  On those areas of differences of opinion, 
Cabinet Secretary has been asked to take another meeting and try to 
come out with agreed recommendations.” 
 
10. The Committee express their satisf action over the emphasis given by 
the Government on forging relations with Overseas Indians by taking 
serious note of the recommendations of  this Committee with regard to 
Indian Diaspora made in their earlie r reports.  Time and again, the 
Committee had strongly recommended for strict implementation of the 
recommendations made by the High Le vel Committee on Indian Diaspora. 
The Committee sincerely hope that the creation of the ne w Ministry will 
lead to greater interaction with the NRIs/PIOs and, now, their problems and 
concerns will be addressed in a more effective and meaningful way. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
11. Now that an exclusive Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs have 
been created, obviously they should gear themselves fully towards helping 
to take care of the problems and affair s of the non-resi dent Indians and 
Persons of Indian Origin.  However, it  is observed that though the Ministry 

  
were created on 27 th May, 2004, three precious months have gone by and 
the allocation of work for the Ministry is yet to be deci ded.  Other aspects 
such as organisational set-up and staffing  of the Ministry are still pending, 
awaiting the allocation of work.  The Government have informed that a 
Group of Ministers is in the pro cess of making recommendations to the 
Prime Minister regarding the allocatio n of work to the Ministry of NRI 
Affairs but no time frame has been suggested for implementation of the 
recommendations. The Committee recommend that at least the basic 
infrastructure, essentially required, for the working of  a full-fledged 
Ministry should be in place at the earli est, so that the functional set-up of 
the Ministry can be established and the uncertainty and ambivalence with 
regard to the working of this Ministry ends without any further loss of time. 
(Recommendation No.2) 
C.  BUDGETARY PROPOSALS  
 (Rupees in Crore) 
                                      Budgetary Projection  
Head of Appropriation                      BE (2004-2005) 
Revenue Section 
Major Head 
Secretariat General Services “2052” 
External Affairs                       “2061” 
                                           Total  
 
                                            4.80 
                                            1.20 
Total Revenue Section                                             6.00 
Capital Section 
Capital outlay on public works“4059” 
 
                                            1.00 
Total Capital Section                                             1.00 
Grand Total                                             7.00 
 
 
12.  According to the Ministry a tentat ive provision of Rs. 4.80 crore had been 
made to cater to the establishment expenditure. When asked whether this 
amount was sufficient enough, the Ministry informed the Committee that this 
amount had been provided to cater to the establishment expenditure and 
functional staff to begin wi th and additional allocation for the Ministry would be 
sought in the first batch of Supplementary Grants itself. 

  
 
13. To another question as to when the functional set-up of the Ministry was 
likely to be established and whether any  target date has been fixed for the 
purpose, the Ministry informed the Commi ttee that although no  target date has 
been fixed, the functional set-up of the Ministry was likely to be established within 
3 months. 
 
14. The Committee were informed that a provision of Rs. 1.20 crore under the 
Head 2061: External Affairs has  been made to cater to t he expenditure likely to 
be incurred on holding the multilateral In ternational Confer ences/meetings in 
India and the expenditure on entertainment on NRIs related events which may be 
held in India, expenditure on projects and schemes which the new Ministry may 
undertake during the course of the year.  In this background, the Ministry were 
requested to state whether these events will be different from  celebration of 
“Pravasi Bharatiya Divas” for which a s eparate fund already st ands allocated in 
BE 2004-2005 of MEA and also to give a br ief description of events which the 
new Ministry proposed/envisaged to undertake during the current financial year.  
 
15. To this, the Ministry replied that this provision had been made on a 
tentative basis since the allocation of th e work to the new Ministry had not yet 
been finalized. The events which the new Ministry proposed to undertake would 
be finalized after the allocation of work to the Ministry and these events will be 
different from celebration of “Pravasi Bharatiya Divas”. 
 
16. The Committee note that Rs. 4.80 crore has been allocated against 
establishment expenditure, Rs. 1.20 crore for holding the multilateral 
International Conferences/meetings a nd expenditure on entertainment of 
NRI’s related events which may be held in India and Rs. 1.00 crore has 
been allocated under other charges.  All these allocations can be properly 
utilised only after the finalisation of work allocation by the Group of 
Ministers, which is still awaited.  The Committee are of the vi ew that at this 

  
point of time, sufficient fund is required only for establishment of the 
Ministry and allocation of funds for other than establishment expenditure 
should have been made at a later stag e i.e. at the RE stage. Therefore, 
priority should now be given to the establishment expenditure in order to 
have the organisational set-up of the Ministry in place as early as possible.  
The Committee also desire that the budgetary allocation of this Ministry be 
augmented substantially in due course so as to enable them to carry on 
their activities.   
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
17.  Similarly, a provision of Rs. 1.00 crore has been made in the BE of the 
Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affa irs under the Head: 2061-16.00.50 Other 
Charges.  When asked to give details of item-wise expenditure going to be 
funded under this Head, the Ministry st ated that being a new Ministry the 
schemes will be finalized after the allocation of work. 
 
18.  A budgetary allocation of Rs. 6. 00 crore in BE 2004-2005 has been made 
in the Demands for Grants of t he Ministry of External Affairs.  In this context, the 
Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs were asked to explain in consultation 
with the Ministry of External Affairs the r easons for allocation of Rs. 6.00 crore in 
BE 2004-2005 for the celebrat ion of ‘Pravasi Bharatiy a Divas’, in the Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs while a separate Ministry of Non-
Resident Indians affairs with its separat e Demands for Grants for the year 2004-
2005 was already in place. The Committee categorically desired to know as to 
why this amount had not been allocated to the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians 
Affairs and whether the celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in the current year 
was not proposed to be organized by the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians 
Affairs, the Ministry informed the Committee as under: 
 

  
19. As per the Government of India (A llocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the 
Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs has been assigned the following 
functions:- 
“1. Relations with Overseas Indians ex cluding entries specifically allotted 
to other departments.  Correspondingly  the erstwhile entry no. 40 under 
Ministry of External Affairs has been deleted.” 
 
20. The Ministry of Non-Resident Indians  Affairs are of the view that after 
deletion of entry no. 40 under Ministry of External A ffairs, there is no specific 
entry under the Government of India (Allo cation of Business) Rules, 1961, which 
justifies the organization of events relating to  Overseas Indians by the Ministry of 
External Affairs. Accordingly, the budget allocation of  Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 
should have been logically transfe rred from the Ministry of External Affairs to the 
Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affair s. Non-transfer of budget allocation is 
likely to adversely affect the preparation of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, which is now  
being organized by the Ministry of NRI A ffairs. The transfer of allocation of 
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas would also be sought in the first batch of Supplementary 
Grants itself. 
 
21. The Committee are surprised to note that a budgetary allocation of 
Rs. 6.00 crore in BE 2004-2005 has been made in the Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of External Affairs for the celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas.  The Committee note in particular that after deletion of entry No. 40 
under Ministry of External Affairs,  there is no specific entry under the 
Government of India (Allocation & Business) Rules 1961, which justifies the 
organisation of events relating to th e Overseas Indians by the Ministry of 
External Affairs.  Accordingly, the budgetary allocation of “Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas” should have been tr ansferred from the Ministry of 
External Affairs to the Ministry of N on-Resident Indians Affairs.  The non-
transfer of this allocation is likely to  adversely affect the preparations for 
“Pravasi Bharatiya Divas”, which is no w going to be organised by the 

  
Ministry of Non-Resident Indians A ffairs. The Committee recommend that 
the aforesaid allocated f und should be transferred su itably to the Ministry 
of Non-Resident Indians Affairs with in a given time frame say at the 
Revised Estimate stage to avoid any constraints/problems for the 
celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas,  in January 2005.  The Committee 
hope that a clear division of work between the two Ministries, in particular 
relating to NRI affairs, should be made at the earliest – leaving no scope for 
confusion and overlapping in respect of their functioning in  future. 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 D. CAPITAL OUTLAY ON PUBLIC WORKS  
 
22.  The Ministry of External Affa irs in their Annual Report 2003-2004 have 
mentioned that it had been decid ed to establish a Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra, as 
an autonomous institution, to promote mu lti-dimensional Welf are of the Indian 
diaspora. The then Prime Minister also announced the decision to allot a plot of 
land and a grant of Rs. 25 crore for the purpose. 
23. In this context, the Ministry of  Non-Resident Indians Affairs were 
requested to furnish a stat us report in regard to the announcements regarding 
allotment of land and grant  of Rs. 25.00 crore also elaborate as to when and 
where this Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra was going to be established. 
24.  To this, the Ministry in a wri tten submission have informed the Committee 
that the Ministry of Ur ban Development and Poverty A lleviation  had allocated 
Plot No. 15-A and 15-B measuring 5858 sq . mtrs. at Chanakyapuri, New Delhi to 
Ministry of External Affair s(MEA) for construction of Pr avasi Bhartiya Bhawan at 
a premium of Rs. 31,83,400/-. MEA had iden tified plot no. 15-D, measuring 3068 
sq. mtrs., adjoining the plot already  allocated to MEA and have requested 
Ministry of Urban Development and Povert y Alleviation for allocating this 
additional piece of land for the Pravasi Bharat iya Kendra. With the allocation of 
this additional land, the plot size would go up to  8926 sq. mtrs. (5858 + 3068 sq. 
mtrs.) and this would serve the purpose of establishing the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Kendra. 

  
 
25. To a query as to whether the Ministry propose to construct two separate 
buildings. i.e. Pravasi Bharatiya Bhawan and Pravasi Bharat iya Kendra and also 
as to what kind of activities are planned by the Ministry in these buildings and the 
purpose which these buildings are going to serve, as far as non-resident Indians 
matters are concerned, the Ministry submitted as under: 
  
“(i) The Ministry propose to cons truct one building only for the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra. 
(ii)  The proposal to establis h a Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra has 
been conceptualized by the High Level Committee on Indian 
Diaspora to provide a suitabl e place to commemorate the 
trials and tribulations, as well as the subsequent evolution 
and achievements of the divers e Indian Diaspora. The aims 
and objects of the proposed Kendra would be: 
 
It would symbolize our recognition that the common 
aspirations of all members of the Diaspora is to maintain 
their cultural identity and civilizational ethos. 
 
It would be an ideal forum to facilitate harnessing 
extraordinary talent pool am ong 20 million strong Indian 
Diaspora for accelerating our development process 
 
The proposed Kendra would have permanent exhibition 
illustrating the histor y of the Diaspora in various parts of the 
world. 
 
The Kendra would also provide facilities for comparative 
study of major Diasporas. 
 
The Kendra would provide facili ties for cultural interaction 
among Diaspora artistes and facilitate interaction with 
eminent Indian artistes. 
 
The Kendra would also suggest ways and means to redress 
the grievances ofNRls/PIOs. 
 
The presence of Diaspora is an important factor in our 
bilateral relationship with the countries of their settlement.  
The Kendra would provide informal channels of 
communication, which woul d help in promoting 
understanding of issues of vital concern to India.” 
 

  
26.  In the Demands for Grants of the Ministry under the major Head 4059: 
Capital Outlay on Public Works Rs. 1.00 crore has been allocated. According to 
the Ministry, the provision was primarily for the acquisition/construction of the 
‘Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra’ and provision in current financial year was for the 
acquisition of land. 
 
27. When asked as to whether the amount allocated for acquisition of land for 
the construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kend ra was in addition to the grant which 
Prime Minister announced earlier for this purpose, the Ministry replied Prime 
Minister had announced during Pravasi Bharatiy a Divas 2004 that the 
Government has decided to set up a Pravas i Bharatiya Kendra in New Delhi, for 
which the Government will provide a suitable plot of land and a seed grant of Rs. 
25 crore. Hence the amount allocated for acquisition of land for the construction 
of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra is in addition to the grant  of Rs. 25 crore which 
Prime Minister announced for this purpose. 
 
28. Replying to a related question as to whether the Ministry were in a position 
to cope up with the pressure whic h could mount in the wake of 
acquisition/construction projects-without proper arrangements so far made for the 
functioning of the Ministry, the Ministry again informed that only after the 
allocation of work to the Ministry, the staffing etc. of the Ministry would be 
finalized. The work for setting up the K endra would progress after setting up of 
the Ministry. 
29. The Committee note with satisfact ion that the amount allocated for 
acquisition of land for construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra is in 
addition to the grant of Rs. 25.00 crore which Prime Minister announced for 
this purpose.  The Ministry of Urba n Development and Po verty Alleviation 
had already allocated Plot No. 15 A&B measuring 5858 sq. mtrs, at 
Chanakyapuri, New Delhi to the Minist ry of External Affairs for the 
construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra at a premium of Rs. 31,83,400/-.  
Further, the Ministry of External Affair s had also identified Plot No. 15 D, 

  
measuring 3068 sq. mtrs. adjoining th e plot already allocated to the 
Ministry of External Affairs and h ave requested to Ministry of Urban 
Development and Poverty Alleviation for allocating this additional piece of 
land for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra.  It means that sufficient fund is 
already available to the Ministry and an additional plot is required for the 
construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra.  Work relating to taking 
possession of the plot and activities in  the Kendra after its functional set-
up should be undertaken by the Minist ry on top priority. The Committee 
understand that the plots which are allo cated to the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the construction of Pravasi  Bharatiya Kendra belong to this 
Ministry and once the Non-Resident Indians Affairs Ministry become 
functional, these will have to be transfer red to the Ministry of Non-Resident 
Indians Affairs.  Some paper work na turally may have to be undertaken in 
this regard.  The Committee, therefore, desire that, in the meanwhile, all the 
necessary formalities should be completed – so that the required set-up in 
the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs is in place at the earliest for 
starting the construction work for th e Kendra. Taking a lesson from the 
Videsh Bhawan project of the Ministry of External Affairs, all precautions 
should be taken in respect of the c onstruction project of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Kendra, so that, it does not get de layed. Accordingly, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs to prepare a time 
schedule for the construction of this building and ensure its completion 
within time. 
 (Recommendation No. 5)   
E.  PROJECTS AND SCHEMES  
30. The Committee desired to know as to w hat was the priority list of projects 
and schemes which the new Ministry may undertake during the course of year. 
To this, the Ministry informed that: 
“The Ministry would be organizing the third Pravasi Bhar atiya Divas in 
January 2005 in Mumbai in  collaboration with FICC I. The other projects 
and schemes would be finalized after the allocation of work to the 
Ministry.” 

  
 
31.  In the Annual Report (2003-2004), t he Ministry of External Affairs had 
stated that a website www.stio.nic.in was launched jointly with the Department of 
Science and Technology for interactiv e exchanges with t he Scientists and 
Technologists of Indian origin , with a view to assist them in their endeavour to 
play a role in the national development.   When asked as to t he salient  features 
of this website, the Ministry responded as under: 
 
"S&T Professionals of Indian Diaspora - Website" is Ministry of Science 
& Technology (Department of Science & Technology - DST) platform 
and is an integral part of the over all Indian Diaspora initiative of 
Government of India. The exact address of the website is stio.nic.in. 
The website was created to provide customized means to the scientific 
and technical community of Indian or igin (whether Resident/NRI/PIO) 
residing abroad to register into a prescribed data grid and seeking their 
expression of interest of workin g with Indian community for enhancing 
the scientific/social/economic temper ament and status of citizens of 
India. The website provides data-grid for registering for a new visitor to 
the site and information for exis ting/new schemes of interaction 
between scientific community abroad and India.”  
 
32. To a pointed query as to in what way the launching of this website was 
going to contribute/help the Scientists and Technologists of  Indian Origin in their 
endeavour to play a role in the national development, the Ministry submitted: 
 
“This Website is aimed at capt uring willingness and harnessing 
contributions of Scientists and Tec hnologists of Indian Origin (STIOs) 
abroad in: 
Human Resources & Research Capac ity Development -  Augmenting 
collaboration for strengt hening Indian education, research and human 
resource capabilities in frontier areas of basic sciences & cutting edge 
technologies; 
Technology Entrepreneurship - Enhan cing India's competence in 
technology entrepreneurship, utilizat ion of venture financing and 
mentoring younger generation for creating wealth from knowledge; 
India in international mega-science - Catalyzing participation of Indian 
scientists and institutions in major international mega-science projects and 
in programs of major advanced research facilities abroad: 
India as Global R&D Platform - Promot ing India as a Global R&D Platform 
and the preferred R&D outsourcing destination; 

  
Alma Mater relationship - connecting al umni abroad with their alma mater 
for purposeful and sustainable relationships; 
The website intends to catalyse r egistered STIOs interface with Indian 
academia, research, laboratories, industry & enterprises.  The STIOs 
offers of collaboration will be periodically screened and uploaded for 
browsing by Indian peers/institutions.  Also, information on specific S&T 
institutions, schemes, programs & opportu nities in India that may be of 
interest to STIOs will be made availabl e on the website.  This website will 
thus facilitate follow-up action on networked joint proposals.” 
 
33. When asked as to how many visitors  have visited this site as on date and 
whether any list of visitors has been prepared, the Ministry in a written 
submission have stated as under: 
 
“494 visitors have visited this websit e. A list of visitors has been prepared. 
The visitors are from Kuwait, Australia , Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Guyana, 
Hong Kong, India, Italy, Indonesia , Ireland, Israel, Japan, Malaysia, 
Netherlands, Nepa l, New Zealand, Oman, Papua New Guinea, Russia, 
Singapore, Saudi Arabia, South Kor ea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Taiwan, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, USA, 
UK and Zambia. The website is maintained and updated by Department of 
Science and Technology.” 
 
34. The website intends to catalyse registered STIOs interface with Indian 
academia, research, laboratories, industr y & enterprises. The STIOs offers of 
collaboration will be periodically screened a nd uploaded for browsing by Indian 
peers/institutions.  
 
35. Upon this, the Ministry were a sked as to whether any offers of 
collaboration of STIOs have been received so far. 
 
 To this, the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Offers of collabor ation have been received in the fields of Microbial 
Process Development, Pharmaceutic al Manufacturing, Biotechnology, 
Rubber Technology, Process redesig n/Integration/Reengineering, Solid 
State Physics, Solar Thermal Tec hnology, Plant Syst ems/ Molecular 
breeding of crops, Polymer Scienc e, Quality M anagement system, 
Architecture and Dental Materials Research.” 

  
 
36. The Committee appreciate the ass ociation and coordination of the 
Government with the Ministry of Science & Technology in launching a 
website “stio.nic.in” for interacti ve exchanges with the Scientists and 
Technologists of Indian Origin with  a view to assisting them in their 
endeavour to play a role in the na tional development.   The Committee note 
that information on specific S&T institutions, schemes, programs & 
opportunities in India that may be of interest to STIOs will be made 
available on the website and this websit e will  facilitate follow-up action on 
networked joint proposals.  The launc hing of this website has created 
some interest among the STIOs.  The Committee would, therefore, suggest 
that vigorous efforts for intensive public ity of this website should be made 
among the Scientific and Technical Comm unity of Indian Origin and steps 
should be taken to keep up the inter est (whether Resident/NRIs/PIOs) – 
residing abroad.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
37. In the Annual Repor t (2003-2004) the Committe e note that a national 
seminar on the Private International La w was organized in 2003, jointly with 
Indian Society for International Law to  discuss various matters concerning 
marriage, divorce, alimony, child custody , inheritance etc., which have a bearing 
on matrimonial alliance of NRIs and PIOs in  India. Difficultie s being faced by 
NRI/PIO ex-serviceman abroad in receiving pensions from India were discussed 
with Ministry of Defence and appropriate  steps were taken to obviate the 
difficulties.  
 
38. On being asked to furnish the details  and outcome of this seminar, and the 
nature/kind of difficulties being fac ed by NRIs/PIOs, ex-servicemen abroad in 
receiving pensions from India,  The Mi nistry have stated that  the Ministry of 
External Affairs and The Indian Society of  International Law (ISIL) had organized 
a National Seminar on the “Private In ternational Law problems of NRIs and the 

  
Hague Conventions” on 6 th and 7 th of December 2003. The National Seminar 
was attended by scholars and experts from various universities, senior lawyers 
who are familiar with privat e internaional law, Judges, who have handled such 
cases, officials of Ministry of External Affairs, former and present Law 
Commission members and officials etc. Ho n’ble Mr. Justice S. Rajendra Babu, 
Supreme Court of India inaugurated the National Seminar and Shri J. C. Sharma, 
Secretary, Ministry of External Affair s delivered the keynote address. Prof. A. 
Jayagovind, Director, National Law Sc hool of India Univ ersity, Bangalore, 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Vikramjit Sen, High Court of Delhi, Dr. S.C. Jain, Former 
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, Shri T. K.  Vishwanathan, Secretary, 
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law  and Justice presided over various 
sessions of the seminar. 
 
39. The Ministry also submitted that t he ISIL in its report on the Seminar and 
subsequent studies has suggested that suitable legislation be enacted to 
alleviate the problems of the wives and families of NRIs. The report also 
suggested that Government of India ne ed to give urgent consideration to 
embracing the Hague Convent ion on the Service abroad of Judicial and Extra-
Judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965. 
 
40.  As per the reply furnished by the Mi nistry, the ISIL in its report on the 
Seminar and subsequent studies has su ggested that suitable legislation be 
enacted to alleviate the problems of the wives and families of NRIs. The report 
also suggested that Governm ent of India need to give urgent consideration to 
embracing the Hague Convent ion on the Service abroad of Judicial and Extra-
Judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965.  
 
41. In this context, the Committee enquired to know whether any legislation 
has been enacted to alleviate the problem s of the wives and families of NRIs, 
whether the Ministry are planning to take up the matter with the Ministry of Law in 
this regard and what specific efforts are being made by the Ministry at their level 

  
to give consideration to embracing t he Hague Convention on the Service abroad 
of Judicial and /Extra-Judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965. 
 
 The Ministry in their written submission stated as under: 
 
“No legislation has been enacted yet but this Ministry will take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Law. The Mi nistry is proposing to seek Cabinet 
approval for becoming a party to Hague Convention Abolishing the 
Requirement of Legalisation for Fore ign Public Documents and the matter 
is at an advanced stage. We have become a party to the Hague 
Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-
country Adoption. We are seeking the views of the Law Ministry on the 
Hague Convention on t he Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or 
Commercial Matters. Other Minist ries and Departments are being 
consulted on Hague Convention on the Civ il Aspects of International Child 
Abduction. 
 
(ii)We are consulting the Minist ry of Law and have sought their 
concurrence to become party to t he Hague Convention on the Service 
Abroad of Judicial and Extra-Judicial  Documents in Civil or Commercial 
Matters, 1965.” 
 
42. The Ministry have accepted that many NRIs/PIOs ex-servicemen have 
complained of the difficulties faced by them in getting their pensions on account 
of  complex procedural r equirements, which cause i nordinate delays sometimes 
running into months and years. 
 
43. On being enquired by the Committee about steps initiated to overcome 
these difficulties, the Ministry have stat ed that the Reserve Ba nk of India vide 
their circular issued in July 1997 hav e stated that the c oncerned NRIs are now 
eligible to remit the relevant funds including pension held in their NRO account or 
to credit the same to NRE/FCNR account  after ensuring that Income Tax has 
been paid as per the provisions of Inco me Tax Act and a No Objection/Tax 
Clearance certificate has been produced from the Income Tax Authorities. These 
provisions have been extended to Defence Pensioners vide Ministry of Defense’s 
letter issued in September 2001. 
 

  
44. The Ministry have stated that th e ISIL in its Report on the seminar 
and subsequent studies have suggested for a suitable legislation to 
alleviate the problems regarding pensi ons of the spouses and families of 
non-resident Indians.  The Report also suggested that Government of India 
need to give urgent consideration to embracing the Hague Convention, 
1965 on the service abroad of  judicial and extra-judici al documents in civil 
or commercial matters.  The Committee are of the view that embracing the 
Hague Convention, 1965 in its letter a nd spirit should not pose much of a 
difficulty for the Government of I ndia and the implementation of ISIL 
suggestion will certainly go in favour  of our own people. Hence, the 
Ministry in coordination with the Minist ry of Law should ensure that such a 
legislation is enacted and implemente d at the earliest.  The Committee 
recommend that no efforts should be spared to protect the interests of 
non-resident Indians.   As the Reserve Bank of India has eased the 
regulations regarding the pensions, etc.,  Departments like Income Tax may 
also be persuaded to cooperate in  issuing no objection/tax clearance 
certificates to minimise the problems of non-reside nt Indians as it was 
being done in the case of Defence Pens ioners.  Now that the Ministry of 
Non-Resident Indians Affairs have been created to look after the affairs of 
non-resident Indians, they should play  a prominent role to obviate such 
problems being faced by spouses and families of the non-resident Indians.  
(Recommendation No.  7) 
 
45.  The Committee note from the A nnual Report (2003-2004) submitted by 
the Ministry that  in response to the long standing dem ands of the Indian 
Diaspora to strengthen emotional and cultural bonds wit h India and in pursuance 
of the Prime Minister’s assurance at the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2003, the 
Ministry of External Affair s, in coordination with the Mi nistry of Home Affairs, 
secured passage of the Citizenship (Ame ndment) Bill 2003 in December 2003, 
which has since been enacted to  grant Dual Citizenship to the Persons of Indian 
Origin (PIOs) in 16 specified countries,  whose legal systems are compatible with 

  
the concepts of the Dual Citizenship an d which have a large concentration of the 
Indian Diaspora. 
 
46. On being enquired by the Committee about the 16 countries, the PIOs of 
which are being considered for Dual Citi zenship and efforts which are being 
made by the Ministry to include PIOs of more countries for grant of Dual 
Citizenship to make this provision a more inclusive one, the Ministry have 
submitted that the 16 countries, the PIOs of which countries are being 
considered for Dual Citizenship are: 
Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Greece, Ireland, Israel, It aly, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Portugal, Republic of Cyprus, Sweden, Switzerland, United 
Kingdom and United States of America and there is a provision in the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 for inclusion of other countries at a subsequent stage. 
The Ministry considers  proposals receiv ed from our Missions abroad for Dual 
Citizenship as and when such requests are received. 
 
47. In reply to a question regarding the grant of Dual Citizenship to NRIs and 
PIOs, the Ministry had stated that t here is a provision in the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 for inclusion of other countries at a subsequent stage. 
The Ministry consider proposals receiv ed from  Missions abroad for Dual 
Citizenship as and when such requests are received.  
 
48. In this context, the Committee des ired to know as to whether any 
proposals for Dual Citizenship from our Mi ssions abroad excluding those sixteen 
countries have been received  and also as to what was the present status of 
such proposals, if any. 
 To this, the Ministry replied: 
“(i)  Proposals for Dual Citizenshi p have been received from our 
Missions in Seychelles and Norway. 
(ii)  Some clarifications on t he proposals have been sought from the 
above Missions.” 
 

  
49. On the issue of Dual Citizenship, the Foreign Secretary further informed 
the Committee during evidence as under: 
“As far as the issue of dual citizenship is concerned, this also is the 
subject of the Ministry of Home Affair s.  They still have to notify the rules 
and regulations that are required fo r implementing this.  We understand 
that, may be in a few months’ time, t he legal framework of the rules and 
regulations will be adopted.  Our role in that case will be to issue the 
Passport if anybody applies to us.  If a US citizen applies to us for an 
Indian Passport, and if he falls under th is category, we will render the 
Passport service to him.” 
 
50.  Again from the Annual Report 2003-2004, the Committ ee note that to 
promote welfare of the Overs eas Indian Workers, the Mini stry of External Affairs 
coordinated efforts with the Ministry of Labour in launching of the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana, applic able to all Indian emigr ant workers in December 
2003.  On being asked whether  the Pravasi Bharatiya Bi ma Yojana has already 
been launched, how are the Indian Emigrant Workers going to be benefitted from 
such a Bima Yojana and w hat has been the response of Overseas Indian 
Workers to this Yojana, the Ministry have replied that the Pravasi Bharatiya Bima 
Yojana was launched on December 25, 2003 and the Bima Yojana is mandatory 
for all Indian emigrants with Emigrati on Clearance Required (ECR) endorsement 
on their passports. It provides a minimu m insurance cover of Rs. 200,000 in the 
event of death or permanent disability; cost of transportation of the dead body 
with an attendant, in case of  death abroad; provision of air passage in case of 
non-acceptance by the employer or pre-ma ture termination; medical cover of a 
minimum of Rs. 50,000 in case of accident  or sickness; provision of maternity 
benefits with a minimum cover of Rs . 20,000 for women emigrants; and 
assistance in case of certain unfores een contingencies at an easily affordable 
fee.  The Ministry also stated that t he Overseas Indian Workers have welcomed 
the Bima Yojana.  
 
51. The Committee welcome the efforts of  the Ministry of External Affairs 
and Ministry of Home Affairs for securing the passage of the 
Citizenship(Amendment) Bill, 2003 – wh ich has since been enacted for 

  
granting dual citizenship to the Persons  of Indian  Origin in  16 specified 
countries so far – in response to the long-standing demands of the Indian 
Diaspora to strengthen emotional and cultural bonds w ith India.  The 
Committee express the hope that rules in this regard w ill be finalised and  
notified without any  further delay .  The Committee also appreciate the 
coordinated efforts of the Ministry  of External Affairs w ith the Ministry of 
Labour in launching the Pravasi Bharatiy a Bima Yojana and also hope that 
with the launching of this Yojana, problems of Indian Emigrant workers will 
be minimised and t heir grievances w ould be mitigated.  The Com mittee 
expect that the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs would live upto the 
expectations of the NRIs/PIOs and Ind ian Emigrant Workers, safeg uard 
their interests effectively in the near future – for which the same have come 
into existence and rightl y fulfill the vi sion and mission of our forefathe rs, 
who believed in the spirit of “Vas udhaiva Kutumbakam” (the people of the 
whole earth are our family). 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI               DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
23rd August, 2004                                  Chairman, 
Bhadrapada 1, 1926(Saka)        Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 