  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
                             FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
21 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2008-2009) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.04.2008 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.04.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COEA NO. 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2008 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08)    …………………….                 (iii) 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………..                   (v) 
REPORT 
 
I. Implementation of the Committee’s Recommendations…………….                    1   
II. Overall Budgetary Allocation             …………………………………                 2  
A. Budgetary Allocation and Utilisation ………………………….                2 
B. Secretariat General Services       ……………………………….                9 
C. Capital Section: Construction of PBK     ……………………….             10  
III. Schemes/ Programmes of the Ministry    ………………………………              13    
A.  Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI)     ………………………..               15 
B. Know India Programme (KIP)                 ……………………..                17 
C. Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children(SSDC)   …………               19 
D. Overseas Workers Resource Centre(OWRC)      ..…………….               22 
E. Overseas Indian Facilitation Center (OIFC)..……………………            22 
F. Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment (CPOE)….....               26 
G. Labour Agreements    ………………………………………….               28 
H. Pre-Departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation   ……………              31 
IV. Other Services             ………………………………………………….              35 
A. Legal Assistance to Women Facing Problems in NRI Marriages             35   
B. Migration Management     ………………………………….….               39 
C. Assistance to Deported Workers   ………………………………             41 
D. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) ..………………………………..            42    
E. Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards    …………………………. .            43 
F. PIO University..………………… ..………………… ..…….…..            44 
G. Working of POE offices  ………………………………………...            45  
  
Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee                                                        48                    
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 01.04.2008…………        
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 11.04.2008…………  
 
(i)

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(2007-2008) 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
7. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
10. Shri L. Rajagopal  
11. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
12. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
13. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
14. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil 
15. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
16. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
17. Shri M. Shivanna 
18. Shri Vanlalzawma 
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
20. Vacant @ 
21. Vacant  # 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
24. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
25. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
26. Dr. Karan Singh  
27. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan  
28. Vacant * 
29. Vacant * 
30. Vacant * 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
5. Shri K.C. Pandey - Committee Officer 
 
@ Change of Nomination of Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu to Committee on Finance w.e.f. 24.3.2008 
# Resignation of Shri P.A. Sangma, MP(LS) w.e.f. 20.3.2008 vide notification no. 21/3/2008/T dated 24th      
   March, 2008. 
* Retirement of Shri S.M. Laljan Basha, Dr. Ram Prakash and Smt. Prema Cariappa w.e.f. 9.4.2008 
(ii)

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the St anding Committee on External Affairs, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty 
First Report of the Standing Committee on Exte rnal Affairs (2007-08) on Demands for 
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. 
2. The Committee took oral evidence of t he representatives of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on 1st April, 2008.   
3. The Committee considered and adopted this  report at their sitting held on 11 th 
April, 2008.  Minutes of  the sittings held on 1 st and 11 th April, 2008 are given in 
Annexure I and II to the Report. 
4. The Committee wish to express their than ks to the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for placing before them the materi al and information which they wanted in 
connection with examination of the Demands for Grants (2008-09).  They also wish to 
thank in particular the representatives of t he Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs who 
gave evidence and placed their considered views before the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
11 April, 2008                                             Chairman,  
22 Chaitra, 1930(Saka)                  Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 1
PART - I 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
I  -   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The 16th Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs on 
“Demands for Grants- 2007-2008 of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs” was presented to the Lok Sabha on 26 th April, 2007. The Report 
contained 12 recommendations/ observations. 
1.2 In compliance of the Directi on 73-A of the Dir ections by the 
Speaker, the Minister of Overseas I ndian Affairs made a statement in the 
House on 21
st November, 2007 giving the status  of the implementation of 
various recommendations/ observations  made by the Committee in their 
16th Report. An analysis of the Minist er’s statement showed that the 
Government has accepted all the 12 recommendations. Out of these, 1 
recommendation (No. 10) was im plemented and 2 recommendations 
(Nos. 5 and 8) were to be implemented by the Government.  9 
recommendations (Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6,  7, 9, 11 and 12) were under process 
of implementation. 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken Rep lies received from the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on the above-mentioned Report, the Committee 
presented their 19
th Report (Action Taken Repor t) to Parliament on 20 th 
November, 2007. The Committee in their 19 th Report have commented on 
the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry in respect of 
recommendations Nos. 2, 4, 5, 6 and 11 contained in the 16
th Report. The 
final replies are awaited from the Ministry, which will be laid in Parliament. 

 2
II  -    OVERALL BUDGETARY PROPOSALS 
A. Budgetary Allocation and Utilization 
The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs established in September 
2004, comprises the erstwhile Emigra tion Division of the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and the NRI division of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, which now functions as t he Diaspora division. The objective 
behind setting up the Ministry was to create a single point  interface with 
the Overseas Indians including Persons of Indian Origin and to give them 
mainstream attention. The Ministry is organized into four functional service 
divisions: Diaspora Services, Financial Services, Emigration Services, and 
Social Services.  The Ministry also hav e the office of Pr otector General of 
Emigrants (PGE) and eight field offices of Protectors of Emigrants.  The 
Budget of the MOIA is primarily Non-Plan in nature.   
2.2 The Demands for Grants of t he Ministry Of Overseas Indians 
Affairs  (Demand No. 68) for the year 2008-2009 is as under:  
(Rs. in crore) 
Section Revenue Capital Total 
Charged - - - 
Voted 55 10 65 
Total 55 10 65 
2.3 The total budgetary allocation of  the MOIA in 2007-2008 was Rs.50 
crore which was reduced to Rs.40 cr ore at RE stage. The Proposed 
allocation of Rs.65 crore for 2008-09 is an enhancement of Rs.25 crore 
over the Revised Estimate of 2007-08. 
2.4 The budget of the Ministry are under three major Heads of 
Accounts.  Two are in the Revenue Account covering expenditure of 
Secretariat Services and Programme activities and one in the Capital 
Account covering Outlay on Public Works.  When asked as to why 
scheme wise details of allocations are not shown in the Detailed Demands 
For Grants under the Major Head 2061-“Other Schemes”, where a 
provision of Rs. 31.75 crore has been made.  The Secretary, MOIA 

 3
responded during evidence by saying t hat it has to be read with the 
Outcome Budget, where each scheme is shown in detail.  This is the 
format of the presentation of the Budget. 
2.5 Budget allocation and actual utiliz ation by the Ministry during the 
last 3 years are as follows: 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals  Shortfall in utilization 
Of BE  
2005-06 35.00 19.10 17.46 17.54 (50%) 
2006-07 38.00 26.00 22.00 16.00 (42%) 
2007-08 50.00 40.00 39.23 10.77 (21%) 
2008-09 65.00 -- -- -- 
It may be observed from the above t able that during the last 3 budget 
years the Ministry has not been able to fully utilize their budgetary allocations.  
During 2006-2007, the allocation of Rs. 38 crore made at BE stage, was reduced 
to Rs. 26 crore at RE stage against which the actual utilization was only Rs. 22 
crore.  The actual utilization in 2007- 2008 is likely to be much lesser than the 
original allocation.  On being asked about the reasons for shortfall in utilization of 
budgeted allocation during 2006-2007 and 2007-2008,  the Ministry replied as 
under: 
“The shortfall in utilization of budgeted allocation during 2006-2007 was 
mainly in the following Heads: 
(i) 2061.00.104.01 - International  Conferences /Meetings 
(ii) 2061.00.106.01 – Entertai nment of Dignitaries 
(iii) 2061.00.800.03 – Other Schemes 
(iv) 4059.60.051.18 – Prav asi Bharatiya Kendra 
The shortfall of expenditure in the first two Heads was because no 
International Conference was organized by  the Ministry during this period 
and the amount allocated for Entertainm ent of Dignitaries was not much 
utilized. There was shortfall in the projected expenditure for ‘Other 
Schemes’ as formulation of the Schemes could be finalized only in the last 
quarter. Many of the Schemes which were to be implemented in 

 4
partnership with the State Governments could not be implemented in time, 
resulting in non utilization of funds under this Head. The funds earmarked 
for construction of Pravasi Bharatiy a Kendra could not be utilized due to 
the fact that Ministry of Urban De velopment had issued the sanction for 
allotment of land for the propos ed Kendra only in March, 2006 and 
thereafter, it was proposed to appoint a Consultant to prepare a Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) in 2006-2007. Howe ver, this could not be achieved 
as adequate number of Expre ssions of Interest (EOI) were not received 
from Consultancy Firms dealing with c onstruction in response to the RFP 
floated by the Ministry, resulting in non utilization of t he funds under this 
Head. 
 During Financial Year 2007-2008, t he Ministry had taken up three 
major Schemes, viz ‘Pre-departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation for 
Emigrant Workers’, ‘Legal and Financ ial Assistance to Women Deserted 
by their NRI Spouses‘ and ‘Scholarsh ip Schemes for Diaspora Children’ 
for approval of the Committee on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE). The 
recommendations of the CNE on the fi rst two Schemes were received in 
January, 2008 only. The ‘Pre-departure  Orientation and Skill Upgradation 
for Emigrant Workers Scheme’ was referred back to the Ministry of 
Finance for seeking approval of Financ e Minister since the total cost 
exceeded Rs. 50 crores. FM’s approval has not been received, so far. 
Hence, the allocation made for the Schemes could not be utilized leading 
to shortfall in expenditure. There has also been savings under the Minor 
Head ‘International Confer ences/Meetings’ as the Ministry has organized 
no such Conference during the current Financial Year.  
 Due to increased sponsorships for organizing PBD, there is also 
reduction in expenditure for organizing this annual Flagship event of the 
Ministry. In the Capital Section, t he Funds allocated for construction of 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra could not  be utilized since the NBCC has been 
appointed as Consultant only in December, 2007. Construction work of the 
Kendra can commence after the DPR is  prepared by the Consultant and 

 5
necessary approvals obtained. Similarly,  there is non- utilization of funds 
allocated for ‘Construction/Purchase of  Buildings for PGE/POEs’ as no 
suitable buildings have been identified in  the States for use of the POE 
offices.” 
2.6 During the course of evidence on De mands For Grants of the Ministry for 
the year 2008-09, the Secretary, MOIA, also submitted that: 
“….The Ministry is relatively a young Ministry.  As the hon. Committee is 
aware, we have had three full budget y ears, starting fr om 2005 till 2008.  
In these three years, we have tried to  build the necessary infrastructure, 
get the required staff and formulate  the programmes and schemes.  
Despite some constraints, the Mini stry has been able to  devote its energy 
and attention on the implem entation of specific pr ogrammes to fulfil its 
mandate…..   
……...During the financial year, 2007-08,  against the BE of  Rs.50 crore 
and RE of Rs.40 crore, we have in curred an expenditure of about Rs.39 
crore.  This is subject of course to the final accounts.  There has been a 
shortfall and this shortfall in perform ance is primarily in the Capital 
Account where we had to surrender  about Rs.9 crore which was 
earmarked for the construction of t he Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra and for 
upgradation of the offices of the Protec tors of Emigrant s.  This amount 
could not be utilised owing to several procedural and practical issues…...”    
2.7 He further stated: 
“…….I must confess that there are three factors which have affected the 
implementation of schemes in the past.  One is the Ministry does not have 
a field level implementation agency and has to depend on the Indian 
Missions for the activities abroad and the State Governments and other 
agencies for activities domestically.  The second problem has been some 
delay in the approval of schemes where inter-ministerial consultation is 
involved.  The third problem was staff shortages and there have been 
quite a few vacancies.   But inspite of these constraints, we have made 
reasonably satisfactory progress…...” 

 6
2.8 Explaining further he added: 
“It is true that due to many factors, so me of which were not in Ministry’s 
control, the Ministry was not able to  utilize the budgetary allocation fully 
during the first three years of its exis tence. The BEs were initially made 
with a lot of optimism, but delays did occur and as I explained earlier, one 
of the main factors was the need to function in close coordination with 
several other Ministries and agencies. We are in the process of building 
up strong partnerships with other Mini stries, State Governments and other 
appropriate agencies for implementation of various activities.  
I have seen that the Ministry in the past has greatly benefited from 
the advice, observations and recomm endations of the hon. Committee. I 
would like to assure you that it will be our endeavour to perform the tasks 
expected of us in the best po ssible manner and utilize the budgetary 
resources allocated to us to the full extent.” 
2.9 On being asked as to if the incr eased allocation of Rs. 65 crore during BE 
2007-2008 is based on actual requirement and what are the new programmes/ 
schemes for which the increased allocation is  required, the Minist ry in its written 
reply has submitted as follows: 
“During FY 2008-2009, the Ministry  intends to expand the scope and 
coverage of many of t he Schemes like ‘Skill Upgr adation & Pre-departure 
Orientation of Emigrant Workers’ implemented through the Ministry of 
Micro Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) and the State Governments. It 
is also proposed to enlarge the cove rage of the  Awareness Campaign 
undertaken by the Ministry through Electronic and Print Media with the aim 
to educate the general public about t he Legal Immigration Process, 
precautions to be taken against illegal practices by fraudulent Recruiting 
Agencies and the need for vigilance wh ile entering into NRI marriages. 
The expenditure for these Schemes ar e met from the Budget Head ‘Other 
Schemes’.  The Ministry also intends to expand the activities of Overseas 
Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), Ov erseas Workers Resource Centre 
(OWRC), Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment (CPOE), 

 7
operationalzing the  Overseas Indian Centres at Dubai, Washington and 
Kuala Lumpur with a view to achieve the mandate of the Ministry.” 
 2.10 The Committee pointed out that during the successive financial years 
2006-07, 2007-08, the Ministry had been ma king provisions in the budget for 
International Conferences/Meetings, how ever, during both the financial years 
there has been a shortfall in expenditure on this account. The Committee desired 
to know, whether these provisions were  made in the budget in anticipation or 
without any firm proposals in hand for hol ding such Conferences/Meetings, the 
Ministry in a written reply submitted:  
“The BE for 2006-07 under the mi nor Head “international 
conferences/meetings” was Rs. 2 cror e which was reduced to Rs 1 crore 
during RE stage against which the act ual expenditure was Rs. 4.9 lakh. 
During 2007-08 the BE was Rs. 30 lakh which was reduced to Rs. 10 lakh 
at the RE stage. However, the ex penditure has been about Rs. 23 lakh. 
As such, the expenditure has exceeded the RE allocation under this minor 
Head during 2007-08.  U nder the minor Head “ entertainment of 
dignitaries” during 2006-07 the BE was Rs. 1 crore which was reduced to 
Rs. 10 lakh at the RE stage.  The ac tual expenditure was Rs. 4.70 lakh. 
During 2007-08 the BE was Rs. 25 lakh wh ich was reduced to Rs. 20 lakh 
at the RE stage. The total expenditure  has been Rs. 8.90 lakh.  During 
2007-08 the aggregate expenditure under  the two minor Heads has 
exceeded the RE allocation and is about 60% of the BE allocation. It may 
be added that some of the international  conferences/meetings that were 
anticipated did not materialize dur ing 2007-08 (e.g. the Joint Committee 
Meeting with UAE and visit of Malaysian Minister and Bahraini Minister). 
Needless to say that the budgetary pr ovisions were based on anticipated 
international conferences/meetings. “ 
2.11 When further enquired if  the money that has been allocated for the major 
schemes like pre-departure orientat ion and skill upgradation for emigrant 
workers, legal and financial assistance to  women deserted by their NRI spouses 
and scholarship schemes for diaspora ch ildren, was without formulating these 

 8
schemes and when were these schemes s ent for approval of the Committee on 
Non-Plan Expenditure and Ministry of Finance seeking approval.  The Ministry in 
their reply submitted as under:  
“(a) The scheme to provide legal and financial assistance to women was 
submitted to the CNE on 30
th July, 2007. 
(b) The scheme on Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) 
was submitted to CNE on 1 st August, 2007 which was returned with some 
queries on 30th August, 2007. The proposal was re-submitted to the CNE 
on 5 th October, 2007 with replies to t he queries. The CNE returned the 
proposal on 18 th October, 2007 with certain dire ctives including that the 
Scheme should be based strictly on income criteria and with a query 
whether the charges of Ed.CIL were fixed or likely to change in future. 
While the Ministry has already intr oduced the income criteria for the 
forthcoming SPDC-2008 Examination as  per the directive of CNE, the 
query is being sorted out with Ed.CIL. Wi th the recent enhancement in the 
delegated financial power, it may not be necessary to send the proposal to 
CNE again.  
2.12 The proposal on the Scheme ‘Pre -departure Orientation and Skill 
Upgradation of Emigrant Workers’, was under consideration of the Internal 
Finance Division (IFD) before referri ng to the Committee on Non-plan 
Expenditure (CNE) on 01.08.2007. 
2.13 The Committee on Non-plan Expenditu re (CNE) under the chairmanship 
of Secretary (Expenditure) approved t he proposal at its Meeting held on 
26.11.2007. However, since the overa ll financial implications of the 
Scheme for the 5 year period was above Rs. 50 crore, the case was 
referred back to Ministry of Finance on 31.12.2007 for seeking approval of 
the Finance Minister in terms of the Delegation of Financial Powers Rules 
(DFPR). Ministry of Finance had raised certain objections and the 
approval of FM is still awaited.” 

 9
B. Secretariat General Services 
2.14 The Committee observed from the Establishment Strength shown in the 
Demands for Grants document that as many as 40 posts are still lying vacant. 
When asked about the reasons for these va cancies and efforts made to fill them 
up during the preceding year. 
The Ministry in their written reply informed as under: 
“There is no separate cadre of the Mini stry of Overseas Indian Affairs and 
the Cadre Controlling Author ity is the Ministry of Home Affairs for the 
secretariat staff, who had been request ed to provide personnel.  Some 
posts encadred in the MEA are vacan t. The MEA has shown inability to 
provide personnel.  Two posts lying vac ant are to be filled by the Deptt. of 
Official Languages. They have been requested to fill up the posts. For the 
POE offices, the posts are filled up by calling the applications on Sectt. 
basis and applications have been called.  
Details of the vacant posts and action taken to fill up the vacant posts are 
given below:   
Post No. 
vacant 
Reason of 
vacancy 
Action taken to fill up the 
vacancy 
Principal 
Private 
Secretary 
1 MEA cadre 
post. 
MEA has conveyed its inability.
Accountant 2 Vacant since 
creation (June 
2005). Post 
meant for P&AO 
office. 
Pr. CCA has taken action to fill 
up the posts.  
Assistant 7 Promotion of 
incumbents. 
MHA/MEA the Cadre 
Controlling Authority has been 
requested to provide 
Assistants.  
Personal 
Assistant 
2 - -do- 
Hindi 
Translator 
2 - Deptt. of Official Language has 
been requested. 
Steno 
Grade ‘D’  
6 - MHA has been requested to 
provide.  
UDC/LDC 12 - It is a dying cadre.  Proposal 
has been sent to the Ministr y 

 10
of Finance for converting these 
posts to Assistants. 
Peon 3 - Action will be taken up to fill up 
the posts. 
POE offices 
Protector 
of 
Emigrants 
(SO level) 
1 Vacancy has 
been circulated. 
DPC has been held. 
Steno 
Grade ‘D’  
1 - Vacancy has been circulated. 
UDC/LDC 3 - .-do- 
  
It may be seen that the vacancies are at the level of the support 
staff.  Outsourced staff has cu rrently been deployed against these 
vacancies to ensure work does not suffer.” 
2.15 The Secretary, MOIA st ated during evidence as under: 
“….this is a small Ministry which does not have its own officers at senior 
levels. Officers are taken on deputation at senior levels and in fact the 
lower staff in our Ministry is provi ded by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
because we are attached to the Home Ministry for getting lower staff. We 
do not have officers and staff of our own….” 
 
C. Capital Section: Constructioi n of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra(PBK) 
2.16 According to the Annual Report of the Ministry (2003-2004) it was decided 
to establish a Pravasi Bharatiya Kendr a, as an autonomous institution, to 
promote multi-dimensional  Welfare of the Indian Diaspora. The then Prime 
Minister also announced the decision to allo t a plot of land and a grant of Rs. 25 
crore for the purpose.  
2.17 The Ministry in a written subm ission informed the Committee that the 
Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation had allocated Plot No. 15-
A and 15-B measuring 5858 sq. mtrs. at Chana kyapuri, New Delhi to Ministry of 
External Affairs(MEA) for construction of  Pravasi Bhartiya Bhawan at a premium 
of Rs. 31,83,400/-. MEA had i dentified plot no. 15-D, m easuring 3068 sq. mtrs., 
adjoining the plot already allocated to MEA and have requested Ministry of Urban 

 11
Development and Poverty Alleviation for allocating this additional piece of land 
for the Pravasi Bharatiya K endra. With the allocation of this additional land, the 
plot size would go up to 8926 sq. mtrs . (5858 + 3068 sq. mtrs.) and this would 
serve the purpose of establishing the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra. 
2.18 An outlay of Rs. 8 cr ore has been made this year for the construction of 
PBK.  As per the Outcome Budget ( 2008-2009), National Building Construction 
Corporation (NBCC) has been selected as partner and MoU has been signed for 
constructing PBK.  The proposals are st ated to be at the planning stage and will 
be implemented after finalization of the Detailed Project Report. 
2.19 On being asked as to when the De tailed Project Report/ implementation 
plan for time bound completion of the proposed project has been prepared and 
whether the Project has suffered any ti me and cost overruns due to time-lag 
between preparation of init ial cost estimates and commencement of work, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
“NBCC has been appointed as the Consultant and Project Manager for the 
PBK.  As per the Agreement  signed with the NBCC (on 18 th December, 
2007) NBCC shall carry out the project on turnkey basis from its concept 
to completion. The concept design of the Kendra has already been 
approved and NBCC is already in t he process of preparing detailed 
municipal drawings.  To complete the building on a time bound basis, a 
schedule for completion of related acti vities has also been chalked out.  
According to the schedule, municipal  drawings will be ready by the Ist 
week of April, 2008 for submission to the statutory authorities (viz: NDMC; 
Urban Arts Commission, Fire Service etc.) for clearance and necessary 
clearance from these bodies is lik ely to be obtained within a maximum 
period six months (by 2
nd week of October’08).    Thereafter, based on the 
suggestions, if any, given by the lo cal authorities, detailed working 
drawing will be finalized by the NBCC (b y Ist week of December, 2008).  
Simultaneously, NBCC will appoint contra ctor(s) for execution of the 
project.  Detailed Project Report (DPR ) will be ready by November, 2008.    
It will be the endeavor of t he Ministry that the building should be ready 

 12
before the commencement of the ensuing Commonwealth Games in 
October, 2010. 
2.20 During the course of evidence, the Secretary, MOIA, also submitted that: 
“I would quickly inform that for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra, for which the 
amount was provided, there were processes of selection of consultants, 
which took time.  This selection was limited to the public sector. 
Consulting companies, primarily HUDCO and NBCC and that took more 
time than envisaged with lengthy negotiati ons regarding the rates, etc.  
But I am happy to say that NBCC has  been selected as consultants at 
eight per cent consultancy fee.  The Plan has been approved.  We have a 
time-bound programme for the implem entation of the Kendra and it is 
expected to be completed before the close of 2010. 
 …..In fact the architectural dr awings are being prepared and we expect 
the detailed estimates in the next one-week.  Then we take about six 
months, which is the cr itical period that will be for the approval by the 
municipal bodies, the Urban Art Commi ssion and various other regulatory 
authorities. So, subject to quick approval s, in fact, we might even be able 
to cut short the time required for Kendra.”   
 
 

 13
III  -   SCHEMES/ PROGRAMMES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
3.1 The allocation of funds towards t he schemes and other activities of the 
Ministry as per the outlay and physica l targets for 2007-2008,  achievement upto 
31.12.2007 and outlay proposed for 2008-2009 as provided in the outcome 
budget is: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
Scheme/ 
Programme 
Outlay 
in 
2007-
2008 
Outlay 
proposed 
in 2008-
2009 
Physical 
targets 
during 
2007-2008 
Achievements 
upto 31.12.2007 
1. Overseas 
Citizenship of 
India (OCI) 
1.75 2.00 1.5 lakh 
cards 
1.98 lakh cards 
2. Knowledge 
India 
Programme 
(KIP) 
0.65 1.00 3 
programm
es 
2 programmes 
3. Scholarship 
Scheme for 
Diaspora 
Children 
(SSDC) 
2.10 2.50 100 
scholarship
s 
81 scholarships 
4. Awareness 
campaign/ 
media plan 
9.80 9.00 (i)10 video 
spots,  
(ii)10 audio 
spots,  
(iii)Sustain
ed media 
campaign 
for 3 
months 
(i)10 video spots,  
(ii) Audio spots 
have been released 
on regional AIR 
channels,  
(iii) Campaign on 
print yet to begin 
5. Overseas 
Indian 
Facilitation 
Centre (OIFC) 
0.30 0.25 To 
establish 
one center 
at NCR of 
Delhi 
The center has 
been established in 
partnership with CII 
 
 
6 Overseas 
Workers 
Resource 
Centre 
(OWRC) 
0.20 0.20 Establish 
one 12x7 
multilingual 
helpline 
12x7 helpline 
functioning in 7 
languages estd. 
7 E-Governance 1.93 1.50 Automation 6 PoE offices have 

 14
in Emigration / 
computeriz
ation of 6 
PoE offices
been computerized 
8 Pre-departure 
orientation 
and skill 
upgradation 
for Emigrant 
workers 
3.00 9.25 Training of 
1382 
workers 
1382 workers 
trained through 
Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium 
Enterprises 
(MSME). 
9 Council for 
Promotion of 
Overseas 
Employment 
(CPOE) 
0.20 1.50 Establishm
ent of 
CPOE. 
Yet to be estd. 
10 Legal and 
Financial 
assistance to 
Indian women 
facing 
problems in 
NRI marriages 
0.50 3.00 537 cases  The Scheme to be 
implemented during 
the 11
th Plan 
period. 
11 Pravasi 
Bharatiya 
Divas (PBD) 
5.50 6.00 Organize 
annual 
event 
1 PBD organized in 
January 2008 
12 Pravasi 
Bharatiya 
Kendra (PBK) 
0.25 8.00 Signing of 
MoU with 
partner for 
constructin
g PBK. 
NBCC has been 
selected as partner 
and MoU has been 
signed. 
13 Construction/ 
Purchase of 
Building for 
Protector 
General of 
Emigrants 
(PGE)/Protect
or of 
Emigrants 
(PoEs) 
1.00 2.00 Modernizat
ion of 6 
PoE offices
Modernization of 6 
PoE offices carried 
out to facilitate the 
automation 
process. 
 
 
 
 

 15
A. Overseas Citizenshi p of India (OCI) 
3.2 The allocation made towards Overs eas Citizenship of India (OCI) scheme 
has been raised from Rs. 1.75 crore in  2007-2008 to Rs. 2 cr ore in 2008-2009.  
On being asked to furnish the reason for the increase in allocation towards this 
scheme during the current Fi nancial Year, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
“The increase in allocation proposed for the OCI Scheme during the 
current Financial year is due to the following reasons: 
(a) The number of OCI documents iss ued during the latter part of FY 
2007-2008 have shown an increasing trend.  
(b) Eight Indian Missions/Posts abr oad who process large number of 
OCI documents have been authoris ed to engage one local clerks 
each for four months from F ebruary, 2008 to clear pending OCI 
work.” 
3.3 When asked if any revenue has  been generated through this scheme 
during the previous years,  the Ministry has submitted as under: 
“The fee for issuance of OCI documents is US$ 275/- (Indian Rs. 12,650/-) 
for those who do not hold PIO Card and it is US$ 25/-  (Indian Rupees 
1150/-)  for a PIO card holder. As on 25 March, 2008, 228980 OCI 
documents have been issued. The fee colle cted is credited to the account 
of Ministry of Home Affairs.“ 
3.4 On being asked about the estimat ed number of Registered Overseas 
Citizens eligible to apply for OCI ca rds and benefits the Ministry propose to 
extend to registered OCIs apart from the existing ones, the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
“As per data available with the Mi nistry there are approximately 12 
millions Persons of Indian origin ( non-NRI) living abroad. The number of 
them who are eligible for issue of OCI card, in terms of eligibility conditions 
specified under Article 7(A) of Citizenship Act, 1955, is not known. 
 

 16
The following benefits are proposed to be extended to registered OCIs, 
subject to concurrence bei ng received from concerned 
Ministries/Departments/organizations/agencies, etc.   
 (i) To practice in India as: 
(a) Doctors, Dentists, Nurses and Pharmacists 
(b) Architects 
(c) Chartered Accountants 
(d) Advocates 
(ii) To take the AIPMT (All India Pre-Medical Test) for admission in 
medical courses in India. 
(iii) Parity with Non- Resident Indians (NRIs)  in fees charged by 
educational institutions in India. 
(iv) Parity with Non-Resident Indians  (NRIs) in pursuing the teaching 
profession in government aided educat ional institutions except in 
Central/State Government educati onal institutions, on contract 
basis subject to the rules and by e-laws governing the particular 
institution. 
(v) Parity with NRIs with matter of entrance fee charged for visiting 
national monuments.” 
3.5 When asked about the details of expenditure incurred on this scheme 
since it became operational, the Ministry furnished the data as under: 
“The Ministry has incurred the fo llowing expenditure till February, 2008 
since the operationalization of the OCI Scheme: 
Sl.No.         Details of Expenditure Amount 
(in Rs.) 
01 Initial purchase and inst allation of hardware for 
Special OCI Cell  
10,48,960 
02 Charges for printing of OCI cards/visa stickers 
from December 2005 to February 2008 
1,57,41,636 
03 Courier charges from February 2006 to February 
2008 
58,45,672 
                                                 Total 2,26,36,268 
 

 17
B. Know India Programme (KIP) 
3.6 The allocation for Know India Progr amme (KIP) has been raised from Rs. 
65 lakhs in 2007-2008 to Rs. 1 crore in 2008-2009.  According to the Outcome 
Budget of the Ministry only 2 KIP could be arranged as against the target of three 
during 2007-2008.  On being asked about  the reasons for shortfall in 
performance in this regard and for enhanci ng allocation during this year, the 
Ministry in a written reply submitted as under:  
“The KIP is conducted in  partnership with a St ate. Around 30-35 
participants take part in each of t hese Programmes, which is held for 
duration of approximately three weeks. Partner State Governments are 
expected to take care of boardi ng/lodging and transport arrangements in 
their territory. During 2007-2008, while Goa (7th KIP) and Tamil Nadu (8th 
KIP) readily accepted to be partner States, responses received from two 
other States were conditional. While one State contacted for the purpose 
was not willing to host more than 20 participants and only for a week, 
another State wanted this Ministry to  take care of a portion of the 
expenditure on boarding/lodging and prov ide transport and hold it before 
the beginning of the touris t season. This led to delay in processing the 
matter and left little time to host one more KIP during 2007-08.   
 The Confederation of I ndian Industry (CII) was, for the first time, 
involved in organization of the KI Ps during 2007-2008, on a non-profit 
basis. Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (N YKS) assisted this Ministry in 
organizing the rural segment of the Programmes. The quality of 
accommodation provided to partici pants has been upgraded in view of 
complaints received earlier on this  account. Participants are now 
accommodated in Delhi in budget hotel s on twin sharing basis for the 
Delhi segment of the programme.  There has been an increase in air fares 
also. Expenses to be incurred on each KIP has gone up and it is 
estimated that it would be around Rs. 33/- lakhs per KIP during 2008-09.” 

 18
3.7 When asked as to how are the parti cipants for this programme selected 
and whether the entire expenditure on the participants are borne by the Ministry, 
the Ministry further informed as under: 
“The participants in the age group 18-26 years are selected from countries 
having 10,000 or more persons of I ndian Origin. The applicants should be 
linked to India through parentage, should have an abiding interest in India. 
The candidates should ei ther be studying in t he under graduate level or 
should already have completed under graduation. They should be able to 
converse in English.  
The prospective participants apply to the Indian Missions/Posts in their 
country, in response to advertisem ents seeking nominations for the 
Programme.  
The selection is made by this Ministry  on the basis of t he profile of the 
applicant, recommendations made by t he Heads of Mission/Post and the 
aim to have a fair mix of candidates from various countries. It has been 
decided that the number of  participants in each KIP from a given country 
having only one Indian Diplomatic Mi ssion may be kept at one. In 
countries having Indian Consular Posts also, the number should not 
normally exceed the total number of Indian Missions and Posts located in 
that country. [If besides a Diplomati c Mission, there ar e four Indian 
Consulates in a country, the total number  of slots for that country may not 
exceed 1+ 4 i.e. 5]. Any increase in  the number would be considered only 
against slots that have remained unfill ed after considering requests from 
other Missions/Posts.  
The participants are provided with fu ll hospitality and are reimbursed one-
way economy class airfare from their res pective country to India. So far, 
the State Governments have met ex penditure on boarding, lodging, local 
travel when the participants were in the respective States.” 
3.8 On being asked as to why the programmes under KI P scheme are not 
planned in advance with the partner states. 

 19
The Ministry informed as under:  
“The Know India Programme is st ill an evolving programme which is 
constantly being improv ed on the basis of experiences gathered from 
earlier programmes. A process by whic h partner States are identified and 
the programmes finalised well in advance is being put in place to ensure 
that 3 KIPs are held every year. 
It may also be stated that (i) State Governments take their own time 
to respond and that too after regular fo llow up, and that (ii)  Some of them 
do not show interest in such programmes.” 
 
C. Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children (SSDC) 
3.9 According to the Outcome Budget t he Ministry provides 100 scholarships 
to undergraduate courses under the Scholar ship Scheme for Diaspora Children 
(SSDC) to partially fund the tuition and hostel fees each y ear from 2006-2007.  
Rs. 2.10 crore was alloca ted in 2007-2008, which has been increased, to Rs. 
2.50 crore in 2008-2009.  It is, however, obs erved that only 81 scholarships were 
given during 2007-2008 and only 69 scholarships given during 2006-2007.  
3.10 On being asked about the reasons t hat necessitated the increase in 
allocation this year despite not havi ng been able to fully utilize all the 100 
scholarships during the last two years, the Ministry has submitted as under: 
“The scholarships under SPDC are awarded to PIOs/NRIs based on a 
merit list prepared by Educational Consultants India Limited (Ed.CIL), after 
conducting an entrance examination for t he eligible applicants.  Each year 
100 scholarships are offered. In fa ct, in 2007-2008, 113 candidates were 
declared eligible as 14 candidates had the same marks at rank No. 100.  
During 2006-07 also, the number of candidates selected were 100. 
However, it is a fact that the candi dates also apply to other institutes 
simultaneously for admission and opt for the one more suitable to them.  
Consequently it has been the experience of  the last two ye ars that not all 
the candidates accept the scholarship.  The Ministry, therefore, proposes 

 20
to prepare a reserve list from the ens uing academic year with a view to 
ensure that the number of scholarships being availed is higher.     
The SPDC commenced in 2006 wit h US$1,800/- per annum of 
scholarship.  This was found to be insufficient and the students were 
facing hardships.  It was, therefore, decided to increase the scholarship to 
US$3,600/- per annum from 2007-2008. Th is applies to students of 2006-
2007 batch also.   
The budget estimate for 2008-09 includes  scholarships to be granted to 
SPDC-2008 students, besides to those from SPDC-2006 and SPDC-
2007.” 
3.11 The Ministry has also informed the Committee that: 
“During 2006-2007, 145 applications we re received out of which 118 
appeared for the examination.  Du ring 2007-2008, 344 applications were 
received and 323 appeared for the exam ination.  The scheme is 
publicized by our Missions/Posts abroad through their websites and 
amongst Indian Associations.  The Pr ogramme is also publicized on the 
websites of this Ministry and Ed.C IL. All the Missions/Posts have been 
specifically requested this year to also publicise the Scheme in ethnic 
magazines/Newspapers.  During 2006-2007 the exams were conducted in 
14 countries viz. Bahrain, Fiji, Gu yana, Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, T anzania, UAE, Nigeria and India.  
During 2007-2008, the exams were c onducted in 16 countries viz. 
Bahrain, Fiji, Indonesia, Kenya, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mauritius, Oman, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Tanzania, Thailand, UAE, Nigeria and India.  7 
students have dropped out from the 2006-2007 batch.  The total number 
of students in this batch is now 60.  4 of the students were not promoted 
by their respective Institutions to the 2
nd year.  2 students dropped out due 
to personal reasons. One student who was admitted in MNIT-Bhopal did 
not avail of the scholarship.” 
3.12 During the evidence of the Ministry , the Secretary, MOIA, has submitted 
that: 

 21
“For the scholarship, as you are awar e, the number is 100 scholarships to 
be awarded every year.  Last year, 113 candidates were declared as 
eligible because many candidates got the same level of marks but what 
happens is that all these candidates do not take up the courses.  They 
shift to other institutions and they mo ve abroad.  So, in many of these 
cases, they do not avail of scholarship even if they are selected.  So, this 
year based on this experience, we pr opose to have a longer wait list so 
that we are able to utilise the scholarsh ip amount fully.  Apart from that 
one major change which we propose to in troduce now is that for the year 
2008-09, we propose to make the sele ctions very early which is by 
September-October of the cu rrent year so that t he students are selected 
six months in advance.  So, the persons who are abroad especially PIO 
children could get enough time for getting admission to the Indian 
Universities and plan well in advance.  With that exercise, we should be 
able to get PIO children also to come to study in India.” 
3.13 The Committee pointed out that I ndian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) also gives a number of scholarsh ips and also have examinations and 
desired to know whether Ministry are c oordinating with the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (HRD) and ICCR, which are having their own scholarship 
programmes.  The Secretary, MOIA in this regard submitted that: 
“…..
On the issue about scholarships, this is done in coordination with 
the Ministry of HRD, because the selection has been entrusted to an 
agency under the Ministry of HRD,  which is the Educational 
Consultants Limited, Ed.CIL.  On the aspect of scholarship, we do 
not have any coordination with the ICCR.  On various other matters, 
we do coordinate with the ICCR. Bu t in respect of scholarships, 
there is no coordination.  Probably it may not be necessary because 
the clientele would be different because we are offering scholarships 
to the children of PIOs to study in India.” 

 22
3.14 When pointed out that ICCR also does the same and gives a lot of 
scholarships to them, the Secretary, MOIA responded as under: 
“They give scholarships elsewhere also.  But we will definitely 
consider this point.” 
 
D. Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC)  
3.15 An allocation of Rs. 20 lakhs wa s made in 2007-08 towards establishing 
the Overseas Workers Resource Centre  (OWRC) and the allocation made for 
this Centre in BE 2008-2009 is also Rs. 20 lakhs.  When asked to elaborate the 
reasons for the same, the Ministry replied as under: 
“As regards, the Overseas Workers Resource Centre (OWRC), the Centre 
has been set up through outsourcing. In  terms of the Agreement between 
the Ministry and the Agency manning the Centre, the Ministry would meet 
the expenditure on account of Manpower , Infrastructure and Operational 
Cost of the Helpline. There w ould be no marked increase in the 
expenditure for running the Centre in the next few years.” 
3.16 The Centre was established on January 2008 with 12x7 helpline 
functioning in 7 languages.  On being a sked about the number of complaints 
registered, responded and monitored by OWRC since January 2008 and the 
number of such grievances redressed and followed up, the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
“The number of grievances regist ered since January, 2008 at the OWRC 
is 157.  Out of this, 140 grievanc es have already been resolved.  17 
grievances are pending for want of information from the embassies and 
other offices which will be replied soon.  It is informed that the number of 
pending complaints are monitored and fo llowed by the Ministry on daily 
basis.” 
 
E. Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) 
3.17 The Ministry launched the Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), a 
not for profit trust, in part nership with the CII, to serve as a ‘one stop shop’ for all 

 23
investment and business related services fo r potential overseas Indian investors.  
According to the Outcome Budget, the a llocation for OIFC has been reduced to 
Rs. 25 lakh in 2008-09 from Rs. 30 lakh.  When asked the reasons for the same, 
the Ministry replied as under: 
“The Ministry has set up an  Overseas Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) as 
a not-for-profit Trust in partnersh ip with the Confeder ation of Indian 
Industry (CII). As per the Memorandum  of Agreement signed between the 
Ministry and the CII, the Ministry will extend Financial Assistance for 
running the Centre for the first thr ee years and thereafter the OIFC would 
become self sufficient through the income earned for the advisory and 
Consular services provided by the  Centre to the Overseas Indian 
Community. The sharing of expenditu re between MOIA and CII is as 
under:  
Year MOIA CII Remarks 
First Rs. 30 lakhs Rs. 30 lakhs Total operational cost for 
the first year is Rs. 60 
lakhs 
Second 30% of the 
recurring cost 
limited to Rs. 25 
lakhs 
70% of the 
recurring cost 
Part of the cost will be met 
from the Revenue 
generated by the Trust 
Third 10% of the 
recurring cost 
limited to Rs. 20 
lakhs 
90% of the 
recurring cost 
-do- 
Fourth No cost 100% Revenue generated by the 
Trust will meet the full 
operational cost 
In view of the above, the expenditure  on the part of the Ministry will be 
limited to the first three only and will also decrease in the three years.” 
3.18 During PBD 2008, OIFC organized a ma rket place in which many one-on-
one meeting and presentations were reported to have been organized.  On being 
asked about the outcome of the meeting/  presentation organized by OIFC during 
PBD 2008, the Ministry has replied as under: 
“Market place of PBD 2008 was an unique platform created by OIFC for 
the visiting delegates for face to face meetings with the knowledge 

 24
partners in sectors such as Real  Estate; Finance &Taxation advice, 
Education, Health, NGOs etc.  Among the sectors, most sought after by 
the delegates were Real Estate and Education, followed by Wealth 
Management and Tax/FDI.  A number of queries are also raised on 
Philanthropy, Tourism and Business-to-Bus iness networking.  Majority of 
the delegates listed Real Estate as t he preferred area of investment.  For 
business to customer services, delegates  preferred investment in financial 
instruments, real estate, contribution to charitable causes etc.  
3.19 In order to gather information about  the experience of visiting delegates 
with the market place as well as about  their expectation of services, a 
survey was also conducted during t he market place.  The important 
recommendations of the survey are as under: 
i) OIFC market place should become a standard feature of the future 
PBD and should be expanded in its scope, coverage and depth. 
ii) OIFC market place should focus on various sectors.  In the run up 
of the market place, small but effective Special Interest Group (SIG) 
can be created to focus exclusivel y at specific sector and garner 
support for it from all quarters to present the specific investment 
related proposal during OIFC.  OIFC can use its unique public-
private partnership to gi ve creative thrust to the efforts of the Govt. 
of India and Industry in accelerating the pace of various initiatives 
taken by the Government in social sector. 
iii) A pre-event publicity platform c an be created about three months in 
advance to attract better participation from OIs. 
iv) To ensure that problems fac ed by OIs are handled expeditiously, 
OIFC can consider nominating trusted trouble-shooters in 
respective areas based on their interest. 
As an initial idea of establishi ng OIFC was very successful and 
achieved its objectives.“ 
3.20 On being asked about the achiev ement of the OIFC in promoting 
investment in India by Overseas I ndians and if it has succeeded in getting 

 25
overseas Indians investment in the infrastructure and social sectors in any Indian 
states, the Ministry replied as under: 
“OIFC, in terms of replying queries and disseminating information related 
to the investment, have achieved its objective.  The real investment 
coming to India will be known in due course of time.” 
3.21 During the evidence, the Secret ary, MOIA, has further informed: 
“….We have established the Overseas  Indian Facilitation Centre in 
partnership with the CII to function as one-stop-shop for Indian investors 
to provide information and assist ance on investment and business 
matters. This is fully functional and will expand its services substantially 
during the current financial year . They have already published two 
documents – one compendium on investment policy and a handbook for 
overseas Indian investors….” 
3.22 On the question of the system of  monitoring devised to quantify the 
investments made by NRIs as a result of efforts made by the OIFC, the Ministry 
in a post evidence reply stated as under: 
“The Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP)  is the Nodal 
Ministry on policy matters relating to Foreign Direct Investments, including 
investments from Non-Resident Indians. Under the liberal and transparent 
policy initiated by the Government, mo st of the Sectoral  investments are 
under the automatic route. As such , specific data on investments by 
Overseas Indians is not maintained ei ther by the DIPP or  by the Reserve 
Bank of India. The role of Overseas  Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC) set 
up by the Ministry of Overseas Indian A ffairs is to facilitate  dissemination 
of information for potential invest ments by Overseas Indians. By 
disseminating investment related information, the OIFC would be 
facilitating potential invest ors to invest in India. However, since the 
Overseas Indians can channelise their investments other than through the 
OIFC, it would not be possible to quantify the outcome from the Scheme. 
The OIFC is maintaining a record of  all investment related queries 
received from Non-Resident Indians. However, it is not possible to 

 26
ascertain as to whether they have made any investment s in the country 
and maintain data in this regard.” 
 
F. Council for Promotion of Overseas Employment (CPOE) 
3.23 An allocation of Rs. 20 lakhs was made for establishing the Council for 
Promotion of Overseas Employment  (CPOE) in 2007-2008.  The Council, 
however, is yet to be established, but the allocation has been increased to Rs. 
1.50 crore in BE 2008-2009.  On being a sked about the reason for shortfall in 
performance and the reason for steep increas e in the allocation made this year, 
the Ministry replied as under: 
“The allocation of Rs 20 lakh for est ablishing the Council for Promotion of 
Overseas Employment (CPOE) in  2007-08 could not be utilized because 
the CPOE has not yet been established.  A proposal is under submission 
to the Cabinet Secretariat for appr oval of the Cabinet to change the 
composition of the Governing Counc il of the CPOE. The CPOE will be 
formally constituted thereafter. The CP OE is likely to be established in the 
early part of 2008-09. Once  the CPOE is established it would require a 
sum of Rs. 1.50 crore per annum for smoothly discharging its functions. 
Therefore, an allocation of Rs. 1.50 crore has been proposed in the BE 
2008-09.” 
3.24 During evidence, the Secretary,  MOIA, has also submitted that: 
“The Cabinet has approved the setting up of an Overseas Employment 
Promotion Council which will serve as a strategic think-tank on migration 
matters and prepare market-oriented strategies to enable the Indian 
workers to benefit from the job opport unities overseas. This will be made 
operational very soon.”   
3.25 The Secretary, MOIA, further informed that… 
“….. the Ministry considers the promot ion of overseas employment as one 
of its core functions and a key ar ea in which the Ministry must 
concentrate. The structure was init ially conceived and approved. One 
change which we are now proposing to make is about who should be the 

 27
Chairman of the Council. Originally, the proposal was t hat the Minister 
should be the Chairman of the Council and the Secretary to be the Vice-
Chairman. That was approved by t he Cabinet. But, subsequently, it was 
felt that there could be issues relating to Office of Profit or some dispute 
could be raised by somebody.  So, it was felt that it need not be the 
Minister.  Then, there was a feeli ng that there shoul d be a full-time 
Chairman who should be a retired Secretary to Government with 
experience in emigration matters. But then, it was felt that having a 
separate, full-time organisation which is de-linked from the Ministry may 
not help the purpose. So, t he present proposal is that  the Secretary of the 
Ministry should be the Chairman of t he Council so that there is an organic 
linkage with the Ministry.” 
3.26 When the Committee suggested whether  it would be desirable to have a 
distinguished non-official Chairman rather than Secretary of the Ministry, MOIA 
Secretary stated: 
“The promotion of employment abroad is one of the key functions which 
the Ministry has to take up. I am not  going into the data. But our country 
will have the maximum youth power in the coming years.  We will get the 
opportunity to develop as a major supplie r of employees to the rest of the 
world. So, we will have to capitalise on this opportunity that we have. 
Since that is a major func tion of the Ministry, to start with, at least, it is 
better that it is started in-house. Agai n it is at arms l ength. But definitely 
once we develop, there is a possibilit y that we could have a full-time 
Chairman. But, at this stage, it is  probably felt not necessary. It is 
something for the future which one could always look at.” 
The Ministry in a written reply also submitted that: 
“Another Cabinet Note seeking approval of the Cabinet to further revise 
the composition of the Governing C ouncil of CPOE was forwarded to the 
Cabinet Secretariat on 7.3.2008. The Cabinet approval is awaited.” 
 
 

 28
 
G. Labour Agreements 
3.27 According to the Annual Report (2007-2008), India presently has labour 
agreements with Jordan, Qatar, UAE and Kuwait, and negotiations for MoUs are 
on with Saudi Arabia, Oman, Bahrain, Malaysia and Yemen.  The Ministry also 
proposes to sign MoUs with countries of the Central and Eastern Europe and 
Asia, Poland, South Korea and labour rece iving countries in Europe and south 
East Asia.   
3.28 The Committee desired to know about  the status of Indian labourers 
working in countries with which Indi a has labour agreement vis-à-vis those 
working in countries where there is no such agreement and the time frame fixed 
for signing the proposed MoUs with the abov e-mentioned countries, the Ministry 
replied as under: 
“No empirical study has so far been c onducted to illustrate the change in 
the condition of the Indian workers as a result of signing of the bilateral 
labour MOUs. The Ministry has signed MOUs with UAE and Kuwait 
recently. The process for signing sim ilar MOUs with other labour receiving 
countries is in progress. At an appr opriate stage an empirical study to 
assess the impact of the MOUs can be undertaken. However, it can well 
be argued that due to the formal commitm ent of the Government of the 
receiving country and due to the mec hanism of the Joint Working Group 
the condition of the Indian workers is bound to improve through greater 
responsiveness and expeditious resolution of bilateral labour issues. 
An endeavor will be made to sign MOUs  with Malaysia, Bahrain and 
Oman during 2008-09. Efforts will also be ma de to initiate the negotiations 
with Yemen, Brunei and Saudi Arabi a during 2008-09. These MOUs are 
aimed at protection and welfare of Indian workers in the existing 
destination base. The MOUs with the c ountries in the Central and Eastern 
Europe and South East Asia are aim ed at expansion of the destination 
base. Due to the nature of the process, no time frame can be laid down for 

 29
signing of MOUs with these countries . However, efforts will be made to 
initiate negotiations at the earliest.” 
3.29 The second annual conference of the Heads of the Indian Missions in the 
major labour receiving countries was hel d in New Delhi during September 2007.  
Representatives of the State Government of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Punjab 
and representatives of Ministry of Exter nal Affairs and Home Affairs were also 
present.  The objective of the conferenc e was to provide an opportunity to the 
Indian Missions in various labour receiving countries to share their experience in 
dealing with labour issues amongst themselves and with the Central 
Government.  The recommendations of the conference intend to serve as useful 
inputs for corrective action.   
3.30 The Committee desired to know the major issues that have emerged in 
common as a result of this conference,  the recommendations of the Conference 
that were considered as useful inputs for corrective action and the extent to 
which this conference helped the Governm ent in finding ways to deal with labour 
issues, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“During the Conference there was a consensus on the need for special 
measures for protection of women emig rants (helpline, shelters for run 
away workers, counselling and legal assistance), multi-media awareness 
campaign to educate potential emig rants about the risks involved in 
irregular migration and the precautions  to be taken while emigrating, pre-
departure orientation of emigr ants through the skill upgradation 
programme, signing bilateral MoUs wit h major labour receiving countries, 
developing model contracts to lay dow n standard terms and conditions of 
employment through bilateral discu ssions, minimum wage for female 
household service workers and security deposit by the employer in case of 
direct recruitment. 
The Ministry intends to conduct the conference of the Heads of Indian 
Missions in the major ECR countries  on a regular basis to discuss the 
problems of the Indian em igrants in these countries and the ways to 
resolve them. In that context, the c onference in Delhi in September 2007 

 30
helped the Government in getting useful feedback and inputs. This 
feedback is being channelized into vari ous policy initiatives that the 
Ministry is taking. It has been decided that the minimum wage for female 
household service workers would be fixed by the Indian Missions 
concerned within a range of  300-350 US dollars, which would come into 
effect from June 2008. The security deposit for directly recruiting individual 
workers from India has been made co mpulsory. A model contract in 
respect of Kuwait has been finalized through bilateral discussions. 
Instructions have been issued to all Indian Missions to submit proposals to 
the Ministry for setting up of help-li nes, shelters for runaway workers and 
to hire the services of legal experts to provide to legal assistance to the 
needy Indian workers.” 
3.31 During evidence, the Secr etary, further informed: 
“…..On the emigration side, a MoU on Labour Employment and Manpower 
Development was signed with Kuwait  in April 2007 and an additional 
Protocol was signed with Qatar in No vember 2007. These MoUs provide 
for strengthening of cooperation in the employment of I ndians in Kuwait 
and Qatar.  These set out the paramet ers for the welfare and protection of 
these workers and most importantly they provide for Joint Working Groups 
for dispute resolution and address the c oncerns of workers in the informal 
sector who are not covered by the labour laws of those countries.” 
3.32 The Committee pointed out that for qui te a number of years, the Annual 
Report of the Ministry indicates t hat an endeavour will be made to sign MoUs 
with Malaysia, Bahrain and Oman and other Gu lf countries. It also states that 
efforts will be made to initiate negotiations  at the earliest.  The Committee asked 
as to when will the real efforts be made to  initiate negotiations and put diplomatic 
pressures, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as under: 
“The Ministry has made substantial pr ogress in the impl ementation of its 
plan to enter into bilateral MoUs wit h the major receiving countries. Since 
1988 no bilateral MOU was singed for pr otection and welfare of Indian 
emigrants with any receiving country  for 18 years. MOIA signed an MOU 

 31
with UAE in December 2006 and with Kuwa it in April 2007. In November 
2007 we have signed an Additional Protocol with Qatar to supplement the 
1985 agreement for protection and welfar e of our worker s. The MOU with 
Malaysia has been finalized and approval  of the Cabinet has been 
obtained. The Malaysian Minister for Human Resources has been invited 
to India for signing the MOU. One r ound of negotiations has already been 
held with Oman. We have invited t he Omani delegation for the second 
round of negotiations in India. We will utilize the forum of India-Oman 
Strategic Consultative Initiative Meeting scheduled in April 2008 in India to 
pursue this matter further for expediti ous finalization of the MoU. The 
Bahraini Labour Minister is visiting India on the invitation of the Minister of 
Overseas Indian Affairs during 25-27 April 2008 with a delegation to 
negotiate the proposed MOU. As such , the efforts being made by the 
Ministry in this direction are not only real but also bearing fruit.” 
 
H. Pre-Departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation Programme 
3.33 A vast majority of migrants to t he Middle East, including Gulf countries, 
are semi-skilled and unskilled workers.  In order to upgrade the skill level of 
Indian emigrants at par with the overseas market requirement, the pre-departure 
training-cum-orientation programme was l aunched on a pilot basis in five states 
during 2006-2007 and Rs. 4 crore was earmarked for the purpose.  An outlay of 
Rs. 3 crore was allocated during 2007- 2008 that has been raised to Rs. 9.25 
crore during 2008-2009.   
3.34 Asked to furnish the reasons for in creasing the allocation from Rs. 3 crore 
in 2007-2008 to Rs. 9.25 cr ore in 2008-2009 and the assessment made if any to 
understand the impact of the tr aining programme, the Minist ry in a written reply 
submitted: 
“The Scheme Skill Upgradation & Pre-depar ture Orientation for Emigrant 
Workers was started by the Ministry as a pilot project during 2006-2007, in 
partnership with certain State Gove rnments. The Scheme was continued 
during the FY 2007-2008 and it is proposed to implement the Scheme 

 32
through Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME). The 
Ministry had proposed  to run the Scheme with a 5 year perspective during  
the Plan period 2007-08 to 2011-12, with a total financial implication of Rs. 
88 crores for training 1,60,000 persons  during this period. The proposal 
which was submitted to the Commi ttee on Non-Plan Expenditure (CNE) 
envisaged a higher allocation during FY 2008-2009. However, due to 
delays in getting the Scheme approved,  the Outlay has been proposed as 
Rs. 9.25 crores during FY 2008-2009. 
Since the Scheme is now being impl emented  through the Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise s (MSME), the feedback from that 
Ministry would be taken into acc ount for assessing the impact of the 
Programme.” 
3.35 The Committee desired to know about t he pattern of funds released to the 
participating States during 2007-2008, state-wise and the kind of training 
imparted to the workers, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under: 
“An amount of Rs. 2.40 crores was released to the Ministry of Micro, Small 
& Medium Enterprises (MSME) who has been associated for 
implementation of the Scheme during 2007-08.  
 Skill upgradation programme in the trades of Welder, Technicians, 
Electricians, Plumber, Machinist, Tu rner, Fitter, CNC Operations, Fibre 
Optics, Quality Control, Carpentry  etc. have been conducted in seven 
MSME Institutions located at Ludhiana (Punjab), Mumbai (Maharashta), 
Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), Agra  (Uttar Pradesh), Ramnagar 
(Uttarakhand), Jallandhar (Punjab) and Gu wahati (Assam).  Nearly 1400 
candidates in 74 batches in various batch sizes are under going training 
for duration of 2 weeks – 1 year  during 2007-08, commencing from 
September 2007.” 
3.36 Asked if there is any proposal to extend the training programme in other 
States as well and t he number of workers that are trained so far, the Ministry 
stated as under: 

 33
“Depending on the success of the training programme, the Scheme will be 
extended to other States, in the coming Financial Year.  As on 
31.03.2008, 12,074 emigrant worker s have been trained under the Skill 
Orientation cum Training Programme of  Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs.” 
3.37 During evidence, the Secr etary, further informed: 
“A scheme for skill development is one of the most ambitious schemes 
that the Ministry has designed. It is something which the Ministry has to 
implement properly so that we make use of the employment market that is 
available abroad. The scheme was under  implementation at the beginning 
of the year, but based on the exper ience that was derived from the 
implementation, it was fe lt that the scheme had to  be redesigned. One, it 
was felt that the initial per capita  allocation was inadequate and secondly, 
it was felt that for t he implementation of the sc heme, one must have more 
agencies than the State Governments. In itially the idea was that the State 
Governments would be fully used for the implementation of the scheme. 
But it was felt that it was necessa ry to have more agencies to implement 
the scheme and accordingly, we have entered into a partnership with the 
Ministry of Medium, Small and Micro Industries of the Government of 
India, which has field centres and seven such centres have been identified 
for the implementation of the scheme.  
Once the scheme was re-designed with a higher level of financial support, 
it had to have the formal approval of the Finance Ministry.  The magnitude 
of the scheme has now ris en to Rs.89 crore over a period of five years.  
Therefore, it had to  be approved by the Committee on Non-Plan 
Expenditure and it needed the formal approv al of the Finance Ministry 
also.  This process, unfortunately, is taking time and the formal approval 
has not yet really come.  So, the scheme is being impl emented as it was 
originally designed.  So we are now pursuing with the Finance Ministry for 
speedy approval of the revised schem e so that there could be more 
effective implementation.” 

 34
3.38 On the question of organizing the programme in a better way, the 
Secretary, has stated as follows: 
“…..Actually, these courses vary in  duration about two weeks to six 
months.  In fact, various instit utions have been identified and various 
programmes have been identified. So me of these are fibre optics 
technicians, quality system and meteor ology, machinist, tunner and fitter 
etc.   This is one type of progra mme which is done at one particular 
institution.  But we do have a variet y of programme including programmes 
for house maids. In all these progra mmes there is also a component of 
communication skills, essentials of basic knowledge of English and Arabic.  
But then often what happens is that the real emigrants get very little time 
to undergo a programme like this.  So th is is primarily targeted at those 
persons who are desirous of going in the medium term and that is the type 
of clientele that we get for these training programmes.” 

 35
IV  -   OTHER SERVICES 
 
A. Legal Assistance to Woman facing problems in NRI Marriages 
4.1 The allocation made for legal and financial assistance to Indian woman 
facing problems in NRI marriages has also increased to Rs. 3.00 crore in BE 
2008-2009 from Rs. 50 lakhs in 2007-2008 RE .  The Committee desired to know 
the reasons for this six-fold increase in allocation for this scheme and the number 
of cases where the Ministry rendered assistance during 2007-2008 against the 
537 cases targeted, the Ministry in their written reply furnished as under: 
 “The scheme to provide legal and fi nancial assistance to Indian women 
deserted by their overseas Indian s pouses was launched by the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs in Febr uary 2007. The Ministry submitted a 
detailed proposal for approval of the Committee on Non–Plan Expenditure 
(CNE), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to incur an 
expenditure of Rs. 31.70 Crore over a period of 5 years from 2007-2008 to 
2011-12 under the scheme. The proposal  was approved by CNE with the 
following conditions: 
i) Selection of committed NGOs/Over seas Indian Organizations being 
carefully done by laying down objectives guidelines for their 
identification and selection; 
ii) MOIA should be clearly involved in the selection process of the 
NGO and not leave it to the Indian Missions abroad; 
iii) The selected NGOs should pursue the case after GOI assistance is 
stopped; 
iv) MOIA should devise an appropriate Management Information 
System (MIS), which would help the Ministry to monitor the 
outcomes from this scheme and fac ilitate correctives to be applied 
where necessary. 
4.2 The approval of CNE could be obt ained only towards the fag end of 
December, 2007. Revised guidelines  have accordingly been worked out 
and issued to concerned Indian Missions/Posts towards the end of 

 36
February 2008.  In the absence of CNE approval, our Missions/Posts 
abroad were not authorized to make any expenditure under the Scheme. 
The B.E. for the Scheme for 2007-08 was Rs. 3.00 Crore. It was brought 
down to Rs. 50 lakhs at the R.E. stage.  
4.3 The Ministry had kept a budget of Rs.3.00 crore for FY 2007-08 under the 
scheme to meet initial cost and incidental charges for documentation and 
filing of the case by t he Indian Women’s Organizations/ Indian Community 
Associations/NGOs on the woman’s behal f. The assistance in this regard 
is up to US $1,000.00 per case. The number of cases that could be 
covered under this amount would al so depend upon the prevalent rate of 
exchange. There is no mechanism to know exactly how many women will 
take legal recourse to solve their problems in a given year. 
4.4 The budget under the scheme has been reduced to Rs.50.00 lakhs and a 
sanction for it was issued on 4 th March, 2008.   The amount of Rs. 50.00 
lakhs was placed at the disposal of  Indian Missions in USA, UK, Canada, 
Australia, New Zealand, UAE, Qatar, Kuwait and Bahrain.   
The details of assistance provided by the Indian Missions under the 
scheme during CFY are yet to be received.” 
4.5 The Ministry was also asked to furn ish the details of funds provided to 
each Indian Missions during the last two years and their utilization.   
The Ministry replied as under: 
“Allocation of budget to Indian Mi ssions/Posts under the scheme to 
provide legal/financial assistance to victims of NRI marriages during the 
year 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 are as follows: 
S.N. Indian 
Mission/Post 
Allocation 
of budget 
during 
2006-2007 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Utilization Allocation 
of Budget 
during 
2007-2008 
(Rs. in 
lakhs) 
Utilization
*  
1 U.S.A 40  15  
2 U.K. 40  08  
3 Canada 40  08  

 37
4 Australia  40 Rs. 4.60 
lakhs 
08  
5 New Zealand  8  03  
6 Dubai (UAE)  8  02  
7 Kuwait 8  02  
8 Qatar 8  02  
9 Bahrain  8  02  
        Total           Rs. 2.00 Crores                 Rs. 50.00 lakhs 
 
*  Sanction issued on 4
th March, 2008. Utilization report is awaited” 
  
4.6 During the course of evidence the Committee desired to know the reasons 
for non utilization of funds during last year.  
The Secretary, MOIA stated: 
“The scheme was approved only in Januar y. Since the approval was so 
badly delayed, it was not possible to utilise the funds. For the scheme, we 
have placed some money at the dis posal of the Missions. Now, we will 
have to go out further giving more pub licity to the scheme because it is 
dependent on demands, on people knowing about it, and on the NGOs 
working on it. So, we will have to have a more aggressive campaign to 
make the scheme more visible so that more people get the benefit.” 
4.7 On the issue of the number of applications received from women for 
legal assistance by Missions till 4 th March, 2008, and the action taken 
thereon, the representative of the Ministry stated as under: 
“As the Secretary has sa id earlier, we got approval from the Finance 
Ministry in January only.  The Finance Ministry had imposed certain 
conditions with the approval.  They wanted us to have some proper 
reporting system to be adopted and for the appointment of NGOs also, 
they wanted the Ministry itself to be involved.  Earlier, it was proposed that 
the Heads of Missions should be able to approve the NGOs which could 
be involved in such cases.  We had some 225 cases.  We referred the 

 38
matter to our concerned Missions for init iating some action.  One thing is 
that under this scheme for providing legal and financial assistance to the 
distressed women, the amount provided to the NGO is a maximum of US 
$1000.  Some of the Missions have appoi nted NGOs.  For example, from 
Washington, we got the report that they have filed 3 cases in the month of 
March this year.  We are in the pr ocess of appointing NGOs from other 
countries also.   Despite all our efforts, we have not been able to appoint 
anyone in US because our Missions there have made all efforts, but so far 
no NGO has come forward to assist the distressed Indian women.”    
4.8 The number of requests received fo r providing legal assistance by the 
Indian Missions since the scheme star ted, year wise and the quantum of 
assistance provided so far alongwith the number of beneficiaries, the Ministry 
furnished the information as under: 
 (i)   
Year Name of the 
Mission/Posts 
No. of request 
received 
2006-07 Australia 
Canada 
10 
10 
2007-08 Canada 
USA 
14 
35 
 
Quantum of assistance provided so  far along with the number of 
beneficiaries; 
Year Amount spent No. of 
beneficiaries*
Name of the mission 
2006-07 Rs. 4.58 lakhs 10 HCL, Canberra 
 
2007-08 Rs. 40,000 
 
Rs. 80,000 
01 
 
02 
CGI, San Francisco 
 
EOI, Washington 
 
(ii) The Mission/Posts have informed t hat they have given wide publicity 
about the scheme through website, ethnic newspapers, and Indian Associations 
& Mission publications. 

 39
(Information from the Missions/Posts at  Abu Dhabi, Doha, Kuwait, HCI, London, 
CGI, Melbourne, Dubai and Birmingham is awaited). 
 
4.9 On being asked as to whether the Ministry has brought out the guidance 
booklet on marriages to overseas Indi ans in all regional languages and what 
steps are being taken in this direction, the Ministry informed: 
“Guidance booklet on Marriages to overs eas Indians in Hindi, Punjabi and 
Telugu have been finalized and are under print.” 
 
B. Migration Management 
 
4.10 The provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983 govern emigration from India. 
The Emigration Act, 1983 provides for a regulatory framework in respect of 
emigration of Indian workers for overseas  employment on contractual basis and 
seeks to safeguard their interests and ens ure their welfare. The Act makes it 
mandatory for registration of all Recruiti ng Agents with the Prot ector General of 
Emigrants, Ministry of Overseas I ndian Affairs before they can conduct the 
business of recruitment for overseas employment.  
4.11 During the evidence on Examination of the Subject “Issues Relating to 
Overseas Indian Affairs” (14 th Report), the represent ative of the MOIA had 
stated:  
“…The Emigration Act, 1983 was not amended for some time. The 
Ministry has proposed an amendment to this Act, which is quite 
comprehensive and it would try to ens ure and protect workers’ interest. 
There are a number of welfare measures for the workers. We have 
received the comments from all the departments now and we are finalizing 
the Cabinet note. We intend to introduce this amendment during the 
coming winter session. I am sure that if this Act goes through, it will be a 
great achievement. Our target is 31st March, 2007.” 
 
 

 40
4.12 Asked the reasons for delay in am ending the Act, the Ministry submitted: 
“The current proposal for amending the Emigration Act 1983 was 
conceived in February 2005 and the pr ocess of drafting the amendments 
in March 2006. The inter-ministerial consultations took about a year. 
Thereafter, the proposal was submitted in February 2007 to the Ministry of 
Law & Justice along with a Cabinet Note for their vetting. Due to difference 
of opinion between the two Ministries on some of the provisions proposed 
in the amendments (such as appointm ent of Ombudsman and creation of 
an Inspectorate of Prosecution) t he matter got delayed. Eventually, a 
Cabinet Note was forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat on 28.1.2008 
seeking approval of the Cabinet to  amend the Act. The matter was listed 
in the agenda for the Cabinet Meeti ng scheduled on 7.2.2008. However, 
as per the advice of the PMO the Cabinet Note was withdrawn. The 
proposal is now being re-examined with a view to strengthen the 
regulation of Recruiting Agents. T he matter will be placed before the 
Cabinet after being vetted by the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
4.13 The Ministry in their Action Ta ken Replies furnished to the Committee 
during August 2007, stated that  the process of inter-ministerial consultations had 
been completed and a note for Cabinet was being submitted shortly.   
4.14 Asked as to when the Cabinet approved the proposed amendments to the 
Emigration Act, 1983 and the current stat us of the propos ed amendments, the 
Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
“A proposal for approval of the Cabi net for amending the Emigration Act 
1983 was forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat in January 2008. However, 
the proposal was subsequently withdrawn in  order to consider some more 
changes in the Emigration Act with a vi ew to strengthen the regulation of 
Recruiting Agents.  
The proposal is now being re-examined in consultation with the Ministry of 
Law & Justice. Efforts are bei ng made to finalize the proposal 
expeditiously. The matter will be placed before the Cabinet thereafter.” 
 

 41
4.15 During the evidence, the Secretary, further added: 
“As far as amendment to the Act is concerned, I am sorry to say that it has 
taken so long because the basic amendments were ready some time back 
but there were a few issues on whic h there had to be further discussions 
particularly with the Law Ministry.  To  be specific, there were issues  
regarding the setting up of grievances redressal mechanism in the form of 
ombudsman.  There was an issue regar ding setting up of a welfare fund.  
Whether this has to be done statutorily or not, took some more time than it 
should have taken.   In the proce ss, the amendments got delayed.  Now, 
we have reached some consensus in  these matters.  The amendments 
are ready.  These are with the Law Mini stry for a final touch and it should 
be possible to bring it in the next session of Parliament” 
 
C. Assistance to Deported Workers 
4.16 Many emigrant workers are stat ed to be living illegally in the Gulf 
countries.  The Government of UAE had in 2007 announced general amnesty 
scheme calling upon those workers who were illegally in UAE to either leave the 
country or amend their residential status .  About 70,000 Indian expatriates who 
were staying illegally benefited and have eit her left the country or regularized 
their status with proper docum ents.  Ministry of Overs eas Indian Affairs also 
ensured the smooth deportation of the worker s in consultation with Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Ministry of Civil Aviation and State Governments.   
4.17 On being asked the number of work ers who were repatriated from UAE 
under the amnesty scheme and help/assist ance extended to the workers after 
deportation by the Ministry, the Ministry informed: 
“As per the information furnis hed by EOI, Abu-Dhabi, about 90,000 
persons availed the benefit of the general amnesty scheme declared by 
the Govt. of UAE during the year 2007. 
The Indian Mission officials visit the deportation centers, regularly issuing 
emergency certificates or travel documents in required cases after 
confirming the nationality and identit y of the Indian deportees.  The 

 42
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, in coordination with the Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
State Governments, closely monitors the deportation of the Indian workers 
from the foreign country to India.” 
4.18 During the course of evidence,  the Committee desired to know the 
assistance Ministry provides to the depor ted workers after deportation to India.  
The Secretary stated: 
“Sir, on the question of assistance to people who are deported, I am 
sorry that the reply has not been that specific in relation to the further 
assistance that is given.  What is  done now is that in coordination 
with the mission the deportation exer cise as such is facilitated and 
coordinated….  We have no scheme fo r assistance after they come 
back.” 
 
D. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) 
4.19 The outlay for PBD celebrati on during BE 2007-2008 was Rs. 6 crore 
which was reduced to 5.5 crore at RE stage and the outlay remained at 
Rs. 6 crore for the current year too.    
4.20 According to the Outcome Budget (2007-2008) the net outflow from the 
budget is being reduced through increased sponsorship.  Asked why the budget 
outlay for PBD has again been increased fr om Rs. 5.5 crore in RE 2007-2008 to 
Rs. 6 crore in 2008-2009 and the actual expenditure incurred during 2007 and 
2008 vis-à-vis the quantum of sponsorship / revenue generated, the Ministry in 
their written reply submitted as under: 
“It is submitted that B udget outlay for organizing PBD is Rs.6.0 crore at 
the BE stage since last three financial years.  The budget outlay for PBD 
reduced to Rs.5.5 crore at the RE stage in 2007-08 is due to non-receipt 
of few bills by the organizer of PBD.  .  
The total expenditure incurred on PBD  2007 was Rs.5.21 crore whereas 
Ministry had generated revenue of Rs.3.84 crore for PBD 2007.  
Therefore, the net outflow from PBD 2007 was Rs.1.37 cror e.  The actual 

 43
expenditure for organizing PBD 2008 will be available after 31 st March, 
2008.  However, it is informed that the Finance Committee, constituted for 
PBD 2008, has approved the Budget of Rs.5.24 crore for organizing the 
PBD 2008,  as a minimum of revenue of Rs.4.05 crore with an estimated 
outflow of Rs.1.19 crore.  However,  efforts are being made to reduce the 
outflow to Rs.1 crore.” 
 
E. Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award 
4.21 According to the Ministry, it  has constituted a Committee on 24 th January, 
2007, chaired by the Secretar y with representatives from the Ministry of External 
Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs to revise the scheme and make the selection 
process for Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award more broad based, objective and 
transparent.  It was informed that the Committee have had two meetings and the 
third meeting was due to be held in 2007 after which the Committee was to 
present its report and make  recommendations for re-examining various aspects 
of the selection process, the Ministry submitted: 
“The third meeting of the Committee was held on 24th April 2007.   
The Committee presented its report on 15 th May, 2007, after its fourth 
meeting held on that date.  A com parative chart given below  shows 
changes made in the criterion for  selection of the awardees:  
 
Eligibility Conditions that 
existed earlier 
Changes notified on 24th September, 2007 
The Award shall be conferred 
on a Non-Resident Indian 
(NRI), Person of Indian Origin 
(PIO) or a NRI/PIO 
organization/institution, who, 
besides achieving great 
eminence in his/her own field, 
has made outstanding 
contributions towards fostering 
better understanding abroad of 
India and its civ ilization and/or 
has extended his/her support 
tI d i ’ d
The Award shall be confe rred on a Non-Resident 
Indian (NRI), Person of I ndian Origin (PIO) or a 
NRI/PIO organization/institution who has made  
• significant contribution towards better 
understanding abroad of I ndia and support to 
India’s causes and concerns in a tangible way;  
• significant contribution for the welfare of diaspora;  
• notable contribution in philanthropic and charitable 
work and for social and humanitarian causes in 
India and abroad;  
• significant contribution in building closer links 
between Indian and its dias
pora in the economic, 

 44
to India’s causes and concerns 
and has advanced her 
interests internationally and/or 
who has made significant 
contribution or service to the 
Indian Diaspora. 
cultural and scientific fields;  
• Eminence in one’s field for outstanding work which 
has enhanced India’s presti ge in the country of 
residence 
Or 
Has achieved outstanding eminence in his skills which 
has enhanced India’s prestige in  that country (for non-
professional workers)  
 
The Committee’s mandate was to  review the existing 
guidelines/notification and recommend revised guidelines in order to make 
the process of selection of awardees broad-based, objective and 
transparent. The job of the Committ ee was over after presenting the 
report.  
 
F. PIO University 
4.22 During the course of evidence,  the Committee raised the matter of 
establishment of PIO University and des ired to know whether the Ministry 
consider taking the Pravasi Bhartiya University out of Delhi, the Secretary, stated 
as under: 
“Regarding the issue of location of PIO Un iversity, it is a private university 
as you are aware.  And the selection of private partner for the setting up of 
this university is nearing completion. 
There was a final shortlist of three made by the Finalisation 
Committee.  There is an order of ranking.  The first one, which was ranked 
highest, they have proposed locating t he university in Bangalore; the 
others one in Mumbai and Kerala.  So, there was no proposal for Delhi at 
all.” 
4.23 The Secretary, further informed: 
“On the location of the uni versity, it may kindly be noted that this is a 
private venture.  As per the scheme itself, it was envisaged that the 
promoter should locate the university at  a place of his c hoice provided, of 
course, the place is approved by the Government also.”    
 

 45
 
 
 
 
G. Working of POE Offices  
4.24 During the course of evidence, t he Committee raised the matter of working 
of the POE offices in the country and draw n the attention of the Ministry towards 
the irregularities and corruption in POE o ffices and desired to know as to why 
different procedure are being adopted by the POEs of Chennai, Cochin and 
Trivandrum for granting emigration clear ance as against the rest of the POE 
offices in India which are granting emig ration clearance on the basis of demand 
letters.  The Secretary during the evidence responded as under: 
“I will have the matter looked into. We will find an immediate solution. 
There is no direction from the Ministry . There is a uniform policy as far as 
the Ministry is concerned. Definite ly, we will find out as to why that 
difference is there.” 
4.25 On the question of corruption in PO E offices due to officers taken on 
deputation from other Ministries and Recruiting Agents, the Secretary, during the 
evidence responded as under:  
 “…..About the functioning of the Po E officers, as has been mentioned by 
the hon. Member, there was a case in Chandigarh recently where the PoE 
and his officers were taken into custody by the CBI. There have been 
quite a few CBI cases relating to Po E officers in Chandigarh earlier also. 
There were cases in Thiruvananthapur am, Delhi, and Hyderabad. There 
have been cases in all these places. We are looking at systemic changes 
that would help improve t he situation. We are looking at various options. 
We have not finalized anything. Vari ous options are being examined to 
see that such a nexus is no longer t here. On the suggestion that persons 
should be from this Ministry, while it is a good sugges tion but it has 
practical problems because this is a small Ministry which does not have its 
own officers at senior levels. Office rs are taken on deputation at senior 

 46
levels and in fact the lower staff in our  Ministry is provided by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs because we are attac hed to the Home Ministry for getting 
lower staff. We do not have officers and staff of our own and definitely we 
will consider this suggestion while we work out a re-structuring of the POE 
officers.  About corruption if there are specific cases, no sympathy is 
called for.  We have to take action.” 
4.26 He further added: 
“….the POEs have to go by the Em igration Act which recognises only 
recruiting agencies.  Service agencies are not recognised and they are not 
to be encouraged.  Touts and middlem en in the name of service agents 
cannot be tolerated.” 
4.27 During the course of evidence, t he Committee desired to know the present 
status of the action taken in respect of  the 29 complaints against Recruiting 
Agents relating to serious matter of offences referred to the 19 th Report of the 
Committee, the Secretary responded as under: 
“All these complaints are inquired into  in detail. I have the numbers. In 
2007, we had 98 complaints of which 51 have been inquired and finalised.  
Licences were cancelled in five of these cases; licences were suspended 
in seven of these cases; four cases have been referred to Vigilance 
Section for further inquiry…..We will send you a detailed note in respect of 
these cases.” 
4.28 Recently some newspapers reported t hat a section of Indian workers in 
the U.S. alleged that they  have endured ‘slave like’ working conditions in the 
labour camp of a major shipping and marine fabrication company in the U.S. after 
their recruiters ‘deceived’ them.  T he newspapers report goes on to state that 
over 600 Indian workers, 85% of them hailing from Kerala, had paid the recruiters 
Rs. 10 lakhs each in 2006 for permanent resi dent status and jobs in the U.S.  
However, the workers f ound that they have been issued H2B ‘guest workers’ 
visas, with validity of 10 months.  When asked the number of  the Indian workers 
employed by the U.S. shipping and marine fabrication company, the recruiting 

 47
agencies involved and the action taken or proposed to be taken against the 
recruiters, the Ministry has submitted in a written reply as under: 
“As reported by the Consulate general of India, Houston, in order to meet 
the labour shortage  after the Hurri cane Katrina which affected Louisinia 
and part of Mississippi in 2005, M/s Signal International, a marine 
fabrication company  with Headquarters at Pascagoula, Mississippi and 
yards at Orange/Port Arthur, Texas, re cruited, with the permission of the 
US Department of Labour, about 590 I ndian skilled workers  and brought 
to Mississippi/Texas in December 2006 on guest worker visa (H2B visa 
programme). 
M/s Dewan Consultants, 708, Sagar Tech Plaza, Andheri Kurla Road, 
Sakinaka Junction, Andheri East, Mumbai-72, a recruiting agent registered 
under the Emigration Act, 1983, is the recruiter in this case.  As per report, 
the company, M/s Signal Internati onal, was planning to recruit more 
workers from India through another registered recruiting agent, M/s 
S.Mansur and Company, Mumbai.  
The operation of the lic enses of both the recruiting agents have been 
suspended with effect from 10
th March, 2008.  The Foreign Employer, M/s 
Signal International, has been put under  Prior Approval Category.   
Further legal action against them is under consideration. 
There is no report of repatriation as  yet.  Updates fr om the Embassy of 
India in USA is awaited.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 48
PART-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Committee find that there h as been huge shortfall in utilization 
of budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs year after 
year.  Though the percentage of shortfall in budgetary utilization has come 
down considerably over the years, the fact that the shortfall was to the 
extent of 21% in 2007-08 indicates that  budgetary planning in the MOIA 
needs to be further improved.  The under utilization of funds is attributed to 
lack of planning and proper formulation of the schemes, absence of field 
level implementation agency and dependence on Indian Missions for 
activities abroad and State Governmen ts and other agencies domestically.  
The Committee hope that necessary act ion will be taken to improve 
budgetary planning and control in MOIA.      
 
2. The Committee observe that though nearly 50 per cent (Rs. 31.75 
crore) of the total allocation for the current year 2008-09 has been provided 
under Major Head 2061 – “Other Sche mes”, the Detailed Demands for 
Grants of MOIA which is required to provide all details, have not provided 
details of the ‘Other Schemes’.  The Committee are not convinced of MOIA 
Secretary’s plea that the Detailed Demands for Grants is to be read with the 
Outcome Budget where each scheme has been shown in detail.  A break-up 
of the estimates relating to each pr ogramme/ organization wherever the 
amount involved is not less than Rs . 10 lakh and the actual expenditure 
during the previous year is required to  be shown in the Detailed Demands 
for Grants.  The Committee desire the M OIA to present in fu ture all details 
in the Demands for Grants in terms of the guidelines of the Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
3. The Committee regret to observe that even three years after the 
creation of this Ministry, it still do es not have its own officers at senior 
levels who are taken on deput ation and for lower staff they have to depend 

 49
on the Ministry of Home Affairs.  The  Committee also feel that there is 
shortage of manpower which is evident from the fact that as against the 
sanctioned strength of 195 persons, the Ministry is having only 153 
persons as on 31 March 2008.  It is obvious  that it would be difficult for the 
Ministry to execute various schemes/  programmes undertaken by them.  
The Committee desire that the vacancies in the Ministry should be filled up 
expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee regret to note that though a decision to establish 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) had been taken four years ago in the year 
2004, not much headway has been made on this project so far.  Plot for the 
project was acquired only in May 2006.  Subsequently, the Ministry initiated 
action for inviting proposals for appoint ing consultants, constitution of 
Consultancy Evaluation Committee (CEC ) etc.  After the completion of 
requisite formalities, an agreemen t with NBCC was signed on 18.12.2007.  
However, construction on the project  has not yet commenced.  The 
Committee express their concern over the slow pace of progress of the 
project and recommend that the concerted efforts be made to adhere to 
time bound programme prepared for it s implementation and completion of 
the project by the end of the year  2010 as assured by the Secretary during 
the evidence.  The Committee urge that  there should be no further delay in 
this regard and would like to know fu rther details regarding activities and 
functions of the proposed Kendra. 
 
5. The allocation for Know India Progr amme (KIP) has been raised from 
Rs. 65 lakh in 2007-08 to Rs. 1 cr. in  2008-09.   However, according to 
Outcome Budget, only two Know I ndia Programmes could be arranged 
against target of three such progr ammes.  Know India Programmes are 
conducted in partnership with States and partner State Governments are 
expected to take care of th e logistics and transport in their states.  The 
Committee observe that inadequate pla nning with partner States left little 

 50
time to host the third Know India Programme.  Regrettably, even after 
passage of three years, the Minist ry is claiming that Know India 
Programme is still an evolving pr ogramme.  The Committee expect the 
MOIA to plan in advance, in consul tation with partner states and other 
stakeholders, to ensure successful c onduct of Know India Programme in 
future. 
 
6. The Committee observe that only 81 scholarships were given during 
2007-08 as against 100 slots of scholarsh ip under the Scholarship Scheme 
for Diaspora Children (SSDC).  The  MOIA has, however, proposed to 
prepare a reserve list from the ensu ing session to ensure that higher 
number of scholarships are availed.  Further, it is observed that 
scholarships are also offered by I CCR and other bodies.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend MOIA to take a ho listic and coordinated approach in 
implementing the programme in consultation with all concerned.   
 
7. The Committee observe that the Ministry launched the Overseas 
Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), a no t-for-profit trust in partnership with 
CII to serve as a “one stop shop” fo r all investment and business related 
services for potential overseas Indian investors.  During PBD, 2008, OIFC 
organized market place in which many one-on-one meetings and 
presentations were reported to have b een organized.  The Committee feel 
that the outcome of the efforts made  by OIFC can only be judged if the 
quantum of real investment flowing into  the country is known.  According 
to the Ministry, specific data on in vestments by overseas Indians is not 
maintained either by the Department  of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
(DIPP) which is the Nodal Agency on policy matters relating to foreign 
direct investments or by the Reserve Ba nk of India.  The Committee would 
like the MOIA to attempt an appropriate Management Information System to 
monitor the outcome of the efforts made under the scheme by keeping the 

 51
profile of NRIs who are in touch with OIFC and matching that with the list of 
overseas investors.   
8. The Cabinet has reportedly approved setting up of Overseas 
Employment Promotion Council to serve as a strategic think tank on 
migration matters and prepare market oriented strategies to enable the 
Indian workers to benefit from the job opportunities overseas.  The present 
proposal is stated to be that Secretar y of the Ministry will be the Chairman 
of the Council, so that there is an organic link with the Ministry.  The 
Committee suggest that once the C ouncil starts functioning with full 
fledged activities, the desirability of  having a distinguish ed non-official as 
the Chairman of the Council should be considered.   
 
9. The Committee appreciate the initiative taken by MOIA in 
implementation of its plan to enter in to bilateral MOUs with major labour 
receiving countries after almost 18 years.   The Ministry has signed an MOU 
with UAE and Kuwait in 2006-07, it h as also signed an Additional Protocol 
with Qatar to supplement the 1985 agr eement for protection and welfare of 
our workers.  The MOU with Malaysia  has reportedly been finalized and 
approved by the Cabinet and one r ound of negotiation has already been 
held with Oman.  Efforts are also reportedly being made to initiate 
negotiations with Yemen, Brunei a nd Saudi Arabia dur ing 2008-09.  The 
Committee hope that the MOIA will simult aneously strive to enter into such 
agreements with other major labour receiving countries. 
 
10. The Pre-departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation Scheme which 
has been re-designed is reportedly awaiting formal approval by the Finance 
Ministry.  The Committee desire that the matter should be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance for speedy clear ance of the scheme and MOIA should 
ensure its expeditious implementation.  
 

 52
11. The Committee regret to note that  the bill to amend the Emigration 
Act, 1983 though conceived in February 2005, is yet to be introduced in 
Parliament.  The Committee have been repeatedly emphasizing in their 
successive Reports, the urgent need to amend the Emigration Act.  The 
Committee regret to note that the am endment bill which is intended to 
ensure and protect the interest of migrant workers has suffered such a 
delay.  The Committee desire that there should be no further delay and 
expect that as assured by the Secretar y, MOIA, the amendment Bill will be 
introduced in Parliament in the next session.   
 
12. The Committee understand that the essential requirements for 
emigration clearance are not uniforml y being implemented as per the 
provisions of Emigration Act by a ll Protector of Emigrants (POEs) 
especially by the POE office, Mumba i.  POEs are reportedly entertaining 
Service Agents on behalf of Recruiti ng Agents (RAs).  This differential 
interpretation of procedures provides scope for corruption in POEs and a 
nexus between RAs and POEs.  The Commi ttee desire MOIA to take urgent 
and effective steps to stem the rot creeping into the system.  They also 
desire that clear directions be issu ed to POEs for uniform application of 
provisions of Emigration Act. 
 
13. The Committee in their Sixteenth  Report on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry for the year 2007-08 had recommended that there should be a 
mechanism for taking effective preven tive measures and other steps to 
check corruption in the emigration o ffices and to improve the emigration 
process while making it more transparen t.  The MOIA in their Action Taken 
Replies had informed that the posts of POE at Delhi, Mumbai & Chennai 
had been upgraded to the level of Deput y Secretary/ Director while those at 
Thiruvananthapuram and Hyderabad had been upgraded to the level of 
Under Secretary in order to ensure be tter supervision, control and greater 
accountability.  However, it appears th at the posts in the remaining POE 

 53
offices have not been upgraded so far.  The recent case of CBI raid in the 
office of POE, Chandigarh has brought  out the rampant corruption in the 
emigration office.  The Committee desire  that the posts in the remaining 
offices of POE may also be considered  for upgradation to an appropriate 
level to check such cases of corruption.   The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
11 April, 2008                                            Chairman,  
22 Chaitra, 1930(Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 

 54
Appendix- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
HELD ON 1st April, 2008 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to  1300 hrs. in Room No. 62, 
Parliament House. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
6. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
7. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
8. Shri Vanlalzawma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Smt Prema Cariappa 
10. Dr. Ram Prakash 
11. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
12. Dr. Karan Singh 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director  
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary  
3. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary  
 

 55
 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
 
 
1.  Shri K. Mohandas  - Secretary 
2.  Shri N. Bala Baskar  - Addl. Secretary & FA 
3.  Shri G. Gurucharan  - Joint Secretary (FS) 
4.   Shri J. Panda   - Protector General of        
          E m i g r a n t s  ( P G E )   
5  Shri D.N. Srivastava  - Joint Secretary (DS)  
6.  Shri Arun Chatterjee  - Director (Finance) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Mi nistry of Overseas Indian Affairs to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Chairman then drew attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(I) 
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs in connecti on with examination of the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2008-2009. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 56
Appendix- II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD  
ON 11TH APRIL, 2008  
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs.  to 1600 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 53, Parliament House.  
  
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
6. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
7. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
8. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
9. Dr. Karan Singh 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Director 
3.   Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 

 57
 
4. The Committee then took up for c onsideration the draft Report on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 
2008-2009. The Committee adopted the sa me, subject to the following 
additions/modifications:  
 
(i) In Recommendation No. 3, the following sentence to be 
deleted
: 
“……The Committee, therefore urge that MOIA should have its 
own cadre…..”   
(ii) In Recommendation No.4, the following sentence to be 
added at the end: 
 “….and would like to know furt her details regarding activities 
and functions of the proposed Kendra”   
(iii) In Recommendation No. 5, the word “…..improper 
planning…..” should be substituted with the word  
“…..inadequate planning…..” 
(iv) In Recommendation No. 6, the following sentence to be 
deleted
: 
“…..The shortfall in utilization is attributed to candidates opting 
the one which is more suitable to  them and non-acceptance of 
offer by all candidates…..” 
(v) In Recommendation No. 13, the following line to be deleted : 
“…..The Committee also suggest Po Es should be from the 
cadre of MOIA so that the Mini stry can have effective control 
over PoEs…..” 
 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report 
after factual verification from the c oncerned Ministry and present the same 
to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 