 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
                                  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 12 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
(Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Tenth 
report (14th Lok sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2006-2007) 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
(Action taken on the recommendations contained in the 10th report 
(14th Lok sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2006-2007) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2006  
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2006/Agrhayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 59  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2006 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by_______ 

 
CONTENTS 
 
          
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2006-2007…………………………….iii  
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………... iv 
    
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………...1 
       
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations that have been   
accepted by the Government ………………………….…10 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations / Obse rvations     which    the 
 Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
 Government’s replies……………………………………….26 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations / Ob servations  in  respect of 
which   replies  of  Government   have   not been  
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration………………..…….……………………………. 27 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations / Obse rvations  in  respect  of  
which  final  replies  of  the  government  are still  
awaited………………………………………………………..28 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 
14.12.2006. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations / observations contained  in  the  
10th Report of the Standing Committee on External  
Affairs (14th Lok Sabha)…………… …………… …. ………29 
 
III. Statement of Recommendations/Observations……………30 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
5. Shri A.V. Bellarmine 
6. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
7. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
8. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
10. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
11. Shri Sebastian Paul 
12. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
13. Shri P.A. Sangma 
14. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
15. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
16. Shri M. Shivanna 
17. Shri Vanlalzawma 
18. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
26. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
31. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia* 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri Devender Singh  - Director 
Shri Ashok Balwani  - Under Secretary 
Shri Lalkithang  - Committee Officer 
*Nominated w.e.f 3rd December, 2006 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs (2006-2007) ha ving 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
12th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on action taken by Go vernment on the Recommendations 
contained in the 10 th Report (14th Lok sabha) of the C ommittee on Demands for Grants  
of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2006-2007. 
2. The 10th Report was presented to both t he Houses of  Parliament on 18 th May, 
2006. T he Action Taken Replies  of the Government on all t he 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 29 th August, 
2006. 
3. The Draft Report on the bas is of Ac tion Taken Replies  was  considered  and 
adopted by the Standing Committee on External A ffairs (2005-2006) at their sitting held 
on 14 th December, 2006. The minutes of t he sitting of the Committee have been 
reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action tak en by Government on the recommendations  
contained in the 10 th Report of the Standing Commi ttee on External Affairs (14 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
15th December, 2006                              Chairman,                 
24 Agrahayana, 1928(Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by Government 
on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 10 th Report of Standing 
Committee on External Affair s on Demands for Grants for the year 2006-2007 in 
respect of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs.  The 10 th Report of the 
Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 18th May, 2006. 
2. The action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on all the Reco mmendations/ Observations contained in 
the report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/ Observations , which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 
Total-10 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations  which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Nil 
 
Total-Nil 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Recommendations/ Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Nil  
Total- Nil 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Recommendations/ Observations  in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Nil 
Total- Nil 
Chapter-V 

 
 
3. The Com mittee desire that  Action Taken Notes on  the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be  
furnished expeditiously. The Committee further desire that in cases w here, 
in case, it is not possible for the Ministr y to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit , the matter should be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
4. The Committee will no w deal with the action ta ken by the Government 
on some of their observations/recommendations. 
 
Overall Budgetary Proposals 
Recommendation No. 1 
5. The Committee observed that Rs. 7 crore was allocated at BE stage in 
2004-05 which was enhanced to Rs. 10 crore at RE stage. However the actual 
expenditure (Rs. 6.16 cror e) was less tha n what wa s projected at BE and RE 
stage. In sharp contrast, the allocation made at BE stage during 2005-06 was Rs. 
35 crore which was reduced to Rs. 19.10 crore at RE stage. The projected actual 
expenditure for the year 2005- 06, according to the Ministry, is likely to be Rs. 18 
crore, which again is less than the alloc ation made at BE and RE stage. Despite 
the Ministry not having been able to sp end their budgetary a llocations during the 
last two years, the Budgetary allocation of the Ministry during BE (2006-07) stage 
is RS. 38 crore. It is also observed that there has been huge variation between 
BE and RE during the last two years. 
 The Committee are, therefor e, of the view that the Ministry have not been 
able to make a realistic projection of t heir budgetary requirem ents over the last 
two years as there have been substantia l unspent balances and re-appropriation 
of funds from one head to another head.  The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry must make the projection as  realistic as possible and spend funds  
properly and judiciously within the allocation. 
 2

 
6. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“The Ministry being at a formative stage was short of staff which was one of 
the reasons that the schemes/projects of  this Ministry could not be pursued 
in right ear nest. Further, the schemes  were also at conceptual st age and 
could not be formalized.  Now with most  posts of officers filled and regular  
or outsourced supporting staff in position, and a number of schemes 
finalised the Ministry is better placed to implement its agenda for action. The 
responsibility to achieve the target s has also been entrusted to the 
concerned Divisional head as per the revised allocation of work. It has been 
impressed upon all the Divis ional Heads to take up the necessary steps for  
implementation of the schemes/targets right from the be ginning of the 
Financial Year 2006-2007 so t hat the funds allotted for the purpose ar e 
utilized.” 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006]   
 
7. The Com mittee note the repetitive explanation furnished by  the 
Ministry and hope that the Ministry  steps out of the stage of nascenc y 
early. It hardl y needs reiteration that  the Ministry  needs consolidation of  
efforts around clear aims and concer ted action to achieve the targets 
within the stipulated time frame.  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
8. The Committee were appalled to note t hat even almost after two years 
the Ministry is still in adequately staffed. The Committee feel that no concrete 
steps have been take n by the Ministry in th e last one year to fill up the vac ant 
posts. The fact that of the 63 posts that have already been created only 24 are in 
position is a telling evidence of the lethargic approach of the Ministry in filling up 
the vacant posts. 
The Committee noted that lack of st aff has apparently been the reason for  
many of the planned activities getting deferred or not gaining momentum. 
 3

The Com mittee, therefore, desired t hat the Ministry should take some 
concrete steps towards filling up the al ready created posts immediately  so t hat 
the proposed agenda/ activities could be taken up during the ensuing year. 
 
9. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“MOIA have at the headquarters 3 init ially created posts, 66 newly created 
posts, 24 posts transferred from Minist ry of Labour alongwith transfer of 
PGE’s office and 12 posts transferred fr om MEA. Out of the total 105 posts, 
48 posts are filled. In addition, we have 46 numbers of outsourced 
supporting staff. While most  post of officers (Under Secretary and above)  
which are  fille d o n a centraliz ed bas is by De partment of Personnel & 
Training (DOP&T) hav e since be en filled, it has not be en possible to fill up  
posts of Section Officer and below whic h are filled on a decentralized basis 
in various cadres. DOP&T hav e not so  far allotted a cadre to MOIA. Our 
request to be a part of DOP&T c adre or to have a s eparate cadre has not 
been agreed to. Therefore, after consulti ng Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), 
we have r equested DOP&T to allow a common cadre of MHA and MOIA . 
Once this issue is sorted out, it would be easy to get regular supporting 
staff. Once regular staff joins, equi valent number of outsourced supporting 
staff will be reduced. In the Officer ori ented system adopted by the Ministry, 
work is basically carried out by the Officers who are getting support of either 
regular or outsourced staff. Thus t he problem due to shortage of staff has 
been contained.” 
 [MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
10. The Com mittee regret to note that  in spite of most posts of the  
Officers being filled up on a centralized  basis by DoP&T, a full complement 
of suppor ting staff is y et to be in  place. The Committee feel that the 
Ministry may not have done enough to support its case of having a cadre of 
its own. The Committee recommend that the Ministry must again appr oach 
DoP&T with proper justification for a separate cadre or settle for a common 
cadre with Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee hope t he Government 
 4

would surel y make available staff an d resources to its  Minis try for 
Overseas Indian Affairs failing w hich it  w ill remain a mere nomenclature 
unable to gain the faith and confiden ce of millions of Overseas Indians and 
Indians who flock to the offices of Protector Of Emigrants (POEs). 
 
Capital Outlay for Public Works 
Recommendation No. 3 
11. The C ommittee w ere pl eased to note t hat the M inistry of U rban 
Development in addition to pl ot no 15A & 15 B has  also allotted plot no 15D in 
Chanakyapuri to MOIA for construction of the Pravasi Bhar atiya Kendra (PBK)  
vide order dated 24.2. 06. The Committee, however, r egret to note that phy sical 
possession of these plots are yet to be hand ed over to the Ministry. The Ministry 
informed the Committee that there is a li ttle bit of unauthorized structure that are 
to be removed and expects to get posses sion of the land by  the end of April,  
2006. The Committee desire that  the Ministry should take immediate posses sion 
of the land and take steps to engage suitable consultants for preparation of  
detailed project report and implementation plan. A time bound programme may 
be drawn up for completion of the pr oject which may be placed befor e the 
Committee. The Committee further desire that they may be informed about the 
progress made in this regard from time to time.  
 
12. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“The Minis try took possession of the plots of land 15A, 15B and 15D in 
Chanakyapuri allotted by the Ministry of Urban  Development for the 
construction of Pravasi Bharatiy a Kendra on 12.5.2006. Administrative and 
expenditure sanction has already been issued to the CPWD for providing 
wire fencing and round the clock security at  the site. Separately, action is in 
progress for appointment of a consultant for the project and for commencing 
implementation.” 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006]     
 
 5

13. With regard to the construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra the 
Committee had recommend ed that the Gover nment en gage suit able 
consultant for preparation of detaile d project report and implementation 
plan, and a draw time bound programme for completion of the project. The 
Committee, how ever, note that the Government, instead of providing  
concrete details, chose to repl y that ’action is in progress’. The committee 
reiterate that the Government shoul d draw up a time bound programme for 
completing the project and place the same before the Co mmittee at the 
earliest.        
Recommendation No. 5 
14. The Committee noted that the Ministry intend to amend the Emigration 
Act as the existing provisions in the Emigration Act, 1983 are not sufficient  
enough to protect the interests of the emigrant workers. 
The Com mittee were of the view t hat the existing section 24 of the 
Emigration Act, 1983 which provides for mandatory imprisonment for a minimum  
period of six months and a minimum fine of Rs. 1,000/- in respect of agencies  
engaged in illegal recrui tment is merely a pittance and is not in proportion to the 
crime illegal recruiters commits. The fa ct that during the years 2004 and 2005 
alone, 451 workers were left in the lu rch by the recruiting agenc ies underscores 
the need to amend the Act. The Ministry  must incorporate stringent punishment 
and harsher penalties for the illegal re cruitment agencies. Th e Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Act should be amended to tighten the emigration rule by 
making the penal provisions  harsher to  control ille gal re cruitments. Th e 
Committee further desire that the Am endment Bill should be introduc ed in 
Parliament by the monsoon ses sion after changing the necess ary provisions in 
the Act. 
15. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“A comprehensive proposal for amendmen ts to the existing Emigration Act  
has been drafted to make the penal pr ovisions more stringent, lay down t he 
responsibilities of the recruiting agents and foreign employer s and other 
stakeholders in clear terms. The proposed amendments envisage stringent 
 6

penalties for the illeg al recruitment  agencies. The proposed a mendments 
also envis age setting up of Emigrant Welfare Fund. Detailed provisions  
have been incorporat ed r egarding the management of  the fund. There is 
also a provision lay ing down the role  of the Central Government in 
promotion of orderly  emigration and protection and  welfare of emigrants. 
Similarly, a provision has been added to prescribe the functions of the 
Indian Missions. 
A draft Cabinet Note together with t he draft amendments to  the emigration 
Act, 1983 have been circulated to Mini stry of Home Affairs, Labour & 
Employment, Ministry of Law & Justic e (Deptt. Of Legal Affair s), Ministry of 
External Affairs and Ambassadors of t he Gulf countries and Malaysia. Their  
comments are awaited.”  
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
 
16. The Emigration Act as it exists fails in its purpose and needs 
drastic amendments. The Committee, th erefore, w elcome the proposal to 
comprehensively amend the existing Emigration Act. The Committe e also 
note that there is a proposal  to set up Emigrant Welfare Fund in the 
proposed amendment. The Committee d esire that the process shoul d be 
expedited and the Bill be in troduced in Parliament w ithout further loss of 
time. 
Regular Infrastructure for the Offices of POEs 
  Recommendation No. 6 
17. The Committee observed that there has been a consistent and s teady 
increase in the labour outflow from I ndian which requires emigration clearance 
from the year 2001. The Committee are of  the v iew that only 8 offic es of  
Protectors of Emigrants may not be sufficient to process emigration clearance for 
persons emigrating for employment abroad. The Committee, therefore, would like 
the Ministry to explor e the possibility of  opening more offices of the Protector of 
Emigrants at places such as Lucknow, Patna, Guwahati and Ahmedabad to cater 
to the needs of the increasing emigrant labour. 
 7

The Com mittee were also of the vi ew that the Ministry is spending 
substantial amount of money on  account of rent for its 4 offices of Protectors of 
Emigrants (POEs) which ar e operating from rented premises. The Com mittee 
feel that the Ministry should wor k towards accommodating these offices in t heir 
own building and utilize the rental money for infrastructural development of  the 
offices. The Committee further recommend that the staff st rengths in each of the 
offices of the POEs should be augm ented and the existing vacancies filled 
immediately. The Ministry should also ta ke up, on priority basis, the project for 
modernizing and computeriz ing all emigration offices across the country to 
facilities n etworking and sharin g of dat es between offices of POEs and  with 
Indian missions abroad. This is all the more important because in the absence of 
an electronic environment the proposed smart card would have no meaning. The 
Ministry should also s tart the project to  streamline the emigra tion process during 
the current year.  
18. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
• A proposal for opening of new of fices of Protectors of Emigrants is under  
examination. 
• The suggestion of the Committee for shif ting the offices of Protectors of 
Emigrations to Government owned buildings has  been noted and 
possibilities in this regard will be exp lored in consultation with the Ministry 
of Urban Development. 
• Efforts are being ma de to fill u p the ex isting vacancies in the offices of 
Protectors of Emigrants by circulation of vacancies. A proposal to upgrade 
the posts of POE from the level of Se ction officer/Under Secretary to the 
level of Under Secretary/Deputy Secretary to make them move effective is 
under process. 
• A proposal for modernization and comput erization of all POE offices to 
facilitate networking and sharin g of data between the offices of PGoE/  
POE and with Indian Missions abroad with through the National Institute of 
Smart Government has already been initiated. 
 8

• The streamlining of the Emigration procedure to make it simple and 
transparent is underway and will be implemented during the current year. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
                            
19. The Committee welcome the proposal of Government to examine 
the possibility of op ening new offices of Protector of Emigrants(PoE). The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must follow  up on this 
commitment and op en the PO E Offices in Lucknow, Patna, Guw ahati and 
Ahmedabad to cater to the needs of th e emigrant labourers i n these cities. 
The Com mittee a lso recommend that the Minis try should expedite the 
process o f shifting the offices of Po Es to government ow ned building in 
consultation with the Ministry of Urban Development. 
The Committee had earlier recommended the Government to fill up the 
existing vacancies in the offices of PO Es. The Committee regret to note 
that even after a lapse of six months, no efforts seem to have been made to 
fill up the vacancies. The Committee reiterate the need for taking immediate 
steps for filling up the existing vacanci es. The process of modernizing and 
computerizing all PoE offices also needs to be followed up expeditiously. 
 9

 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
 ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee had observed that Rs. 7 crore was allocated at BE stage in 
2004-05 which was enhanced to Rs. 10 crore at RE stage. However the actual 
expenditure (Rs. 6.16 cror e) was less tha n what wa s projected at BE and RE 
stage. In sharp contrast, the allocation made at BE stage during 2005-06 was Rs. 
35 crore which was reduced to Rs. 19.10 crore at RE stage. The projected actual 
expenditure for the year 2005- 06, according to the Ministry, is likely to be Rs. 18 
crore, which again is less than the alloc ation made at BE and RE stage. Despite 
the Ministry not having been able to sp end their budgetary a llocations during the 
last two years, the Budgetary allocation of the Ministry during BE (2006-07) stage 
is RS. 38 crore. It is also observed that there has been huge variation between 
BE and RE during the last two years. 
The Committee were, therefor e, of the view that t he Ministry have not been 
able to make a realistic projection of t heir budgetary requirem ents over the last 
two years as there have been substantia l unspent balances and re-appropriation 
of funds from one head to another head.  The Committee had recommended that 
the Ministry must make the projection as  realistic as possible and spen d funds 
properly and judiciously within the allocation. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry being at a formative stage was  short of staff which was one of  
the reasons that the schemes /projects of this Ministry  could not be pursued in 
right earnest. Further, the schem es were also at conceptual stage and could not  
be formalized.  Now with most posts of of ficers filled and regul ar or outsourced 
supporting staff in position, and a number of schemes finalised the Ministry is 
better placed to implement its agenda for action. The responsibility to achieve the 
targets have also been entrusted to the concerned Divis ional head as per the 
 10

revised allocation of work. It has been impressed upon all the Divisional Heads to 
take up the necessary steps for implementation of the schemes/targets right from 
the beginning of the Financ ial Year 2006-2007 so that the funds allotted for the 
purpose are utilized. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006]   
 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee were appalled to note that  even almost after two years the 
Ministry is still ina dequately staffed. The Committee felt  that no concrete steps  
have been taken by  the Ministry in the last  one year t o fill up th e vacant posts. 
The fact that of the 63 posts that have already bee n created only 24 are in 
position, is a telling evidence of the lethargic approach of the Ministry in filling up 
the vacant posts. 
The Committee noted that lack of st aff has apparently been the reason for  
many of the planned activities getting deferred or not gaining momentum. 
The Com mittee, therefore, desired t hat the Ministry should take some 
concrete steps towards filling up the al ready created posts immediately  so t hat 
the proposed agenda/ activities could be taken up during the ensuing year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MOIA have at the headquarters 3 init ially created posts, 66 newly created 
posts, 24 posts transferred from Ministry  of Labour alongwith tr ansfer of PGE’s  
office and 12 posts transferred from MEA. Out of the total 105 posts, 48 posts 
are filled. In addit ion, we have 46 numbers of out sourced supporting staff. While 
most post of officers (Under Secret ary and abov e) which a re filled o n a  
centralized basis  by Depar tment of Personnel & Trai ning (DOP&T) have since 
been filled, it has not been po ssible to fill up posts of Section Officer and be low 
which are filled on a decentralized basis in various cadres. DOP&T have not so 
far allotted a cadre to MOIA. Our request to be a part of DOP&T cadre or to have 
a separate cadre has  not been agreed to. Theref ore, after consulting Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA), we have r equested DOP&T to allo w a c ommon cadre of 
 11

MHA and MOIA. Once this issue is sorted  out, it would be eas y to get regular  
supporting staff. Once regul ar staff joins,  equivale nt  number of outsourced 
supporting staff will be reduced. In the Officer oriented system adopted by  the 
Ministry, work is basically carried out by  the Officers who are getting support of 
either regular or outsourced staff. Thus the problem due to shortage of staff has  
been contained. 
 [MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
  
 The Committee were pleased to not e that the Mini stry of Urban 
Development in addition to pl ot no 15A & 15 B has  also allotted plot no 15D in 
Chanakyapuri to MOIA for construction of  the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK)  
vide order dated 24.2.06. The Committee, howev er, regretted to note that 
physical possession of these plots are yet to be handed over to the Ministry. The 
Ministry informed the Committ ee that there is a little bit of unauthorized structure 
that are to be removed and ex pects to get possession of  the land by the end of 
April, 2006. The Committee desired that the Ministry should take immediat e 
possession of the land and take steps to engage suitable consultants  for 
preparation of detailed pr oject report and implement ation plan.  A time bound 
programme may be drawn up for completion  of the proj ect which may be placed 
before the Committee. The Com mittee further desired that they may be informed 
about the progress made in this regard from time to time.  
   
Reply of the Government 
 
The Minist ry took possession of the plots of land 15A,  15B and 15D in 
Chanakyapuri allotted by the Ministry of  Urban Development for the construction 
of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra on 12.5.2 006. Administrative and e xpenditure 
sanction has already  been issued to the CPWD for providing wire fencing and 
round the clock security at the site. Separately, action is in progress for 
appointment of a consultant for the project and for commencing implementation. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006]                           
 12

 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Com mittee noted that a proposal  of Rs. 2 crore has been made 
during BE 2006-07 under the head ‘Advertising & Public ity’. The Ministry has 
accordingly drawn up a media plan for the year 2006-07 for publicity of the 
Ministry’s various plans & schemes. The Committee had appreciated that the 
campaign would be c arried out both in the national and international media both 
in print and electronic.  The Committee were of the view that the Advertising and 
Publicity ef forts of the Mini stry will play a  very vital role in p opularizing the 
proposed plans & sc hemes and their success would greatly depend on how 
effectively they are publicized. The Committee were also of the vi ew that intense 
publicity campaign sh ould particularly be made to create awareness on is sues 
related to marriages to overseas Indians. The Committee, therefore,  
recommended that t he guidance book let and other documentation that are 
proposed to be brought out should be made av ailable in regional languages for  
better sensitization, especially among wo men. The committee also wanted the 
Ministry to widely disseminate among ov ersea Indians infor mation regarding 
matters of interest to Overseas Indi ans such as investment opportunities, 
scholarship schemes, promotion of Dias pora knowledge network, promotion of  
electronic remittance facility etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The instructions of the Committ ee have been noted. The Ministry had 
organized a National Consultation on Marriages of Indian Women to NRIs on 18th 
Feb., 2006 in which around 120 delegates including NGOs, Diplomats, State 
government representatives, lawyers, etc. participate d to address the problems 
of Overseas Marriages. Based on the sugge stions received the Ministry plans to 
launch an awareness campaign to address t he issue. An action plan has been 
drawn up on the following lines: 
 
 13

• The Ministry would finalize and publish vernacular editions of the guidance 
booklet on Marriages to Overseas I ndians incorporating suggestions  
received during the National Consultation during the current year. 
• The Minist ry has already launched its awareness  and sensitization 
campaign through telecasting of electr onic scrolls on regional net work of 
TV, initially in the States of Punjab and Andhra Pradesh. 
• Pamphlet versions of  the booklet is  proposed to be di stributed through 
public offices, airports, travel agencies, NGOs, colleges  etc. in 
consultation with the State Governments. 
• It has been decided to start a sensitiz ation and publicity campaign before 
the launch of the booklet inv olving professionals, women’s organizations 
and State government agencies including Panchayats.  
(ii) The Ministry also organized a Regional Workshop at Chandigarh on 
20th & 21 st of June 2006 regarding “Problems relating to NRI Marriages & 
suggested measures” to create awarenes s on this issue in partnership wit h 
NCW. A similar workshop is proposed to be held in Thir uvananthapuram, Kerala 
on Sept 13-14, 2006   
Apart from distribution,  both in India and abroad, of a monthly newsletter 
‘Overseas Indian’, t he Ministry is br inging out two guidanc e booklets, viz. 
‘Handbook for Overseas Indians’ and a compendium on investment opportunities 
for Overseas Indians  which contains detailed information regarding invest ment 
opportunities, scholarship schemes, etc. for the benefit of Overseas Indians. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee noted that the Mi nistry intend to amend the Emigration Ac t 
as the existing provisions in the Emigration Act, 1983 are not sufficient enough to 
protect the interests of the emigrant workers. 
The Com mittee were of the view t hat the existing section 24 of the 
Emigration Act, 1983 which provides for mandatory imprisonment for a minimum  
period of six months and a minimum fine of Rs. 1,000/- in respect of agencies  
 14

engaged in illegal recrui tment is merely a pittance and is not in proportion to the 
crime illegal recruiters commits. The fa ct that during the years 2004 and 2005 
alone, 451 workers were left in the lu rch by the recruiting agenc ies underscores 
the need to amend the Act. The Ministry  must incorporate stringent punishment 
and harsher penalties for the illegal re cruitment agencies. Th e Committee, 
therefore, had desired that the Act should be amended to tighten the emigration 
rule by making the penal provis ions harsher to control illegal recruitments. The 
Committee further desired that the Amendm ent Bill should be introduc ed in 
Parliament by the monsoon ses sion after changing the necess ary provisions in 
the Act. 
Reply of the Government 
A comprehensive proposal for amendments to the existing Emigration Act  
has been drafted to make the penal prov isions more stringent, lay down t he 
responsibilities of the recruiting agents and foreign em ployers and ot her 
stakeholders in clear terms. The proposed amendments envisage stringen t 
penalties for the illeg al recruitment agencies. The proposed a mendments als o 
envisage setting up of Emigrant Welfare Fund. Detailed prov isions have been 
incorporated regarding the management of  the fund. There is also a provision 
laying down the role of the Central Government in promotion of orderly 
emigration and protection and welfare of emigr ants. Similarly, a provision has 
been added to prescribe the functions of the Indian Missions. 
 A draft Cabinet Note together with the draft amendments to the emigration 
Act, 1983 have been circulated to Mini stry of Home Affairs, Labo ur & 
Employment, Ministry  of Law & Justic e (Deptt. Of Legal Affair s), Ministry of 
External Affairs and Ambassa dors of the Gulf countries and Malaysia. Their 
comments are awaited.  
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee had observed that there has been a c onsistent and steady 
increase in the labour outflow from I ndian which requires emigration clearance 
from the year 2001. The Com mittee were of the view that only 8 offic es of 
 15

Protectors of Emigrants may not be sufficient to process emigration clearance for 
persons emigrating for employment abr oad. The Committee, therefore, wanted 
the Ministry to explor e the possibility of  opening more offices of the Protector of 
Emigrants at places such as Lucknow, Patna, Guwahati and Ahmedabad to cater 
to the needs of the increasing emigrant labour. 
The Com mittee were also of the vi ew that the Ministry is spending 
substantial amount of money on  account of rent for its 4 offices of Protectors of 
Emigrants (POEs) which are operating from rented premises. The Committee felt 
that the Ministry should work towards acc ommodating these offices in their  own 
building and utilize the rental money for infrastructural development of the offices. 
The Com mittee further recommended that the staff strengths in each of the 
offices of the POEs should be augm ented and the existing vacancies filled 
immediately. The Ministry should also ta ke up, on priority basis, the project for 
modernizing and computeriz ing all emigration offices across the country to 
facilities n etworking and sharin g of dat as between offices of POEs and  with 
Indian missions abroad. This is all the more important because in the absence of 
an electronic environment the proposed smart card would have no meanin g. The 
Ministry should also s tart the project to  streamline the emigra tion process during 
the current year.  
Reply of the Government 
• A proposal for opening of new of fices of Protectors of Emigrants is under  
examination. 
• The suggestion of the Committee for shif ting the offices of Protectors of 
Emigrations to Government ow ned buildings has  been noted and 
possibilities in this regard will be exp lored in consultation with the Ministry 
of Urban Development. 
• Efforts are being ma de to fill u p the existing vacancies in the offices of 
Protectors of Emigrants by circulation of vacancies. A proposal to upgrade 
the posts of POE from the level of Se ction officer/Under Secretary to the 
level of Under Secretary/Deputy Secretary to make them move effective is 
under process. 
 16

• A proposal for modernization and comput erization of all POE offices to 
facilitate networking and sharin g of data between the offices of PGoE/  
POE and with Indian Missions abroad with through the National Institute of 
Smart Government has already been initiated. 
• The streamlining of the Emigration procedure to make it simple and 
transparent is underway and will be implemented during the current year. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee were extremely concer ned to note that many emigrant  
labourers c ontinue to get duped by both registered and unregistered recruiting 
agents. The Committee found it  alarming to note t hat there is a degree of 
connivance between the agents and officials of the Pr otectors of Emigrants. The 
Committee desired t hat the Ministry s hould immediately undertake vigilance 
measures in all the PoE offices to id entify officials  whos e integrity may be 
doubtful. Officials who have been conniving with agents in cheating emigrant 
workers should be accorded the most  stringent punishment and criminal 
procedure initiated against them. The Commi ttee noted that the Ministry in this  
regard is t hinking of certain corrective measures of scrutiny. The Commit tee 
desired that the proposed corrective meas ures and its resultant impact may be 
placed before them. 
The Com mittee were deeply c oncerned about the increas ing number of 
complaints received against the registered recruiting agents. The Com mittee 
desire that the Ministry should properly  scrutinize the credentials of  the 
Recruiting Agents before granting them license. Another issue of serious concern 
to the Committee is the involvement of unregistered agents in the labour rackets. 
The Committee were of the view that such rackets are thriving due to the lac k of 
awareness among the public. The Ministry  should therefore undertake massive 
publicity drive in the media to  publicise names of ille gal agents as well as lega l 
agents who are involved in labo ur rackets so that prospective emigrant workers 
may not approach them for their services. 
 
 17

Reply of the Government 
Complaints are received against r egistered as  well as unregistered 
recruiting agents from time to time. Co mplaints are received from various  
quarters including Indian Mission s that the workers are exp loited/ or that there is  
breach of contract, substitution of the employment contract etc. 
The mechanism for regulating and disci plining the recruiting agents is  
already in place in the Emigration Act 1983 .  To hav e a check on the registered 
recruiting agents, they are required to submit (i) demand letter (ii) power of 
attorney and (iii) specimen employment (all in original) from the foreign employer 
for obtaining emigration clearance in respect of the workers recruited by them. In 
the case of vulnerable categories of workers, i.e. unskilled labourers and 
housemaids the employment documents are requir ed to be attested by the 
concerned Indian Missions. Registered  Recruiting Agents,  against whom  
complaints are received, are served show-cause notices and directed to 
settle/resolve the complaints within 15 da ys and if t he Recruiting Agent fails to 
respond or his reply  is not found satisfac tory, his registration certificate is  
suspended for 30 day s. If the complaint sti ll remains unresolved, the registration 
certificate is suspended for indefinite period and action is initiated for cancellation 
of his registration certificate and forfeiture of bank guarantee. Further, in order to 
properly sc rutinize the credentials of t he Recruiting Agents, a notification has  
been issued by the Government under wh ich the persons who have applied for 
grant of registration certif icates under the Emigration  Act, 1983 are interviewed 
personally by the Protector-General of Emigrants before granting them licenses. 
Recruitment of Indian national f or empl oyment abroad without registration 
certificate is an offence under s ection 10  of the Emigration Act , 1983 which is 
punishable under section 24. Complaints against unregistered recruiting agents 
basically relate to ov ercharging, cheating, non-sending of workers for overseas 
employment and non-return of their pas sports etc. The com plaints against  
unregistered recruiting agents are refe rred to the concerned State Polic e 
authorities for investigation and action for violation of section 10 of the Emigration 
Act and provisions of other laws, as applicable. 
 18

A proposal to amend the Emigration Ac t 1983 is being considered in the 
Ministry, which will also cover the aspect of strengthening the provisions  relating 
to regulation of Recruiting Agent s. The complaints received against the various  
POE officials are closely being monitored in  the Vigilance Unit of the Ministry.  
Recently, after complaints received from various quarters, disciplinary action in 
respect of one of the POE and one staff member of the POE has been initiated 
and the concerned POE transferred back to  his parent department. It is also 
proposed to conduct vigilance audit of th e different POE offices by a c ombined 
team of CVC and MOIA officials to tighten the functioning of the POE offices.   
In so far as public ity is concerned, a campaign is being  plan ned to be 
undertaken through radio and TV channels in t he form of slogans relating to (i)  
misuse of visit visa; (ii) unregistered agents and (iii) housemaids. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Com mittee observed that the empl oyment of Indian workers abroad 
helps to earn foreign exchange. Du ring 2004-05 t he remittances of Indian 
workers was over $20 billion whereas total FDI to India was only $3-4 billion. It is 
assessed that a major proportion of this is  contributed by the increasing number 
of unskille d and semi-skilled I ndian workers employed in the Gulf countries,  
Malaysia and Singapore. Despit e their huge  contribution, emig rant workers are 
facing exploitations in different forms and the government seem to be a mute 
spectator to all th is. The workers  are agitated about p oor working conditions, ill-
treatment and mis-guidance by r ecruiting agents. The Committee also noted that 
there was a big demonstration in Dubai re cently, in which workers complaints  
that they were not getting what was promised to them. Sizeable number of Indian 
workers are thus exploited both in Indi a and abroad. The Committee felt that the 
Ministry should initiate to get labour agreement signed with countries where there 
are large number of Indian wo rkers in order to put a check to the exploitation of  
Indian workers. The Committee also desi red that the draft labour agreement 
under consideration with Kuwait and Malaysia should be pursued strongly so that 
an agreement can be reac hed with both countries. The Committee further  
 19

desired that the Ministry should also purs ue with countries particularly in the Gulf 
region for labour agreement so that Indian workers can be protected from further 
exploitation. 
In an attempt to protect the vulnerable workers from exploitation the Ministry 
has been saying that they would introduce an electronic emigration card/ a smart 
card which will contain all details pertaining to the worker. The smart card project, 
however, is yet to be started. The chai rman of the Semi Condu ctor Ltd. (SCL),  
the PSU entrusted with exec uting the smart card pr oject, had expressed s ome 
difficulty in executing this project. The Committee had regretted to note the delay  
in implementing this project. Now that SCL will not be able to execute the project, 
the committee, desire that the Ministry  s hould immediately  look for another 
company which has the technology and c apability to execute the project. The 
Committee wanted that the Ministry must speed up the process of issuing smart 
cards to emigrant workers. 
Reply of the Government 
 It has been noted that a large number of Indian wor kers are exploited by  
foreign employers and unscrupulous recrui ting agents. It is, therefore, important 
that sustained efforts are made to negotiate and conclude Labour agreements  
with the major Labour receiving countries in Gulf and in South  East Asia. To 
begin with, this Ministry intends to target  the top 8 labour receiving countries for 
signing of bilateral La bour agreements wit h the UAE, the KSA,  Kuwa it, Oman, 
Bahrain, Jordan, Qatar and Malay sia. Out of these 8 countries , we already have 
agreements, even if outdated, with Qatar and Jordan. The focus of our effort is, 
therefore, on signing of MO U with the remaining 6 c ountries namely (i) UAE (ii) 
KSA (iii) Kuwait (iv) Oman (v) Bahrain an d (vi) Malaysia. The d raft MOUs whic h 
were pending with Kuwait and M alaysia Government were too s ketchy and thus  
a more comprehens ive draft MOU covering all the aspects  was required. 
Accordingly, this Ministry has drafted a model MOU and sent  to the concer ned 
Missions and the territorial div isions of Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs for  their  
comments. The comments have been receiv ed and the draft MOUs are being  
finalized. The draft MOU with Kuwait has been finalized and efforts will be made  
 20

to sign it later in the year. Similarly discussions with M alaysia are also expected 
to commence soon. 
The Minis try has initiated a pr oposal for transforming emigration 
management through an e-Governance project with consultancy support from the 
National Institute of Smart Government, a not for profit company promoted by the 
Department of Information Technology, the NASSCOM and the Government of 
Andhra Pradesh.  
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee were happy to note that Mi nistry has upgraded t he Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yoja na (PBBY) , 2003 as  the PBBY,  2006 to provide broader 
coverage to the emigrant workers by ra ising the ins urance amount from Rs. 2 
lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs. The Committee were also happy to note that the Ministry is  
planning to bring thos e insured under the old scheme within the purview of the 
new scheme. The Committee also shared t he view that all those insured under  
the old scheme should be cov ered under the new scheme. The Committee 
however felt that they should not be charged any extra premium as that might act 
as a deter rent for subscription.  The Co mmittee were also of the view that  
subscription to this scheme should be made compulsory for all emigrant work ers 
so that in c ase of any ex igencies they will have some thing to fall back upon. To 
this end, the committee felt that the scheme should be widel y publicized among 
emigrant workers by highlighting its benefits. 
Reply of the Government 
 Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006 (PBBY, 2006) has been ext ended to 
those holding polic ies under the Pravas i Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2003 (PBBY,  
2003) on payment of change over cost. 
Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yo jana, 2006 is c ompulsory for all em igrant workers 
going abroad for employment. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
 21

Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Com mittee noted that the Ministry  propose to set up three overseas  
centres for Indian workers in the Gul f, Malaysia and U.S. The Committee als o 
noted that the proposal is awaiting approval of the Government and are expected 
to be operational by  October 2006. The Co mmittee felt that this is a very 
important step in the right direction to help the overseas Indians  by way o f 
providing guidance and couns elling to th em. During the examination of DFG 
(2005-06) the Ministry informed the Commi ttee about their intention to create 
posts abroad. The Committee had accordin gly obs erved also in their earlier  
Report (6 th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) that this wa s a much-felt need to help 
Overseas Indians as there have not so far been any r eciprocal gesture from the 
government side. The Committee had al so recommended that such c entres 
should be created within the time fram e then set out by the Ministry. The 
Committee, however, regretted to note t hat there have not been any follow up 
action by the Ministry in this regard. Now that the proposal has again com e up, 
the Committee desire that t he Ministry should stick  to  the new time frame of 
setting up the centres in Gulf, Malaysi a &U.S. by October , 2006. The Committee 
further desired that the centres s hould be adequately  managed by persons who 
are experts in the field of economics, investments and law. 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal to establish the overseas centers has initially be en submitted 
to the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). The CoS in its meeting held on 10.5.2006 
considered the case and has given its recommendations. Further action for  
obtaining the approval of the Cabinet to the proposal is under-way in the Ministry. 
It is expect ed that the Ministry will be a ble to commence action for setting up of 
the Centers during year. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
Recommendation No. 11 
 The Committee were pleased to note th at the Overseas Citizenship o f 
India (OCI) scheme has become operational w.e.f. 2 nd December, 2005. The 
 22

Committee also noted that the OCI schem e has been introduced by statute as a 
new category of citiz enship to facilitate life long vi sa, free travel and certain 
economic, educational and cultural benefits. The popularity of the scheme can be 
gauged from the fact that within three months of its operation, 6264 OCI 
documents have been granted. The Comm ittee however regretted to note that 
the question of granting of voting rights to OCI is not at  all being considered. The 
Committee were of the view that the old rigid notion of nationality no longer works 
in a global scenario with a fluid and mobile workforce. Keeping this in mind, t he 
Committee in their earlier Report(6 th Repot, 14the Lok  Sabha)  have 
recommended that the Ministry must se riously c onsider and explor e the 
feasibility of extending the benefits of voti ng right to Overseas Citizens of India. 
The Committee, therefore, re iterated that the Ministry  in cons ultation wit h the 
Ministry of Law and Justice should explore the possibility of granting voting rights 
to overseas citizens of India.  
Reply of the Government 
 A proposal for giving voting rights to Indian citizens only (not PI Os) who 
are away from their place of residence on account of employment, education or  
otherwise has been approved  by the Government. The pr oposal presently 
permits Indian citizens residing outside India due to their employment, education, 
etc. to get their names registered in  the electoral roll of t he concer ned 
constituency of their place of ordinary re sidence in Indian and cas t their vote to 
the elections to the Lok Sabha and State L egislatures in case they are present in 
their constituencies at the time of t he elections. A bill in this regard was  
introduced in the Rajy a Sabha on 27 th February, 2006  Rajy a Sabha Secretariat 
had referred  the Bill to t he   Departmental Parlia ment Standing Committee on 
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Ju stice. This Committee has submitted 
its report to Rajya Sabha which was laid in Lok Sabha on 4 th August, 2006. The 
report is under examination in the Ministry  of Law & Jus tice. While agreeing with 
the letter and spirit of the Amendment, the Committee wanted the Ministry of Law 
& Justice to explore various modes/optio ns available in order to achieve the 
purpose for which the Bill is intended, i. e. enabling the NRIs to participate in the 
 23

democratic process of the country in a meaningful manner. To achieve this,  the 
Committee had recommended for a comprehensive Bill on the subject containing 
all the details regarding the manner of  enrolment of the Non-Residence Ind ians, 
the mode of voting and the conditionalities for contesting elections.     
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee noted that the fourth Pravasi Bharatiya Div as (PBD) was  
organized by the Ministry in Hyder abad from 7-9 January 200 6 with Andhra 
Pradesh as the partner State. The Committ ee also noted that the outlay for PBD 
celebration has been increased from Rs. 4 crore in 2005-2006 to  Rs. 6 crore in 
2006-07. The Committee further noted that in the assessment of the Ministry, the 
fourth PBD could be r ated as a success in the conscious progression towards 
emphasizing the content and outcome of the conference rather than a mere form 
of participation. The Co mmittee have also attended t he conference and wer e 
satisfied with the ov erall arrangement s made in Hyderabad except for som e 
minor shortcomings. The Committee ha ve notice d the abs ence of v iable 
arrangements made for receiving and guid ing delegates from abroad to the 
venue of the conference. The Committee fe lt that there should have been a cell 
positioned at various places  suc h as pl aces of stay of delegates and meeting 
venues and preferably under one roof to  help and guide them. The Comm ittee 
desired that the Ministry must take care of  these shortcomings in the next edition 
of PBD. 
The Committee also noted that intera ctive sessions were held with States 
on five key issues  v iz. Fiscal Refo rms, Labour Reforms, Agriculture, Urban 
Management and Regulatory Framework fo r Investment. The idea of  an 
overseas investment prom otion union promoted by M OIA in coordination with 
apex industry as well as various State Governments was also discussed and was 
well received. The Committee desired that  the Ministry should follow up on the 
key issues that were discussed in the inte ractive sessions so that some concrete  
steps can be taken further during the ensuing year.  
 
 24

Reply of the Government 
Committee’s recommendation regarding viab le arrangements for receiving 
and guiding guests from abroad have been noted including positioning a c ell at 
various places such as places of stay of delegates.  
Ministry is following up various k ey issues discussed during the interactive 
session in the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 2006.  Steps will be taken to carry forward 
the discussions in the interactive sessions. 
[MOIA OM No. G-20017/5/2006-Bt dated 10.7.2006] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25

CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRETO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
--Nil-- 
 
 
 26

CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
--Nil-- 
 
 27

CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-- Nil -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                          Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                    Chairman, 
15th  December, 2006/ 24 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)      Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 28

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 14TH DECEMBER, 2006  
  
The Committee sat from 1515 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
  
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
3. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
4. Shri Vanlalzawma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
5. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K. 
6. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
7. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
8. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
9. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
  
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh - Director 
3. Shri Ashok Balwani - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
--2-- 
 

 
-2- 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 13 th  Report on 
Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the 11 th Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External 
Affairs for the year 2006-2007. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their 
suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report.   
 
5. The committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report and present the same to 
Parliament.  
 
6. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE TENTH 
REPORTOF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 I. Total Number of Recommendations                   12 
II. Observations/Recommendations, which have 
 been accepted by the Government 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8, 9,10,11 and 12 
 T o t a l                    1 2  
Percentage                             100% 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view  of the Government replies 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. Nil 
   
Total                    00 
 Percentage                                Nil 
 
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
 replies of the Government  have not been accepted by  
the Committee and require reiteration 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. Nil  
   
 Total                      00 
 Percentage                        Nil 
 
V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 which final replies of the Government are 
 still awaited 
   
Recommendations Sl. Nos. Nil  
   
Total                  00 
 Percentage                Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
 

APPENDIX-III 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Ministry Recommendations/Observations 
1. 7 Overseas Indian Affairs The Committee note the repetitive 
explanation furnished by the Ministry 
and hope that the Ministry steps out of 
the stage of nascency early. It hardly 
needs reiteration that the Ministry needs 
consolidation of efforts around clear 
aims and concerted action to achieve 
the targets within the stipulated time 
frame.  
2. 10 Overseas Indian Affairs The Co mmittee regret to note that in 
spite of most posts of the Officers being 
filled up on a centralized basis by 
DoP&T, a full complement of supporting 
staff is yet to be in place. The 
Committee feel that the Ministry may 
not have done enough to support its 
case of having a cadre of its own. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry 
must again approach DoP&T with 
proper justification for a separate cadre 
or settle for a common cadre with 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The 
Committee hope the Government would 
surely make available staff and 
resources to its Ministry for Overseas 
Indian Affairs failing which it will remain 
a mere nomenclature unable to gain the 
faith and confidence  of millions of 
Overseas Indians and Indians who flock 
to the offices of Protector Of Emigrants 
(POEs). 
 
3. 13 Overseas Indian Affairs With regard to the construction of 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra the 
Committee had recommended that the 
Government engage suitable consultant 
for preparation of deta iled project report 
and implementation plan, and a draw 
time bound programme for completion 
of the project. The Committee, however, 
note that the Government, instead of 
providing concrete details, chose to 
reply that ’action is in progress’. The 
committee reiterate that the 
Government should draw up a time 
bound programme for completing the 
project and place the same before the 
Committee at the earliest.        
30 

4. 16 Overseas Indian Affairs The Emigration Act as it exists fails in its 
purpose and needs drastic 
amendments. The Committee, 
therefore, welcome the proposal to 
comprehensively amend the existing 
Emigration Act. The Committee also 
note that there is a proposal to set up 
Emigrant Welfare Fu nd in the proposed 
amendment. The Committee desire that 
the process should be expedited and 
the Bill be introduced in Parliament 
without further loss of time. 
 
5. 19 Overseas Indian Affairs The Committee welcome the proposal 
of Government to examine the 
possibility of opening new offices of 
Protector of Emigrants(PoE). The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry must follow up on this 
commitment and open the POE Offices 
in Lucknow, Patna, Guwahati and 
Ahmedabad to cater to the needs of the 
emigrant labourers in these cities. The 
Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should expedite the process of 
shifting the offices of PoEs to 
government owned building in 
consultation with the Ministry of Urban 
Development. 
The Committee had earlier 
recommended the Government to fill up 
the existing vacancies in the offices of 
POEs. The Committee regret to note 
that even after a lapse of six months, no 
efforts seem to have been made to fill 
up the vacancies. The Committee 
reiterate the need for taking immediate 
steps for filling up the existing 
vacancies. The process of modernizing 
and computerizing all PoE offices also 
needs to be followed up expeditiously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 