 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 14 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
ISSUES RELATING TO OVERSEAS INDIANS 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
ISSUES RELATING TO OVERSEAS INDIANS 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.03.2007  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.03.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO. 61  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           P A G E  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2006-2007……………………….…       (iii)  
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………       (iv)  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Introduction……………………………………………………….          1  
Chapter II Migration Managemen t ………………………………………….         3 
Chapter III Investments by Over seas Indians………………………………       25 
Chapter IV Marriages to Overs eas Indians…………………………………        34 
Chapter V Opportunities for Overseas Indians 
   for Education in India………………………….………………….        38 
Chapter VI Overseas Citizens hip of India……………………………………      45 
Chapter VII Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra ……………………………………….       48 
Chapter VIII Miscellaneous  ………………………………………………….….      50 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Comm ittee held on 12.07.2005…………       53 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Comm ittee held on 09.10.2006………….      55 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 09.01.2007………….      57 
IV. Statement of Observations and Recommendations …………………..      59 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Year-wise details of pr ivate remittances from  
the year 2001-2005……………………………….……………………….      67 
II. Year-wise information regarding number of workers  
who were given Emigration clearance for contractual 
employment during the last five years…………………..……………….      68 
III. Distribution of Annual Labour outflows from India 
by destination………………………………………………………………       69 
IV. State-wise figures of workers Granted Emigration  
clearance / ECNR Endorsement (2001-2005)……………………………    70 
V. Country-wise break-up of blacklisted foreign employers list (PAC)……    72 
VI. Number and city-wise break up of recruiting agents in the 
 internal watch list of Ministry of Overse as Indian Affairs (MOIA)……...      90 
    
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2006-2007) 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
5. Shri A.V. Bellarmine 
6. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
7. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
8. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
10. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
11. Shri Sebastian Paul 
12. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
13. Shri P.A. Sangma 
14. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
15. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
16. Shri M. Shivanna 
17. Shri Vanlalzawma 
18. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
19. Shri L. Rajagopal @ 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Dr. Karan Singh 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
26. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
29. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
30. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta  
31. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia * 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri Devender Singh  - Director 
Shri Ashok Balwani  - Under Secretary 
Shri Lalkithang  - Committee Officer 
 
*   Nominated w.e.f. 3rd December, 2006 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 16th January, 2007 
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs (2006-2007) having 
been authorised by  the Committee to pr esent on their behalf, pr esent this 14 th Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Issues Relating to Overseas Indians”. 
 
2. The Committee selected the subject “Issu es Relating to Overseas Indians” for 
detailed examination and repor t during the year 2005. The Committee took evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 12 th July  2005. The 
evidence, however, remained inconclus ive as t he Ministry itself was at a very nascent 
stage and many of their pr oposed agendas/schemes pertaining to the s ubject unde r 
examination had not really taken off.   T he Committee again selected the same subjec t 
for detailed examination and report during the year 2006. The Committee took further 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 9th October 
2006.  
 
3. The Com mittee consider ed and adopted this Report at their sitting held  on 
09.01.2007. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
4. The Committee wis h to express their thank s to the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for placing before them  the material and information they wanted in connection 
with the examination of the subject.  They also wish to  thank in particular the 
representatives of the Ministry of Over seas Indian Affairs who gave evidence and 
placed their considered views before the Committee.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI       DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
19th February, 2007                                       Chairman,                 
30th Magha, 1928(Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
(iv) 

REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Indian diaspora constitutes a signific ant economic, social and 
cultural force in the world. Overseas I ndians estimated at over  twenty million are 
spread across 110 c ountries. Their industry, enterprise, economic strength, 
education and professional skills are widely recognised. The inv isible thread that 
holds this vast and diverse overseas Indian community together and bonds them 
with India is Indianness. The creation of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(MOIA) acknowledges the fact that the welfare of  overseas  Indians  needs 
mainstream attention. The Ministry in tend to promote, nurture and sustain a 
mutually beneficial and symbiotic relationship between India and its diaspora1. 
1.2  According to the Annual Report (2005-2006), the focus of the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) is to  establish an institut ional framework to 
benefit from networks with and among O verseas Indians based on three valu e 
propositions:  
• Through multi-skilled market driven ent ities spawned by Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) and with k nowledge par tners from the 
private sector.  
• States will be stakeholder par tners as Overseas Indians (OI) 
supported initiatives have to be anchored in the States.  
• MOIA will stay small, facilitate activity on the ground and drive  
policy changes. 
1.3 Ministry of Overseas Indian Affa irs is organized into four functi onal 
service divisions: Diaspora Services, Financial Services, Employment Services,  
1. Annual Report (2005-2006), MOIA 

and Social Services. 
1.4 The Protector General of Emigr ants administers the E migration Act, 
1983. He oversees the eight field offices of  the protectors of emigrants located at 
Chandigarh, Chennai, Co chin, Delhi, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Mumbai and 
Thiruvananthapuram. 
 2

CHAPTER - II 
MIGRATION MANAGEMENT 
 
Emigrant Workers 
2.1 Although precise data is not av ailable, according to the Annual 
Report of the Ministry  (2005-2006), Overse as Indian workers are estimated by  
the government to be at 4 - 5 million with annual gross flow of one millio n 
workers excluding returnees. These worker s are mostly semi-and-unskilled and 
are appreciated for their sincerit y, hard work and non-interference abroad. The 
Overseas Indian work ers remittances into  I ndia are estimated at $12-15 billion 
annually. While the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are the top destin ation 
countries for Overseas Indian workers,  Kerala, Tamil Nadu  and Andhra Prades h 
are some of the top sourci ng States. The v ast manpower that India has, makes  
this a key opportunity  area. However, co mpetition is eating into low wage jobs 
and localization is reducing the number of un-skilled jobs.  
2.2 Indian workers are appreciated for their skills, hard work, law-abiding 
nature and apolitic al orientation. Indian technicians, nurses, teachers and other 
professionals handle almost  the entire ser vices sector in the Gulf. Around 70%  
are engaged in sem i-skilled and un-skilled work; while 20-30 % comprise 
professionals and other white collared wo rkers. A small portion is employed as  
domestic help. Nearly half of the t otal NRI remittance of Rs. 55000 crores comes 
from Kerala NRIs.  
2.3 The employment of Indian wo rkers abroad helps to earn foreign 
exchange and thereby adds to the foreign exchange reserves of the country. The 
Private transfer of foreign exchange from the year 2000-2001 onwards is given in 
Annexure-I.  There has been a steady increase in the remittances from Rs. 
58756 crores in 2000-2001 t o Rs. 525 63 crores in 2005-2006 (upto 30 th 
September, 2005). It is assessed that a ma jor proportion of this is contributed by 
 3

the increasing number of unskille d and se mi-skilled Indian workers employed in  
the Gulf countries, Malaysia and Singapore. 
2.4 When asked about the position of Indian labourers in the international 
job market, the Ministry responded that I ndia is one of the largest labour sending 
countries in the world. Although data on the number of Indian expatriates working 
abroad is not maintained, the number of  overseas Indian workers  may be about 
5-6 million. The Ministry went on to state that most of  the labourers are unskilled 
and semi-skilled category. There has been a consistent and steady increase in 
the number of persons emigrating for employment abroad from the year 2001 
onwards. The number of emigration clearances granted by the eight offices of the 
Protector of Emigrants has increased from  2.79 lak hs in 2001 to 5.49 lakhs in 
2005. Apart from those categories of workers who were given emigr ation 
clearance, there are many others like professionals, who do not fall within the 
ambit of Emigration Act, 1983. 
2.5 In repl y t o a quest ion on r eposition of India as a higher- end 
labour provider rather than at the lower-end, the Ministry stated that: 
“The government proposes to  undertake skill upgradation  
programmes for potential unskilled/ semi-skilled emigrant workers. 
Initially the major sourcing States from where large number of workers 
emigrate each year will be the focus states. During 2006-07, a sum of 
Rs. One crore has been earmarked for this purpose. So far, proposals 
have been received from Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala for 
starting emigrant workers trai ning programmes. Action is being tak en 
by the Ministry to provide funding support for thes e programmes. The 
scheme is expected to commence during the current year.” 
2.6 The Secr etary, MOIA, whil e tendering evidence befor e the 
Committee submitted that: 
 4

“…We get complaints that when they land up, their passports are kept 
by their employers and they are at their mercy. We have tried to enter 
into a bilateral ag reement with those c ountries so that the interests of 
such worker s ar e protected. Al ready, we have had a detailed 
discussion with the Go vernment of Kuwait and that Government has 
already ini tialed t hat agr eement and shortly, we are goi ng to sign it  
too. Si milarly, the Gover nment of Qatar also has negoti ated such a 
type of agreement. We are jus t waiting for their response. Most 
probably, that also will be fina lized very soon. Likewise, we are 
negotiating with Oman, Malaysia and most of the other countries also. 
Our target  by the fi nancial year-end  is that we would have enter ed 
bilateral agreements with most of the countries to protect the interests 
of the workers. This will be a major achievem ent that ensures the 
workers interest so t hat he is not exploited by the agent her e and by 
the employer there. If there is a complaint in regard to that we will take 
it up with that parti cular G overnment to ensure that int erest of t he 
worker is protected.” 
2.7 The Committee rais ed ques tion regar ding t he need for skil l 
development of our  workers going abr oad and the need for maintaining a 
clearinghouse to ascertai n the catego ries of wor kers that are requir ed 
abroad and the categories of  people availabl e. Responding to the queries 
of the Committee, the Secretary, MOIA, stated during evidence as under: 
“…Regarding skill  devel opment programmes, I hav e already 
mentioned that we have start ed this year itself. That is presently for 
the category, which is going predom inantly to the Gulf countries. For 
highly skilled and all  that, we have a planning type of body.  We have 
circulated a note. When it comes,  that body will make proper 
assessment of the job opportunity av ailable and then – I have alr eady 
 5

mentioned – they  will give  for ecast to t he concer ned St ates so that  
they can accor dingly work out thei r training schedules in various 
training i nstitutes, vocational training  institutes etc. then, they will 
accordingly ad vise t he prospective emigrant s, who are going to 
various countries. It is a long drawn process. We have already started 
the proc ess. It may take s ome ye ars to dev elop into a full-fledged 
scheme.” 
2.8 On the issue of pr e-departure training programme for emi grant 
workers, the Secretary, MOIA, also submitted that: 
“…There had been no trai ning progr amme for t he wor kers who are 
going abroad. They wer e not give n any pre-depar ture training before 
they leave and we had discussed it with the concerned institutions and 
the Stat e Governments. W e have finalized a progr amme and last 
month, a meeting was convened by me with the concer ned St ate 
Secretaries. We have already  written to the c oncerned State 
Governments and this year,  we have announced this training 
programme. The t arget for l aunching t his programme would be 31 st 
December, 2007 and we intend to train about 50,000 workers. Though 
the number is small, gr adually it will go up as we keep on selecting 
institutions for this programme. We want to expand this programme so 
that we can become as  competitive as ot her countries are. The 
purpose i s to make the worker s aw are of their rights under the 
contract so that they  become well versed with t heir rights when t hey 
land up there…” 
2.9 The Secr etary, MOIA, went on to state that this training 
programme will be started in the next couple of months and a large 
number of workers from the concer ned States whi ch are sending them to 
various countries will be benefited. Th e Ministry also have earmar ked Rs. 
 6

7 crore to Rs. 8 cror e for this progr amme and it wi ll release the amount to 
the States  on firs t-cum-first-served bas is. T he Minis try is  ex pecting 
proposals from the State Governments very soon.  
2.10 According to the Ministry, the number of emigrant workers being 
large, a fair number of th em face difficulties. Complaints are received from 
various quarter s, regarding non-pa yment/delayed payment of wages , 
unilateral changes in the cont ract of wo rkers, changing the jobs arbitr arily 
etc. In ext reme cases, the workers are not given any empl oyment at  all 
and are l eft in the lurch in the fore ign countr y. Such worker s, besides  
suffering untol d personal mi sery, al so str etch the r esources of our  
Missions. In su ch i nstances, t he Pr otector General of Emigrants (PGE) 
gets the concer ned Recruiting Agent s (RA) to repatriate the worker at hi s 
expense. If he fails to do this, his Ba nk Guar antee is forfeited and the 
amount utilized to pay for the repatria tion expenses. Co mplaints against 
foreign employers are taken up with the Indian Missions and if need be the 
employer is blacklisted. 
2.11 The Ministry in their writt en submission to the Committee also 
mentioned that an Overseas Indian Workers Awards  Sc heme, 2006 is 
being propos ed by  the government wi th the obj ective of  recognizing the  
outstanding contribution made by Overseas Indian workers (Non-Resident 
Indians-NRI) employed by an overseas  ‘employer in any country or pl ace 
outside India for distinguished record of performance, devotion to duty of a 
high order, contribution towards fostering better understanding of his fellow 
Indian worker s, trustworthiness, honesty, exc eptional courage and who 
have made supreme sacrif ice of l aying down their li ves in t heir 
conscientious discharge of their duties  and for improving the image of the 
country through his/her performance.  
 7

2.12 The award will consist of a citation and 1 lakh Rs. Cash awards. 
There will  be 10 such awards ever y year and wil l be called as “ Pravasi 
Bharatiya Shramik Puruskar”.  The first series of su ch Awards are likely to 
be conferred by the Rash trapatiji on 9 January 20 07 during valedictory 
session of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2007: The details  of the scheme are 
being finalized. 
2.13 The Com mittee observe that  the Overseas Indian wor kers 
are estimated at about 4-5 million an d their remittances into India are 
estimated at $12-15 billion annually. The Committee also observe that 
most of them belong to unskilled and semi-skilled category and there 
has been a steady increase, to th e tune of 1 million a y ear, in the 
number of persons emigrating for employment abroad. Taking note of 
the fact that the Ministry propos e to undertake skill upgradation and 
pre-departure training pr ogrammes f or pot ential emigr ant wor kers, 
the Committee recommend that t he training programmes undertaken 
must keep in view th e changing nature o f manpower requirement of 
countries around the w orld throu gh the Indian Missions. The 
information re garding the training so imparte d and the dat abase of 
manpower availability  shoul d also be available w ith our Missi ons 
abroad. The Committee further r ecommend t hat t he pr oposals 
received from Tamil Nadu,  Andhra Pradesh and Kerala for starting 
emigrant workers t raining programm es should be foll owed up w ith 
the concerned st ates and the tr aining programmes for emigrant  
workers started expeditiously. 
2.14  The Committee are concerned to note that Overseas I ndian 
workers are facing numer ous probl ems re garding non-
payment/delayed pay ment of wa ges, un ilateral ch anges in th e 
contract of workers, changing the jobs arbitrarily  etc. In certain 
 8

cases, the wor kers are not given any employment and are left in the 
lurch in t he forei gn country . The  Committee, theref ore, recom mend 
that the Ministry should focus on the need to safeguard the interests 
of Ind ian w orkers ab road, b y en tering into bilatera l ag reement w ith 
countries where there are substantia l number of Indian workers. The 
Committee appreciate that a begi nning has si nce been made by  the 
Ministry f or entering into bilatera l agreements w ith Ku wait, Qatar, 
Oman and Malay sia. The Comm ittee desire t hat t he 
discussion/negotiation for bilateral agreement w ith these  coun tries 
be expedited to ensure that the workers’ interests are p rotected and 
that they are no longer exploited by the unscrupulous agents in India 
and by their employers abroad. 
2.15 The Committee wel come the proposal of the Gover nment to 
have an aw ard called “Pravasi Bhar atiya Shramik Pur uskar” that w ill 
consist a citation and 1 lakh rupees  in cash w ith the objective of 
recognizing the outstanding contri bution ma de by  Ov erseas India n 
workers. The Committee note that th ere will be 10 such aw ards every 
year and the first series of such Awards conferred on January 9, 2007 
during the valedictory session of Pr avasi Bharatiya Divas 2007. The 
Committee are happy  that Governm ent is instituting this aw ard in 
recognition of the huge contribu tion these w orkers make through 
their remittances to the national economy.  
Emigration Act, 1983 
2.16  The prov isions of the Emigrati on Act, 1983 govern emigration f rom 
India. The Emigration Act, 1983 provides for a regulatory framework in respect of 
emigration of Indian workers for overseas  employment on contractual basis and 
seeks to s afeguard their interests and ensu re their welfare. T he Act makes it 
mandatory for registration of all Recruiti ng Agents wit h the Pr otector General of 
 9

Emigrants, Ministry of Ov erseas Indian Affairs bef ore they c an conduc t the 
business of recruitment for overseas employment. 
2.17 During evidence, the representative of the MOIA stated: 
“…The Emigration Act, 1983 was not am ended for some time. The Ministry 
has proposed an amendment to this Ac t, which is quite comprehensive and 
it would try to ensure and protect the workers’ interest. There are a number  
of welfare measures for the workers.  We have received the comments from  
all the departments now and we are fina lizing the Cab inet note. We intend 
to introduce this amendment during t he coming winter session. I am sure 
that if this Act goes through, it will be a great achievement. Our target is 31st 
March, 2007...” 
Protectors of Emigrants (POEs) 
2.18  In a bid to safeguard the intere sts of Indian nationals working abroad 
and also to protect them in case of any  adverse or unfortunate event occurring in 
their country of work, the Emigration Act, 1983 req uires all workers seeking 
contractual employment abr oad to seek emigration c learance fr om any of the 
eight Offices of the Protectors Of Emigrants (POEs). The Act also mandates that 
no agency/ establishment can undertake recr uitment of Indians for employ ment 
abroad without obtaining registration from the Protector General  of Emigrants, 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, Government of India. 
2.19 The Protector General of Emig rants (PGE) is headquartered in New 
Delhi. It has eight offices of Protector of  Emigrants functioning under the overall 
control of PGE. According to MOIA, the process of grant of emigration clearanc e 
has been decentralized for the convenience of the applicants. Eight offices of the 
Protectors of Emigrants have been est ablished at – Delhi, Mumbai, Kolk ata, 
Chennai, Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Coch in and T hiruvananthapuram. Any  
applicant seeking employment abroad and poss essing a passport with 
‘Emigration Check Required’, endorsement can obtain emigration clearance from 
 10

any of these eight of fices subject to submission of other documents prescribed 
for unskille d and semi-skilled wo rkers. Pe rsons hold ing 10+2 qu alification and  
highly skilled/technically qualified are not  required to obtain emigration clear ance 
if they possess pas sports with “Emigr ation Check  Not Required (ECNR)” 
endorsement. 
2.20 The number of workers who were  given  emigration clearance for 
contractual employment abroad during the last five years and data on distribution 
of labour outflows is  detailed in Annexure II, III a nd IV . A vast majo rity of 
migrants to the Mid dle East, includ ing Gulf countries, are semi-skille d and  
unskilled workers and most of them are te mporary migrants who return to Ind ia 
after expiry of their contractual employment. It is observed from Annexure II that 
there has been a consistent  and steady increase in the number of persons  
emigrating for employ ment abroad from the year 2001 onwards. The number of 
emigration clearances granted by  the eight offices of t he Protector of Emigr ants 
has increased from 2.79 lakhs  in 2001 to 5.49 lakhs in 2005. Annexure II I 
indicates that the U.A.E. has become the main destination for Indian wor kers 
closely followed by Saudi Arabia. Outside the Gulf region, the intake of Indian 
manpower by Malaysia has shown a si gnificant and consistent increase.  
Employment for Indian workers in these countries holds a great potential.  
2.21 Asked about the func tioning of the Protector of Emigrants (POEs), 
the representative deposed before Committee; 
“…Presently, there are eight emigration offices set up in the cou ntry. They 
are being manned by Under Secretary and Section Officer level officers. We 
have made an assessment of the status  of the officers and the type of 
activities they are handling in t hat set up. There has been rampant 
corruption in that set-up and the hon. Minster was also very keen that 
something should be done in this regar d. Last month, the Government had 
agreed to upgrade all the officers in the metropolitan cities except Kolkata,  
to Deputy Secretary level officers. The postings are expected to take plac e 
 11

within this month and they have been finaliz ed already. In this process, we 
want to make the functioning of Field Officers transparent for the workers as 
well as the public s o that there is complete transparency in the process of  
applications for emigrants. We are planning to com puterise even these 
offices. Already, I have had a detailed discussion with the DGNIC (Director 
General of National I nformatics Centre). The matter has been pending for 
quite sometime now. We have worked out a strategy for this and we want to 
finalise computerization before Dece mber. Computerisation of these 
programmes will not only ensure trans parency but also the work will be 
done much faster as there are delays happening.” 
2.22 The representative further stated that: 
“…The Ministry is looking into the simplification proc ess of Emigrants 
because presently, there are a number of  complaints regarding emigration 
process. There is a Committee of Secretaries set up on this aspect. I am the 
Convenor of that Committee. We  have finalized a number of 
recommendations and within the next month or so we are going to 
announce them. Presently only per sons who have qualified 12 th standar d 
are exempted from emigration check-up an d now even the matri culates will 
also be e xempted from ECR. This will be a considerable relief to the  
workers, as they need not visit our o ffices. We are going to announce it  
shortly …..” 
2.23 The Com mittee note that there are 8 o ffices of the POEs from  
where applicants seeking emplo yment abroad and  possessing a passport  
with Emigrant Clearance Required (ECR) en dorsement can  ob tain 
emigration clearance. The Committee observed during their visit to some of 
the field offices of POE that these o ffices are headed b y junior level  
officers. The Commi ttee, therefore, r ecommend that the field offices need  
to be revamped by upgrading the posts in the metropolitan cities to Deputy 
Secretary level. The Committee regret to  note that there has been rampant  
 12

corruption in some of the offices of POEs. The Committee find it even more 
regretful to note that inspite of the admitted corruption in the POE offices,  
the Government has done seemingl y little to identify officials with doubtful 
integrity and proceed against them. The Committee, therefore, recommend  
that suitable measures be undert aken immediatel y to bring about 
transparency in the functioning of POEs and exemplar y action be taken  
against officials indulging in corrupt practices.  
2.24 During their stud y visit to so me of the offices of POEs d uring 
November 2006, the Committee observe d that the office accommodation 
was too small, remotely located, unkempt and without proper infrastructure 
in place. The Com mittee, therefore, desire that the POE submit a detailed 
report w ithin three months on all th e regional offices of POE indicating 
office-wise staff strength, the number  of applications received,  space 
requirement and actually available, suitability of the office location in terms 
of accessibility and the infrastructure needed to m ake the offices efficient 
and user  friendly . For the convenience of applicants, the Com mittee 
recommend that the POE o ffices may also open  ‘May I h elp you’ cou nters, 
so that applicants are not exploited by soliciting spurious agents. 
 
Recruiting Agents (RAs) 
2.25 To streamline recruitment policie s and to safeguard the interests of 
the emigrants, the E migration Act, 1983 stipulate that onl y Recruiting Agents 
registered with the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affair s can conduct the busines s 
of recruitment for overseas employme nt. For this, they have to obtain a 
Registration Certificate from  the Protector General of Em igrants. In this regard, 
the Government also recognizes  State Manpower Export Corporations in Uttar 
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Ke rala, Punjab, Tamil Nadu,  Karnataka, Him achal 
Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi as Recruiting Agents.  
 13

2.26 During evidence the Committee poi nted out that one of the main 
reasons or factors that cont ribute to illegal emigration is the activities of spurious  
recruiting agencies within our country. The Committee desired to  know whether 
any concrete action has been taken to pr event illega l emigration. To this, the 
representative responded as under: 
“…We are aware of this pr oblem. In fact, this is a very serious problem an d 
the Ministry has been very conc erned about that. According to the 
information available with me, we have so far received about 61 complaint s 
against such agencies. Normally, we re fer it to the concerned Director 
General of Polic e of the State, and in about 14 case s they have r egistered 
cases also.  
2.27  On being queried further, the witness submitted that:  
“…We are proposing t o amend the Act. T here are certain claus es inserted 
in the amendment that we have proposed , so that stern action could be 
taken against such agencies. We are planning to take care of such agencies 
with the introduction of this legislation,  so that strong action could be taken 
against such persons who are exploiting these workers.” 
2.28 The Ministry in their written s ubmission to the Committee stated that,  
presently 270 foreign companies  are in t he ‘Prior Appr oval Category’ (PAC) list. 
The list showing their  total number and country wise b reakup is at Annexure-V. 
The recruiting agents against whom compla ints are received persistently are 
placed in t he Internal Watch Lis t of the Ministry. When a Recr uiting Age nt is  
placed in the internal ‘Watch  List’, it is mandatory for him to submit employment  
documents duly attested by the conc erned Indian mission before seeking 
emigration clearance f or overseas recrui tment. There are presently 12 (Twelve) 
Recruiting Agents placed in the internal Watch List of  the Ministry. Their total 
number and city wise break up is at Annexure VI . Country-wise break up of 
blacklisted foreign companies and city wis e break up of recruiting agents placed 
 14

in the internal ‘W atch List’ are available o n the Min istry’s we bsite 
www.moia.gov.in for general information. 
2.29 Taking no te of the large scale exploitation and harassment of 
prospective emigrants by spurious Recruiting Agents (RAs), the Committee 
recommend that the Emigration Act 1983 be amended expeditiously by 
inserting provisions so that deterrent punishment is inflic ted on spuri ous 
RAs and the RAs duping the emigrant workers. In order to curb the 
incidents of illegal e migration for w hich spurious RAs are r esponsible, the 
Committee further recommend that r espective POE office s should hold 
regular meetings w ith the Pol ice Depa rtment of the con cerned States to 
follow up on the cases registered and to chalk o ut w ays and means for  
dealing with spurious recruiting ag encies. The Co mmittee would also like 
the government to widely publicise the blacklisted agents (both foreign and 
Indian) to preclude duping of unsuspecting workers seeking emigration. 
 
Issue of Smart Cards to migrant workers 
2.30 In order to curb the malpract ices perpetrated by the Recruiting 
Agents against emigrant workers the Ministry proposes to introduce smart cards. 
In response to a question, the Ministry  stated that they have a proposal under 
consideration for transforming emigration management through an e-Governance 
project with consultancy support from  the National Institute of Smart 
Government, a not for profit company promoted by the Department of Information 
Technology, the NASSCOM and the Govern ment of Andhra Pradesh. The terms 
of reference include the study for assessing feasibility/viability of smart cards with 
reference to technology, cost benefit anal ysis and integration with e-governanc e 
in emigration.  
2.31 Elaborating further on the issu e of smart card, the representative 
deposed; 
 15

“…. There was a proposal  initially from one com pany regarding smart card. 
Subsequently, this has been exami ned and as I mentioned in my opening 
remarks, presently there is no computerization in our offices and most of the 
work is being done manually. So, first we thought that computerization is our 
desirability. In this regard I have st arted a discussion wit h DG, NIC. They 
have made a presentation and prepar ed necessary software. We are 
planning to start this by December. Our target is that most of the field offices 
and Ministry’s computerization work should be completed by the financia l 
year-end. Once this is done, we will ta ke up the smart card system. It is a 
very high tech issue. Earlier, only one company had come and we took it up 
with the Department of Spac e. We have written to them and are awaiting a 
response from them. They have said t hat instead of taking it up with one 
company, we shou ld explore the possibilities of public sector undertakings  
or there should be a joint ventur e. So, only on the rec eipt of the proposal,  
the Ministry will be taking a v iew whether to go ahead with that or not. We 
awaiting their feasibility study report and their advice.” 
2.32 On the question of the Committee over the unusually long time being 
taken in introducing the smart card, the witness elaborated during evidence; 
“….Smart Card is  quite a hi-tec h area and it c omes with the latest  
technology. Even my field office does not have the infrastructure for 
computerizing, which we should have done long time  back. We are doing it 
now. I have discussed it with DG, NIC. We are waiting fo r the feasibility  
report and also the expert advice from  the Department of Space. Earlier  
they recommended that one unit  is located at Chandigarh. Now, the parent  
Ministry advised us that the Department may not be in a position to do it and 
they want to make it a consortium of public sector companies and then do it. 
We are awaiting that report. The moment that report from the Department of 
Space co mes to us, we will ta ke necessary action. In fact, I spoke to the  
Secretary, Department of Space. He said that he would expedite that  
report.” 
 16

2.33 When ask ed about the current st atus on the proposal to introduce 
smart cards, the Ministry submitted a status Report to the Committee as under: 
“1. In March 2005 M/s Semi-conduc tor Complex Limited (SCL), 
Mohali, Punjab which is a Government  of India Enterprise under the 
Department of Space submitted a suo-motu proposal to the Protector 
General of Emigrants for issue of Smart Cards to emigrant workers. 
The proposal was on a build, own and operate (BOO) basis. The cost 
of the package quoted by M/s SCL was Rs. 1200 per emigrant.  
2. Following discussions with the Protector General of Emigrants and 
a presentation made to the Minis try the M/s SCL submitted a revised 
proposal in early May 2005. In this  proposal too, M/ s SCL proposed 
to levy a fee of Rs. 1200 per emigrant. 
3. The IFD while examining the propos al had inter-alia observed that 
the propos al is based on a single suo-motu offer submitted by M/s 
SCL. There would be other PSUs handling similar projects, whic h 
may be ascertained from the Ministry of IT and sealed tenders invited 
and that the work may be awarded to the L1 bidder. 
4. The project proposal was referred to the Department of Information 
Technology for their views.  T he De partment of Information 
Technology informed in July 2005 that while M/s SCL  has extensive 
experience in chip design and manufacture, thei r experience in 
designing end to end IT solutions, at present may be limited. 
5. In a meeting held on Septem ber 25, 2005, a pres entation was 
made by M/s SCL on their proposal . At t his meeting the Director 
designate of SCL raised some doubts about the security aspects of 
using cont act – less cards. It wa s desired in the meeting that a 
concept paper should be prepared based on which a decision on this 
project could be taken. 
 17

6. On the suggestion of the Secret ary, MOIA in Dec ember 2005 and 
with the approval of the Competent Authority in January 2006, it was 
decided that since M OIA has no in-house expertise, the preparation 
of the concept paper  would have to be entrusted to an outside 
agency. 
7. In February 2006, the then Secr etary suggested that the proposal 
for computerization of  the offices of the POEs be de linked from the 
proposal of issue of Smart Cards.  
8. Meanwhile, a decision was  ta ken with the approval of the 
Competent Authority to seek the advice of the Mi nistry of Information 
Technology for introduction of e-Go vernance in emigration. It was  
decided to assign the e-Governance project to M/s NISG which is a 
‘not for profit’ company promoted by the Ministry of Information 
Technology, Government of Andhra Pradesh and NASSCOM. 
9. M/s NISG has submitted its e-Governance proposal which entails: 
a) Business process re-engineering of the emigration process, 
b) Designing and executing an IT based solution on a turnkey basis and  
c) Report on introduction of Smart Cards in emigration. 
The process of obtaining IFD c oncurrence as well as  vetting of the 
proposal by Ministry of Information Technology is underway. 
10. Meanwhile, in Apr il 2006 we have referred once again the 
proposal of M/s SCL to the Departm ent of Space for their comments. 
In May 2006, the Department of Space informed us that it is exploring 
the possibility of carrying out the project by a consortium of PSUs. 
 18

11. Meanwhile, the NIC has  been asked to undertake 
computerization of the offices of the POEs. The project proposal and 
commercial proposal from NIC is expected shortly. 
2.34 The Com mittee observe that the proposal to introduce smart 
card was initiated way back in March, 2005, but despite considerable lapse 
of time no significant headw ay has been made. The explanation submitted 
by the Ministry for the delay in introduction of smart card in the field offices 
and at the Headq uarters of POE is found untenable by  the Committe e as 
India is acclaimed to be one of the high-tech capital of  the w orld. The 
Committee, therefore, see no reason as  to w hy t he introduction of s mart 
card should be delay ed so inordinatel y. The Committee, therefore,  
recommend that the government should expedite full computerization of all 
the offices of POE, and impart necessar y training to the staff so that the 
introduction of smart card is facilitated without any operational difficulty. 
Diaspora Database 
2.35 During evidence, the Committee observed that there are a  large 
number of Non-Res ident Indians (Pravasi Bharatiyas) who are liv ing in different  
parts of the world and desir ed to know whether the Ministry is thinking of 
compiling a list, country-by-country, of these Pravasi Bharatiyas.  
2.36 The Secretary, MOIA, during evidence stated that: 
“…Regarding the databank on Pravasi Bh aratiyas, we have a project and 
we are working on it s details. Some in formation is available which is not 
quite correct. In fact, we  are working with a leadin g institute to prepare a 
databank of all the Pravasi Bharatiyas. I think within this year we will be able 
to finalise it and make it available. We  would not keep  it a secret. It will be  
available freely.” 
 19

2.37 The Committee note that government is not maintaining  
database of diaspora / NRIs living in different parts of the w orld. The 
Committee hardl y need to emphasise the need  for maintaining such a 
database countr y/region-wise, while ack nowledging the need to promote, 
nurture and sustain a mutually b eneficial sy mbiotic relationship betw een 
India and its dias pora. The database so created should maintain 
information including the kind of w orkers required and the j obs available 
and the emerging trends of employment and made available on the w ebsite 
of the Ministry . This, in the consider ed view of the Co mmittee, would save 
the migrant workers from the clutches of unscrupulous emigration agents.  
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana, 2006 
2.38 In an effort to further safeguard the interests of the emigrant workers, 
the Government of India has introduced the “Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yo jana, 
2003”, an insuranc e scheme compuls ory for emigrant workers seeking 
Emigration Clearance from POEs for going abroad for employment. On the 
occasion of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas on 09.01.2003,  the then Hon ’ble Prime 
Minister announced the compuls ory Insurance Scheme for the emigrants going 
abroad for employment. In pursuance of this announcement, a compulsory  
Insurance Scheme kn own as Pravasi B haratiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) 20 03 was 
notified on 13.11.2003 which came into force from 25.12.2003. 
2.39 The PBBY, 2003 has  now been upgr aded as the Pr avasi Bhar tiya 
Bima Yojana, 2006 to provide broader cove rage to the emigrant workers. The 
PBBY, 2006 has been notified on 25.01.2006 and it has come into effect from  
01.02.2006. The emigrant workers will now get a minimum insurance cover of 
Rs. 5 lakhs (instead of Rs. 2 lakhs) and t he policy will be for t he entire period of  
employment contract. An addi tional cover of Rs. 25,000/ - for the legal expenses 
incurred by the emigrants in connection with their employment has also been 
included. The salient features of the PBBY, 2006 are listed below:  
• The Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana, 2006 provides for an insuran ce cover 
of a minimum sum of Rs. 5.00 lakhs payable to the nominee/legal heir in the 
 20

event of death or permanent disability  of any Indian emigrant who goes  
abroad for employment purpose after obt aining emigr ation clear ance from 
the concerned Protector of Emigrants (POE). 
• In the case of death, besides the cost of transporting the dead body, the 
cost incurred on the one-way airfar e of one Attendant shall also be 
reimbursed by the Insurance Company.  
• If a worker is not received by the employ er on his arrival to the destination 
abroad or there is any subs tantive change in Employ ment Contract to his  
disadvantage or if the em ployment is pre-maturely terminated within the 
period of employment for no fault of the emigrant, the Insurance Company  
shall reimburse one way economy cla ss airfare provided the grounds of  
repatriation are certified by the concerned Indian Mission/Post. 
• In cases where the repatriation is arranged by the Indian Mission/Post, the 
Insurance Company shall re-imburse the actual expenses to the concerned 
Indian Mission/Post. 
• The Insured person s hall be reimburs ed actual one way econo my class 
airfare by t he Insurance Company if he  falls sick or is declared medically 
unfit to commence or continue work ing and the service contract is  
terminated by the F oreign Em ployer with in twelv e months of taking th e 
insurance. 
• The Insurance Policy  shall be valid fo r a minimum period of two y ears or 
the actual period of contract, whichever is longer.  
• The Insurance Policy shall also provide medical cover of a minimum of Rs. 
50,000/- as cash-les s hospitalization and/or reimbursement of actual  
medical expenses of the insured emigrant workers on grounds of accidental 
injuries and/or sickne ss/ailments/diseases occurring during the period of  
insurance whether in India or in the country of his employment.  
 21

• An insured person shall be covered fo r a minimum sum of Rs. 25,000/- in 
connection with the legal expens es incurred by him in any litigatio n relating 
to his/her employment.  
• The Insurance Policy  shall also provide maternity benefits, subject to a 
minimum c over of Rs . 20,000/- in cas e of  women emigrants. In case of  
medical treatment in the country of  employment, the maternity benefits 
would be provided if the requisite documents were certified by  the  
concerned Indian Mission/Post.  
• The family  of emigrant worker in  India c onsisting of spouse and two 
dependent children up to twenty one year s of age shall be entitled t o 
hospitalization cover in the event of  death or permanent disability of the 
insured person for a maximum amount or Rs. 25,000/- per annum.  
• The Insurance Companies  shall c harge fair and reasonable pr emium. 
Service tax will be charged as applicable.  
2.40 The Com mittee desired to know  the fair and r easonable premium  
amount that the Ministry is looking at. The Committee also pointed out that , 
according to earlier information given to the Committee, the Ministry was working 
with various insuranc e companies to brin g down the premium to a level, whic h 
the labour force can afford to pay . Responding to these queries of the 
Committee, the Secretary, MOIA, stated as under: 
“… The present premium ranges from Rs. 500 to Rs. 600. Earlier, it was Rs. 
350 to Rs. 400. In fact, I had called al l the insurance c ompanies and raised 
the issue, that on what basis this premium is fixed. I had asked them that we 
need to have a re-look on it. They said that they had start ed it only it only  
recently and requested us to giv e them one year and within one year they  
would com e back and subm it whether lower premiu m is pos sible. I am  
waiting for their response. Within this  financial year, we are going to review 
as to whether the premium, which they  are charging, is reasonable or ther e 
is a scope or a feasibilit y to further reduce it. With reference to the claims  
they are getting, what I am finding is t hat the claims are not many. They are 
 22

very few, where there may be scope for reducing the premium. But I have to 
consult them and take their advice. Only after that we will take the view. I 
think, at the end of this financial year, we would take a view on that.” 
2.41 On being asked whether the Mini stry is pr eparing to streamline the 
process of issue of policies for settlement of claims etc. The Ministry replied as 
under: 
“Under the Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), 2006, only those Indian 
Insurance Companies  whic h are regist ered with the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authorit y (IRDA) are authorized to issue policies. The 
products framed by these companies ar e filed with th e IRDA before these 
are accepted under the PBBY. These companies hav e a defined process 
and documentation for issue of polic ies, settlement of claims etc. under the 
laws applicable to them.” 
2.42 The Minist ry was as ked to furnish the details pert aining to the 
number of persons who subscribed to PBBY, the number of claims preferred and 
the number of claims settled and the number  of claims pendin g till date.  The  
Ministry replied as under: 
“According to the information receiv ed from the Insurance Companies,  
whose products hav e been approved un der the Pr avasi Bhar tiya Bima 
Yojana, 2003 and Pravasi Bhartiya Bima  Yojana, 2006, these details are as 
under: Number of insurance polic ies issued - 11.07 lakhs  ; Number of 
claims preferred – 421; Number of claims settled – 159. 
2.43 The Com mittee further asked t he Ministry the major causes for 
delaying the settlement of insurance cl aims and the steps propos ed to be taken 
by the Ministry to bring down the number of claims pending. The Ministry 
responded as under: 
“The main cause for delay in the settl ement of insurance cla ims has been  
non-submission of the requisite documents by the claimants. In some of the 
 23

cases, the claims were found inadmi ssible, as the ground on which they  
were preferred was not covered under the insurance policy. The Ministry 
has asked the Insurance Companies conc erned to send a monthly report 
relating to claims statistics, i.e., number s of claims preferred, claims settled, 
amount of settlement, reasons for non-settlement of pending claims, and 
dates of receiving and settling the cl aims with a v iew to monitor early  
settlement of the claims.” 
2.44 The Com mittee are happ y to  note that the Government has 
introduced the Pravasi Bharati ya Bima Yo jana (PBBY), 2003 in an effort to 
safeguard the interests of the emigra nt workers. The Committee also note 
that the PBBY, 2003 has now  been  upgraded as the PBBY, 2006 and 
emigrant workers will no w get a minimum cover of Rs. 5 lakhs, instead of 
Rs. 2 lakhs. The Committee, how ever, note that as on date 11.07 lakhs 
policies have been issued, but the numbe r of policies issued vis-à-vis th e 
number of emigrant workers is  still fa r less. The Committee feel that t here 
are man y more potential workers in need of insurance and, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry  must sensitise the workers on the benefits of  
getting insured. The Committee also desire that subscription premium 
should be reviewed so as to consider the scope to further reduce it. 
 24

 
CHAPTER - III 
INVESTMENT BY OVERSEAS INDIANS 
Overseas Indians Investment Promotion and Facilitation Unit  
3.1 The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) has a proposal to set  
up an Investment Promotion Unit of MO IA with a partner to give sustained and 
focused attention to promoting investment s by Overseas Indians in India. The 
objectives of the Unit will inc lude inter-alia  dissemina tion of information on the 
investment climate in Indi a and it s states, providing guidance on doing business 
in India including on rules, regulati ons and approval procedures, extending a 
one-stop facilitation support for prospective  investors, promoti ng invest ment 
needs of state governments with Overseas Indian associations and establis hing 
institutional arrangements for on going engagement with the I ndian Diaspora on 
the one side and Indian industry & business on the other. 
3.2 In reply to a question, the Minist ry further stated that the matter has  
been discussed with f our banks including UTI Bank, PNB, Syndic ate Bank and 
SBI. The broad areas of discussion were on using the rapidly growing financial & 
Capital market in India to provide new and more attractive avenues for Overseas  
Indians to invest in financial instru ments to increase Overseas Indians 
remittances. The UTI Bank has evinced inte rest in collaborating with the Ministry 
to explore the possibilities of developing new products to make remittances as  
well as inv estments by Overseas Indians  attractive such as deposit accounts, 
mutual funds etc. 
3.3 When the Ministry was asked to furnish the la test position regarding 
the proposed investment promotion unit, th e MOIA, in their written submis sion, 
responded as under: 
 25

“Government of India has put in place a liberal an d transparent policy  for  
investment from Non-Resi dent Indians (NRIs), wher ein most of the sectors 
are open to foreign direct investment under the automatic route. 
The State Government has an important ro le to play to pr omote investment 
in India by  Overseas Indians s ince any investment has to be loc ated in a 
particular State. The Invest ment Promotion Un it will  therefore have to be 
established in collaboration with majo r States. The Ministry has already  
requested the State Governments to es tablish a s eparate Department for 
Overseas Indians or a Cell to promote investment in the States also. Many 
State Governments have already established such department/cell.  
The Minist ry proposes to discuss the modalities of Investment Promotion 
Unit with stakeholder. Thereafter modalities of establishing will be finalized.”   
3.4 The Committee also desired to k now whether the Ministry has come 
up with any schemes/incentives  to attrac t investments in India by Overseas  
Indians. The Ministry in their written submission responded as under: 
“Ministry of Overseas Indian Affair s has launched an Information Servic e 
Portal in  a ssociation wit h UTI Bank which provides  useful infor mation for 
investment opportunities in India. Ministry is also bringing a Compendium on 
Policies, Incentives and Investment opportunities for Overseas Indians  and 
a Hand Book for Overseas Indians whic h will als o pr ovide information on 
investment opportunities available with the States Governments.” 
3.5 During evidence, the Committee re ferred to the so many avenues  
where the remittances received from Ov erseas Indians can b e invested and the 
inhibition in the mind of Ov erseas Indians when they ac tually come here and do 
not have easy access to the rules and r egulations or where they should be 
putting their hard-earned money.  The Committ ee, therefore, wanted to know if  
there were any central guidelines for the Pravasi Bharatiyas to make investments 
in India or whether the issue was left to the respective States. 
 26

3.6 In response to the concerns rais ed by the Committee, the Secretary, 
MOIA, stated during evidence that: 
“…We also have been discuss ing in the Ministry to provide the necessar y 
assistance to our workers and others who are abroad. We had a discussion 
with various stakeholders, and recently we had discussions with CII, FICCI, 
etc. We want to make a one-stop shop where all the information, which they 
require, is readily available either on the Internet or on telephone. In the 
initial stages, we had a disc ussion with the CII and FI CCI, and t hey have 
given us s ome proposals that we are analyzing. We had talks with them  
because they have got a lot of data, and as  they are basically an industrial 
body, therefore, they i nteract, and the Ministry would be providing them the 
guidelines. We want to announc e this prom otional investment unit on this  
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, and we are working on the contours of it. 
We are thinking that this one-stop win dow-shop will be a type of service to 
those prospective inv estors, who want to  invest here. This will provide the 
type of guidelines  that are there for various inv estment opportunities  
available, namely, where they can inv est, how they  can inv est, etc. The 
Ministry will work like a catalyst agent to see that once a decis ion is taken, 
then we will take up wit h the v arious State Govern ments to further help 
them, so that those decisions really get implemented.” 
3.7 To an unstarred question (No. 11 46) answered in Lok Sabha on 29 th 
Novermber, 2006, as  to whether  the Gove rnment has introduced any system of 
hassle free approval of the proposals for NRI invest ments the Ministry stated 
that, the Government has put in plac e a liberal and transparent policy  for 
investment from Overseas Indians. The Mi nistry further submitted that most of  
the sectors are open to FDI under the automatic route. 
3.8 The Minis try further submitt ed that under the Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) Policy, the facility available to Overseas Indians are as follows: 
 27

 1. Non-Resident Indians (NRIs)  can inves t upto 100% under t he 
automatic route in the Housing and Real Est ate Development for the 
following activities. 
• Development of serviced plots and construction of built up 
residential premises; 
• Investment in real estate cove ring construction of residential 
and commercial premises in cluding business centers and 
offices; 
• Development of townships; 
• City and region al level urban in frastructure facilities, includ ing 
roads and bridges; 
• Investment in participatory ventures in the above activities; 
• Investment in housing finance institutions. 
 
 2.  NRIs can invest upto 100% in Indian c ompanies engaged in Air 
Taxi Operation. (For foreign c ompanies Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) is permitted only up to 49%).  
3.9 In addition to the inv estments under the F DI policy,  NRIs can also 
invest under other schemes under various Foreign Exchange Management Act 
(FEMA) Regulations in the following activities/Sectors: 
• Mutual Funds. 
• Investment in PSU Bonds. 
• Investments up to 100% equity in proprietary / partnership 
concerns, except in agricultural / plantation activity or real estate 
business. (Foreign companies ar e not allowed to invest in 
partnership firms / proprietary concerns). 
 28

• Portfolio Investment Schemes: NRI s are permitted to invest in 
shares and debentures through secondary market purchas e 
from the stock exchanges  under the portfolio scheme. 
Investment limit are 5% and 10% respectively. These limits are 
over and above the F oreign Institutional Investors (FII) portfolio 
investment limits s o as to ens ure that NRI investment are not  
crowded out by FIIs.  
• NRIs can acquire im movable property, other than agricultural 
land / plantation property / farm house and transfer such 
property to a resident, another NRI. 
3.10 The Ministry was ask ed whether any study has been undertaken or 
proposed to be undertaken on the investment  pattern of overseas Indians in 
India. In their written submission to the Committee, the Ministry submitted that:  
“No formal study has so far been undertaken or c ommissioned by the 
Ministry. From RBI and other data, some broad inferences could be drawn 
about the investment patterns of overseas Indians in India. Going forward, a 
formal study by a professional agency might be worth consider ing. Such a 
study could also doc ument a few cases of  successe s and failure so that 
appropriate lessons  are learnt and the promotion policies could be fine-
tuned.” 
3.11 The Committee further enquired from  the Ministry whether they have 
drawn any inferences from  RBI and other data about t he investment patterns of 
Overseas Indians in India. The Ministry submitted in their written reply;  
“Format in whic h data is pres ently maintained by  organizations  
concerned, including RBI, makes it di fficult to draw a clear inference 
about the investment pattern of Ov erseas Indians in India.  The 
Ministry has therefore not as yet been able to draw inferences on the 
investment patterns of Overseas Indians in India.” 
 29

3.12 The Ministry also submitted t hat it propose to undertake a formal 
study in t his regard by a professional agency. It fu rther submitted that the 
Ministry will initiate action soon to commission such a study. 
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act (FCRA) 
3.13 The Comm ittee enquired from the Ministry whether any steps have 
been taken to get the FCR Act and proce dure simplified for overseas Indians. 
The Minist ry responded that Ministry of  Home Affairs (MHA) has drawn up 
proposals for a comprehensive Foreign Contribution Management Act. The 
Ministry further stated t hat their suggestions have been convey ed to MHA and 
that the matter stands referred to a Group of Ministers (GOM).  
3.14 In their written submission to t he Committee, the Ministry stated that, 
MOIA have convey ed its suggestions an d expects that MH A would have taken 
the views of MOIA along with other c oncerned Ministries into account while 
putting up their Note for Cabinet’s approval. The suggestions are as follows: 
 
S. No.  Comments/Suggestions Response of Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs 
1. Automatic route for donations  by 
PIO Card-holders/Overseas Indian 
Citizens (OIC). Allow donations only  
for developmental and s ecular 
purposes. Introduce a negative list of 
purposes donations for which not  to 
qualify for the automatic route. 
MHA has equated PIO Card 
holders/OIC with foreigners in 
this regard in their note. 
However this  Ministry 
recommends that the automatic 
route provision should be  
allowed for  donations  indic ated 
on the left. There could however 
be a negative list. 
2. Place donations meant to promote 
secular education on the automatic 
MHA has indicated that there is 
no such pr ovision. However this 
 30

route. Ministry feels that such 
donations should be put on the 
automatic route.  
3.  Remove requirement  of 3 years 
existence for grant of registration 
under FCRA.  
MHA has  indicated that the 
present law does not have any 
such provision. MHA has als o 
said that  experience in the 
related field of activity is  
considered essential to 
safeguard against the possible 
misuse of foreign c ontribution. 
However for PIOs /OICs this 
requirement should be waived. 
4. The approval granted under the new 
law should be permanent, as at 
present. No need for renewal of  
registration at fixed intervals.  
For PIO/OIC there should be no 
need for renewal, once approval 
is given. 
5.  The periodicity of reporting the 
details of  foreign c ontributions by 
bank branches dealing in such 
transactions may be made half-
yearly basis as at present in plac e of 
monthly basis as proposed in the 
new law. 
MHA has  indicated that this  
period may be fixed in the rules  
as deemed fit from time to time. 
However for PIO/OIC this period 
should be half yearly as at 
present. 
 
3.15 The Ministry, in addition to above, has the following general 
comments to make: 
 31

1. The objects clause of the dr aft Bill sh ould a lso includ e 
promotion of the right  kind of foreign c ontribution in desirable 
sectors/areas; 
2. The threshold of ‘foreign contribution’ that would be subject to 
management and control ought to be increased. The limit 
may be raised under Sec. 2 (f )(i) to Rupees One hundred 
thousand and having an equivalent limit of US $ 2,500 under  
2 (f) (ii) & (iii) as well. 
 
3.16 The Com mittee welcome the proposal of the  Ministr y to 
establish an Overseas Indians Investment Promotion Unit to give sustained 
and focused attention to pro moting investments b y Overseas Indian s in  
India. Given that the re mittances of Overseas Indian workers into India are 
huge and  that their investments potential is e normous, the Committee 
appreciate the launch of an Information Service Portal in association w ith 
UTI Bank, which provides useful info rmation for investment opportunities 
in India. The Com mittee recommend that the proposed compendium on 
Policies, Incentives and Investment Opportunities for Overseas Indians and 
the Handb ook for Overseas In dians providing information on investment  
opportunities available w ith the State Governments should be brought out 
soon.  
3.17 Realising the potentials and capacities of Overseas Indians to  
invest in India the Committee in their 6 th Repo rt (14 th Lok  S abha) had 
recommended for setting up of the i nvestment promotion unit as the 
Committee felt that Overseas Indians ar e presentl y able to invest onl y a 
lower proportion of their resources in  India as compared to the Overseas 
Chinese who invest in China in a bi g way. The Committee recommend that 
the Ministry must also commission a st udy of the w ays in which Overseas 
Indians can make gr eater cont ribution through in vestments in India. The 
 32

study co mmissioned should also analy se the investment patterns of the  
Overseas Indians in India so that prom otion policies can be fine-tuned. The 
Committee further recommend that th e Ministr y should finalize  and 
announce the investment promotion unit expeditiously. 
3.18 The Com mittee also note th at the Ministr y of Home Aff airs 
(MHA) has dra wn up proposals for a comprehensive Foreign Contribution 
Regulation Act for Overseas Indians and that the Ministry have made some 
suggestions to MHA. The Committee al so note that the matter has been  
referred to a Group of Minis ters (GoM s). The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should follow  up the matter w ith the MHA expeditiousl y so that 
procedures are simplified for the Overseas Indians under the FCR Act. 
 33

CHAPTER - IV 
MARRIAGES TO OVERSEAS INDIANS 
4.1 Over the years the problem of  Indian women tr apped in fraudulent 
marriages with ov erseas I ndians has ass umed alarmi ng proportions. Th is has  
underscored the urgent need to build safeguards to protect these women and 
make them aware of their rights and re sponsibilities on the one hand and about 
the safety nets and social defense mec hanisms that are available and wh ich 
could assist them. 
4.2 A National Consultation on this issue was organized on 18th February 
2006 at Vigyan Bhav an, New Delhi by MOIA. The purpose of the N ational 
Consultation was to take into ac count the perspectives of various stakeholders 
and make use of their practical experience in finalizing a booklet for the guidance 
of women planning to get married to overseas Indians.  
4.3 When the Committee a sked whether the propos ed publication of the 
booklet for the guidance of wom en planning to get married to overseas Indian in 
vernacular language and its distribution has been completed, the Ministry in their 
written submission stated that:  
“The guidance booklet on Marriages to overseas Indians is being finalized 
in consultation with the Indian Society of International Law”. 
4.4 The Ministry was also asked whether the proposed Gender Cell in 
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affair s has since been set up. The Minis try in 
their written submission stated that: 
“The Gender Advis ory Group has been s et under t he Chairmanship of  
Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs”. 
 34

4.5 On the issue of NRI marriages, t he Secretary, MOIA, stated during 
evidence that: 
“Another area which has been engaging t he attention of the Ministry has  
been the issue of NRI marriages. There have been a lot of problem s on this 
issue and the Ministry has been handling it in consultation with the NCW. A 
national consultation on t he issue of NRI marriages was held in Delhi in 
February, 2006. A region al workshop/seminar on the issue was held in 
Chandigarh in whic h I had personally participated. Another seminar in 
Trivandrum was attended by the hon. Minister. We are trying to look into this 
problem and work out a st rategy in c onsultation with t he NCW to see h ow 
social problems could be taken care of. We  will see to it that the interests of 
most of the girls an d other familie s who  suffer are protected. We are 
working o ut a scheme, which is  still in the  discussio n stage. We want to  
announce it in the Pr avasi Bhartiya Diva s, 2007, whic h is to  be celebrated 
between 7th and 9 th January. We want to announc e it on that day. We are 
working out a detailed schem e which is at an advanced stage of  
discussion.” 
4.6 In their Annual Report (2005-2006), the Ministry also stated that the 
way forward in curbing inc idences of women trapped in fraudulen t 
marriages as under: 
1. Instituting a series of  meas ures ranging from sensitization 
and creation of awareness to legal and legislative changes. 
2. Releasing informati on booklets to prevent fraudulen t 
marriages. 
3. Setting up a Gender Ce ll in the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs to deal with gender issues of Overseas Indians. 
4. Continued interaction with t he st akeholder bodies  suc h as  
between the Ministry of Over seas Indian Af fairs and NCW  
and related women groups. 
 35

5. Advise State governments to set up specia l ce lls for  
providing free legal aid and conselling. 
6. Orientation programmes to  help brides from rural 
background adjust to western way of life. 
7. Prepare a directory of help lines in different cities and 
countries. 
4.7 The Committee are concerned to note that the incidents of failed 
and fraudulent marriages of Indi an w omen with NRIs have assumed  
alarming proportions. The Committee  note that ow ing to huge costs 
involved, the victim Indian w omen are not able to take legal recourse. The 
Committee recommend that an effective mechanism need be worked out in 
order to curb the m enace of fraudulent marriages including compulsor y 
registration of marriages and  amendm ent to the Indian Marriages Acts, 
which may  provide for, among other things, the jurisdiction of div orce 
proceedings to be instituted onl y in the courts in w hose jurisdiction the 
marriage was solemnized/registered. The Com mittee also recomm end that 
the prospective bridegroom  should be made to gi ve an affidavit to the  
effect that he is not married, and that the affidavit must be notarized by the 
respective consulate/embassy. The Committee also desire that the 
guidance booklet o n Marriages w ith Overseas In dians sho uld be br ought 
out immediatel y an d w idely dissemin ated both in India w here marriages 
take place and also distributed overseas. T he Com mittee further 
recommend that government should se t up Gender Cells/ legal cells to 
provide legal aid and counsel ing to victims of fra udulent marriages. The 
Committee note that in many  countries there is provision under w hich the 
courts offer the services of attorney s free of charge and there are also  
social organizations w hich provide free legal aid counselling to Indian 
women. The Ministry, therefore, need to prepare lists of such attorneys and 
other organisations w ho would be ready  to w ork pro bono and put up the 
 36

lists on the w ebsite of the Ministry  and our Missions so that v ictims of 
fraudulent marriages may approach them for free legal aid. 
 37

CHAPTER - V 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR OVERSEAS INDIANS FOR EDUCATION IN INDIA 
Scholarships for Overseas Indian Youth 
5.1 The Ministry has proposed a Sc holarship Scheme for Diaspora 
Children(SSDC). The specific objective of  the Scholarship Scheme is to make 
higher education in India acces sible to the children of Overseas Indians and 
publicise India as an education hub. Thr ough this scheme, it is hoped that the 
students selected for such scholarship s would become brand ambassadors for 
India and it s educational inst itutions.  Under the propo sed Scholarship Scheme, 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) intends to provide 100 scholarships to 
Indian students each year starti ng from 2006-07. The annual outlay would be 
around Rs.1 crore to begin with and woul d go up to about Rs.4 crores in the 
fourth year and stabilize thereafter.  The eligibility criteria under the SSDC will be 
on merit-cum-means basis and pr imarily aim at OI stud ents from the LDCs and 
developing countries numbering around 23.  
5.2 The objective is to target Overs eas Indian children living in countries 
where there are no extant edu cational fa cilities or have less o pportunities for 
higher studies and wh ere there are large c oncentration of the In dian dias pora. 
On the basis of the broad contours of the Detailed Projec t Report (DPR)  
prepared, the Scholarship Scheme fo r Diaspora Children  (SSDC)  was 
announced at the 4th PBD durin g the Session on ‘O pportunities in Education’ by 
Educational Consultants India Limit ed (Ed.CIL), an autonomous body under 
Ministry of Human Resource Developm ent (MHRD) with wh om the Minist ry is  
working on a partnership bas is. The final DPR would be completed by Ed.CIL by 
April, 2006.  The Ministry is making ever y effort to implement the Scheme from 
the academic year 2006-07.   
 38

5.3 On being asked whether the final  DPR has been completed by  Ed. 
CIL and whether the scholarship would be ready fo r implementation during the 
academic year 2006-2007, the Ministry responded as under: 
“The final DPR had been s ubmitted by Ed.CIL to t he Ministry in March, 
2006. Further a MOU has been signed between the Ministry and the Ed.CIL 
for executing the Scholarship Sc heme. The Scholarship Scheme is being 
implemented from the academic year  2006-2007. Admissions  in various  
technical institutions have been fi nalized for 70 students and are being 
finalized for another 12 students. The Sc holarship amount is approximately 
80,000 Indian Rupees.” 
5.4 For the benefit of the Indian Di aspora, the Government has decided 
that 15 per cent seat s in al l higher and technical inst itutes (exc ept courses in 
medicine) may be filled on  supernumerary basis  over  and abov e the approved 
intake and one-third of these are reserved for NRIs in the Gulf and South East  
Asia. 
 
5.5 The Government has created an exclusive scheme called Direct 
Admission of Students Abroad (DASA) wh erein 15 per cent of seats have been 
reserved in 18 National Instit utes of  T echnology (formerly the Regional 
Engineering Colleges ) and other centrally funded tec hnical institutions, except 
IITs.  
5.6 The Government has designat ed Educat ional Consultants India 
Limited (Ed.CIL) as the Si ngle Window agency to faci litate the admission of 
children of  Indian Diaspora and foreign students. Ed.CIL not  only guides and 
informs students about technical and higher educational opportunities in India but 
takes care of admission formalities, provid es administrative support and acts as 
local guardian. 
 39

5.7 When ask ed whether any Dias pora students have av ailed of this  
reservation and whether any NRI students in  the Gulf and Sout h East Asia hav e 
availed/utilized the one third reservation for them, the Mi nistry in their written 
submission stated; 
“Notifications have been issued by All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) and Univ ersity Grants Commission (UGC) creating 15% 
supernumerary seats in technic al c ourses and higher education courses 
respectively. Ministry of Human Re source Dev elopment, Department of 
Higher Education has informed t hat there was no nodal agency for 
monitoring the implementation of the supernumerary quota. By virtue of the 
guidelines in the Notifications, technica l education institutions which foll ow 
AICTE guidelines and colleges under UGC are im plementing the Schem e. 
Admissions are taken directly by the appl icants in individual institutions, 
which are autonomous bodies,  created under statutes. Moreover, State 
Universities are gov erned by  different  laws in different States. Also 
agricultural courses are administered by the Ministry of Agriculture. Some of 
the students go through Ed.CIL also. Ed .CIL has infor med that they had 
facilitated admission of 15 and 27 NRIs from Gulf and South East Asian  
countries in the academic years 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 respectively. “ 
5.8 The Ministry in their written su bmission also stated that Ed.CIL has 
started admission of  children of Indian Diaspora and forei gn nationals under 
DASA Scheme, with effect from the academic session 2001-2002. Under this  
scheme, Ed.CIL provides servic e as ‘S ingle Window Coordi nating A gency’ for  
admission. It arranges for publicity of  DASA Schem e through its website (s), 
communication to Indian Mission abro ad and For eign Missions in India, 
communication to various Schools abroad,  advertisement in newspapers and 
participation in fairs/exhi bitions abroad, etc. It re ceives application from 
prospective students, scrutiniz es their eligibility and offe rs provisional admission 
in DASA Institutions, subject to verifi cation of elig ibility from the origina l 
documents by the Institutions. It also facilita tes remittance of first year tuition fee. 
 40

The number of foreign st udents and Indian Diaspora children admitted in NITs  
and other centrally funded instit utions (other than IITs) under the Schem e as 
furnished by the Ministry are given below: 
 
Academic 
Year 
Students Admitted under 
DASA Scheme 
Foreign Nationals Indian 
Diaspora Children 
Total 
2001-2002 Nil 2 Nos. 2 Nos. 
2002-2003 2 Nos. 12 Nos. 14 Nos. 
2003-2004 3 Nos. 41 Nos. 44 Nos. 
2004-2005 21 Nos. 245 Nos. 266 Nos.
2005-2006 83 Nos. 231 Nos. 314 Nos.
5.9 The Ministry further st ated that they are in c onsultation with Ministry 
of Human Resource  Develop ment (MHRD)  and Ministry of External Affairs  
(MEA). The Scholars hips offered by MEA and ICCR are for foreign natio nals. 
This may or may not include PIOs. MHRD is not offeri ng scholarships for foreign 
nationals/PIOs/NRIs. The Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) 
executed by MOIA is a new Scheme and is meant for PIOs and NRIs and there 
is no duplication with the schemes being  implemented by the Ministries of 
External Affairs and Human Resource Development. 
5.10 On a specific query, the Com mittee was also informed that the 
project to get the educati on pr ofile of the diaspor a students mapped is  at a 
conceptual stage. Ed.CIL has  expresse d an interest in developing and 
implementing the project for the Ministry. The matter is under discussion. 
 41

5.11 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has started a 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspor a Children from 2006-2007 w ith the 
objective to make higher education in India accessible to the children of 
Overseas Indians and publicise India as an education hub. The Committee 
also note that over 70 student s have availed of the scholarship during the 
academic year 2006-2007. The Com mittee hope that the scholarship 
scheme will also enable diaspora students to act as goodw ill ambassadors 
between India and their adopted countries. The Committee recommend that 
the scholarship scheme should be w idely publi cised to bring greater 
awareness of the scheme among the diaspora populations.  
5.12 The Committee also note that sc holarships to study in India are 
also being offered by  Ministry  of Ex ternal Affairs  (MEA) and Ministry  of 
Human Resource Developm ent (MHRD). The Committee desire that the  
Ministry should explore the possibi lity of instituting a coordination 
mechanism so as to ensure that information regarding the children of PIOs/ 
NRIs availing schol arships u nder the schemes operated b y Ministry of 
External Affairs (MEA) and Ministry  o f Human Resources Development  
(MHRD) is concurrently compiled and updated b y the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs responsible for impl ementation of scholarship programm e 
for diaspora children. 
5.13 The Committee note that the Government has decided that 15 % 
seats in all higher and techn ical inst itutes (except courses in Medicine) 
may be filled up on supernumerary  ba sis over and above the approved 
intake and 1/3rd of these are reserved for  NRIs in the Gulf and South East 
Asia. The Committee also note that  the Gover nment has introduced an 
exclusive scheme called Direct Admiss ions of St udents Abroad (DASA)  
wherein 15 % seats have been reser ved since 2001-2002 in 18 National 
Institutes of Technology  and other centr ally funded technical institutions,  
except Indian Institute of Technologies (IITs). The Committe e observe that 
the numb er of stu dents w ho availed  the quo ta have been steadil y 
 42

increasing since 2001-2002. The Committee also note that there is no nodal 
agency f or monitoring the implementation of the quota and onl y 
notifications are issued to AI CTE and UGC. The Committe e feel that in the 
absence of a nodal agency , notifications  alone may  not be  sufficient in 
implementing the quota. The Ministry  must ensure, therefore, prope r 
coordination w ith States universities and other  Ce ntral universitie s to 
facilitate admissions of students  under the quota. The Committee also 
recommend that the project to get the educat ion profile of dias pora 
students mapped should be expedited. 
People of Indian Origin (PIO) University 
5.14 The High Level Com mittee on Indian Diaspora, appointed by the 
Government in 2000 had v isited various  countries with large concentration of  
Indian Diaspora and had submit ted its reco mmendations to the Government in 
2001. The Committee had recommended, among other things , in regard to 
‘Education’, the necessity of setting up of new Univ ersities and professional 
institutions offering courses of In ternational standards in Management,  
Information Technology, Media, Agri cultural Res earch, Medicine, Food 
processing, and other areas in demand. The Committee had als o found that in 
many countries the higher educ ation to Persons of Indian Origin is not available,  
particularly in thos e countries where there are fewer opportunities for higher  
education or are not within the reach of the Indian community due to legal, 
economic or constitutional compulsions of the countries where they are residing.  
There has been c onsistent demand from Indian Diaspora in different forums for 
assistance from the Government of India in f acilitation education of their children 
in Indian educational institutions. 
5.15 According to the background mate rial obtained from the Ministry, 
while addr essing the Indian community in  Malaysia in December 2005, Prime 
Minister had stated that the Government  was cons idering set ting up of an 
exclusive university for Persons of Indian Origin. PM again reiterated the need for 
 43

creating a university for the Persons of Indian Origin during Pravasi Bhar atiya 
Divas 2006 at Hyderabad. 
5.16 The background note further states that the Ministry has submitted a 
COS Note to the Cabinet Secretariat proposing establishment of a PIO University 
to be established under t he Central Government. A policy paper in this regard 
has been circulated in this connection to the concerned Ministries. 
5.17 When quizzed further during evidence, the witness submitted; 
“…This issue is a sensitive one and it took some time to firm up our opinio n. 
We have finaliz ed our  proposal. It is before the Committee of Secretaries 
and all the Departments have given their views on it. I would expedite the 
recommendations of the Committee and the moment it is finalized, we will 
take the approval of the Cabinet and the target date is before 31 st 
December 2006 by  which we want to announce the setting up of a 
university. This is one of the l ong pending demands of the NRIs and other 
overseas Indians. We are tryi ng to meet their demand by 31 st December. I  
am confident that we will be able to ge t it done because most of the 
comments of the department s have been r eceived and we have finalize d 
everything. It is just waiting for the approval of the Committee of Secretaries 
and the Cabinet...” 
5.18 The Committee note that there is a lon g pending demand from 
NRIs to set up a PIO University in India to facilitate wholesome and modern 
education for the children of Indian  Diaspora. The Committee are happ y to 
note that the proposal is under active consideration of the Government and 
the Committee hope  that such a universit y will be set up in due course so 
that India  really  emerges a hub of education for the children of India 
Diaspora  across the globe. 
 44

CHAPTER - VI 
OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP OF INDIA  
 
6.1 The Ministry informed the Committ ee that in response to a long and 
persistent demand for “dual citizenship” pa rticularly from t he Diaspora in North 
America and developed count ries and keeping in v iew the Government’s deep 
commitment towards fulfilling  the asp irations and expectations  of Overseas  
Indians, Prime Minister Dr. Manm ohan Singh had announced at the Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas 2005 held in Mumbai the grant of Overseas Citizenship of India 
(OCI) to all Persons of Indian Ori gin where local laws permit “dual citizenship” in 
some form or the ot her except  Paki stan and Bangladesh.  Accordingly, the 
citizenship  (Amendment) Ordinance was promulgated on 28.06.2005 amending 
the Citizenship Act, 1955 extending the faci lity of Overseas Citizenship of India 
(OCI) to Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) of all countries (who were citizens of 
India or eligible to become citizens of India on 26 January, 1950 and are citizens 
of the countries (except Pakistan and Bangladesh) . The Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act was passed in the Mons oon Sess ion of the Parliament in 
August 2005.   Detailed instructions  and procedures on the OCI scheme are 
given in the MHA’s website www.mha.nic.in.  
6.2 The scheme is since operational fr om December 2, 2005.  OCI has  
been introduced by statute as a new category of citizenship to f acilitate life-long 
visa, free travel to India and certain ec onomic, educational and cultural benefits. 
The Ministry also informed that this is not to be construed as ‘dual citizens hip’ 
since it does not confer po litical rights.  Any Overs eas Indian applic ant who is 
comfortable with his present citizenship status in the country of his residence can 
apply for OCI.  Prime Minister formally handed over the first two OCI Cards at the 
4th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas  at Hyderabad on January 7,  2006. Till date, about 
 45

5000 OCI documents have been dispatc hed. The Ministry expects that the 
scheme will gain momentum in the coming months. 
6.3 In a reply  to an unstarred question (No.  2087) answered in Lok 
Sabha on 06 th December, 2006, the Ministry subm itted that the number of PIOs 
granted the status of Overseas Citizen of India as on 27.11.2006 was 7,84,371.  
6.4 The Committee pointed out during oral examination of the witnesses 
that the Dual Citizenship has been diluted merely to a Card and Overseas Citizen 
of India are forbidden from participating in the political proces s of the country. 
When asked why dual citizens are prevented from participating in the full political 
process, the Secretary, MOIA, replied as under: 
“ …I would submit, with the indulgence of this House, that the similar subject 
was discussed in other committees/fo rums and that we have followed 
whatever direction has been giv en. That is the decision of  the Parliament.  
This was not the reco mmendation of this Ministry. That Committee’s 
recommendation presently is that politic al rights are not available under this 
system. T his subject  was debated consid erably. Now, the view is to be  
taken in the Parliament.”  
6.5 The Secretary, MOIA, further stated that: 
“This question was discussed in another  Committee where I had tendered 
evidence. I would like to say that I am  not at liberty to discuss this because 
that Committee had already  taken a view. We had giv en evidenc e on 
whether voting rights to NRIs holding dual citizens hip should be given or 
not. Their recommendation was in th e negative. The report is already 
available.” 
6.6 The Committee welcome the launch of the Overseas Citizenship  
of India (OCI) card, w hich w ill st rengthen links betw een the Overseas 
Indians and their countr y of origin. The Committee has been 
 46

recommending to the government to allo w OCI cardholder to participate in 
the political process of the countr y. Given the contribution of Overseas 
Indians to the India n economy through their investments and remittances, 
the Committee fee l that it is ti me that the Government stop treating 
Overseas Indians as mere economic citi zens. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the practice in c ountries allow ing dual citizenship and 
conferring the right to vote on thei r non-resident citizens. The Committee 
have in  their earlier reports (6 th an d 10 th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) 
recommended, and the Com mittee reit erate that the government must 
consider and explore the feasibility of extending the benefits of voting right 
to Overseas Citizens of India.  
 
 
 47

 CHAPTER - VII 
PRAVASI BHARATIYA KENDRA (PBK) 
7.1 The High Level Committee on Indian Dias pora had r ecommended 
setting up of an autonomous and empower ed body structured along the lines of 
the Planning Commission with Prime Mini ster as  its ex-officio Chair man. 
However, it has been felt that the proposed elaborate structure would not be 
conducive. At the Pravas i Bhartiya Divas, 2004 t he then Prime Minister  
announced establis hment of a Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra as an autonomous  
institution to promote mult i-dimensional welfare of th e Indian Dias pora and a lso 
announced an initial grant of  Rs. 25 crores and a plot of land for housing the 
offices and activities of the Kendra. 
7.2 The Ministry in their Annual R eport (2005-2006) als o mentioned that 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) when cons tructed would be the focal point for 
interaction with overs eas Indians and woul d, in course of time, become the hub 
of various activities aimed at creating pr ide in the achievements of India an d its 
Diaspora. Work on this project will commence in the ensuing year.  
7.3 For the purpose of c onstructing a Pravas i Bharatiya Kendra, t he 
Ministry of Urban Development had earli er allotted plots No. 15A & 15B in 
Chanakyapuri measuring 5854 s q.mt. lying between the Russ ian and Bulgar ian 
Embassies in favour of MEA in their letter dated 27 th February 2003 at the 
provisional cost of land @ Rs. 22 lakhs per  acre. Following allocation of the work 
relating to PBK to MOIA, MUD was reque sted to confirm the allotment in favour 
of MOIA. In its letter no. DL&DO/L-11-1(1538)/36 of 25th January 2005, MUD has 
confirmed the allotme nt in favour of MOIA for construction of PBK. MOIA has 
since deposited a s um of Rs. 31.83 lak hs in favour of the DL&DO of MUD 
towards the premium and other charges in respect of the above plots. MUD also 
agreed to earmark another Plot No. 15 D measuring 3812 sq. meters for PBK.  
 48

7.4 The Ministry of Urban Development  have recently allotted Plot No . 
15D measuring 3812 sq. meters to Ministry  of Overseas Indian Affairs. Although 
the total allocation of land is much less than the requirement earlier assessed for 
an integrated Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra complex, nevertheless  the Ministry 
proposes to proceed further with the project based on the available land. 
7.5 During ev idence the Committee desired to know the time by which 
the appointment of consultan t for t he project will be comp leted and  th e 
approximate time by which the construction of this Kendra will be over. 
7.6 The Secretary, MOIA, responded to the query of the Committee as  
under: 
“…As regards the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra, we have taken poss ession of 
that land, and we have already asked for the Letter of Intent from the 
prospective consultants. Their offer is  expected by this month end. We will 
be taking a view in the matter on receipt of their feasibilit y report. The final 
review regarding when it will b e ready can be known only after we get the 
feasibility report to judge about the intended cost, and the time that they will 
be taking for it. The process is already on, and by next month end we would 
be able to take a vi ew regarding the f easibility study that  the consultant  
would give us….” 
7.7 The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Developm ent 
(MUD) had earlier a llotted Plots no. 15A & 15B in Chanak yapuri measuring 
5854 sq. meters (1.45 acres) in favour  of MOIA in Januar y, 2005. An other 
plot No. 15D measuring 3812 sq. meters was also allotted to the Ministry for 
the construction of Pravasi Bharati ya Kendra (PBK) during Februar y, 2006. 
The Committee observe that the Ministry  has taken inordinatel y long time  
to acquire the land. The Com mittee would like to be apprised of the action 
plan dra wn for early  construction of  the PBK and the time frame for 
completion of the project.  
 49

CHAPTER - VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Staff Position in the Ministry 
8.1 The Committee raised the problems relating to inadequacy of staff, 
non-fulfillment of vacant posts and lack of adequate infrastructure in the Ministry. 
8.2 Reacting to the observation of t he Committee, the Se cretary, MOIA, 
explained thus the staff position in the Ministry; 
“…. Regarding the staff strength, I understand and I confess that there has 
been some problem. We have a total strength of about 105 and out of those 
55 posts have been filled and 50 are vacant. All the posts of officers have 
been filled up. This is a small Ministry  and only  on the staff side there is  
some problem. As it is a small Minist ry, it does not have any cadre of its  
own. We have first moved to the D epartment of Personnel in t his regar d 
because if we have a cadre of our own then we will  have some parameters. 
They have advised us  that we should get attached to s ome bigger Ministry. 
But we approached the Depart ment of Personnel to have a separate cadre 
but they did not agree with the proposal because of various administrative 
reasons. I had discussed this with t he Home Secretary and the Hom e 
Department has agreed to it. We have taken up with them and we are  
waiting for a response  from them. I am  sure once this is done, the staff will 
be recruited by the cadre management authority.  
Basically, the 50 post s that are vac ant are of stenographers, PA’s, UDC’s, 
LDC’s, etc. Presently, the working is not  suffering because we have 
outsourced the posts, which were vacant. The only thing is that they are not 
Government employ ees and it  could not  take place becaus e of non-
availability of a single cadre sy stem. We have outs ourced the staff and 
people are available and they are worki ng. We are making all out efforts so 
 50

that this problem is sorted out. We have written to the Department of 
Personnel and they are conducting some studies and shortly they will be 
sending personnel. I am sure that by this financial year end most of the staff 
will be in position and these posts will be filled up.” 
8.3 Elaborating further on the staff position in the Ministry, the Secretary, 
MOIA, stated during the evidence that: 
“…The sanctioned strength is 105. Out of that, all the 57 posts of officers 
are filled up. It is only at the clerical level that some posts were lying vacant. 
That was because we did not have a cadre for that and unless we have a 
cadre we cannot fill them up. We wanted it to be a part of the Department of 
Personnel. When I met the Secretary Personnel he was not in favour of that. 
He asked me to take it up with t he Home Ministry. I had met t he Home 
Secretary and he is  willing to consider it. So, the proposal is pending 
now….” 
8.4 The Committee are concerned to note that even after three years 
of its crea tion, the Ministry  is stil l w ithout a minimum support staff. The 
Committee feel that in the absence of the required staff, th e Ministry may 
not be able to discharge its manda te. Many schemes/projects announced 
are yet to be implemented. The Committe e regret to note that the Ministr y 
still does not have any cadre staff of its own. The Committee, therefore, feel 
that MOIA should continue its efforts to build its  own and adequate cadre 
of staff. 
Overseas Indian Centres 
8.5 The Com mittee in their 6 th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha 2005,  had 
appreciated the intention of the Ministry  to create p osts abroad as this would 
allow them to directly  interact with Overseas Indians and provide guidance and 
counseling to them -- in c oordination with the work being done by the Missions. 
The Committee had t hen desired that these posts should be init ially created in 
 51

countries where there are substantial number of I ndian Diaspora and in those 
countries from where the Diaspora populat ion is contributing heavily to I ndia 
through remittances. The Ministry had then gi ven itself a time frame of 6 months 
within which the posts would be created. 
8.6 However, after the lapse of over  one and a half years, the Ministry 
submitted to the Committee as under: 
“…A proposal for setting up three Ov erseas Indian Centres in USA,  
Malaysia, and GCC countries has been recommended by the Committee of 
Secretaries. These Centres are proposed to be headed by a Director, 
supported by a PA and one more staff, to be India based. Three 
professionals, one each in Medical,  Legal and F inancial Services are 
proposed to be recruited from local OI population unless it is not permissible 
under the local laws. Driver and helper w ould also be locally recruited. The 
Director will be administratively under  the Head of Mis sion and functionally  
he will report to the Ministry of Ov erseas Indian Affairs. Cabinet in its 
meeting held recently consider ed th is proposal. One Overseas Indian 
Centre is proposed to be set up in the Gulf region during the current  
financial year.” 
8.7 The Com mittee would like to be informed of the time frame 
stipulated, if an y, for setting up Over seas Indian Centres. Needless to say, 
the setting up of such Centres w ill go a long w ay to establish regular link 
and build goodw ill between India, the I ndian diaspora and the countries of 
their residence. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
19 February, 2007                                     Chairman,                  
30 Magha, 1928(Saka)          Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 52

APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNALAFFAIRS 
HELD ON 12th JULY, 2005 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
 
Present 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
3. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
4. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
5. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
6. Shri Dinsha Patel 
7. Shri Sebestian Paul 
8. Shri P.A. Sangma 
9. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
10. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri P.K. Maheshwari 
12. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
13. Dr. Karan Singh 
14. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K. 
15. Smt. S.G. Indira 
16. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
17. Shri Fali S. Nariman 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Shiv KUmar - Under Secretary 
 53

Witnesses  
(Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs) 
 
1. Shri S. Krishna Kumar, Secretary 
2. Shri Malay Misra, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri R.K. Singh, Protector General of Emigrants 
4. Shri S.K. Khurana, Deputy Secretary  
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Over seas Indian Affairs to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Com mittee then took evi dence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs on the subject “ Issues relating to Overseas 
Indians”.  
2. The main issues dis cussed during the sitting related to positioning o f 
adequate staff in the Ministry as well as in the proposed Posts abroad, insurance 
schemes for Overseas Indians, celebrat ion of Pravasi Bhar atiya Divas 2006,  
setting up of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) and PIO University, pilot project for 
‘Assisted Living’ for old aged NRI s, fraudulent marriages between NRI/PIO 
grooms and Indian girls, illega l emigraton of  labour force from India to other 
countries, violation of  contracts entered into with Indian labourers by foreign 
employers and the issues relating to dual citizenship.  The representatives of 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs r eplied to the queries ra ised by the Members 
on these issues.  
3. The verbatim proceedings of the evidence have been kept for record. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 54

APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2006-2007) 
 HELD ON 09th October, 2006 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1630 hrs.  
Present 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
6. Shri Sebastian Paul 
7. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
8. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
9. Shri M. Shivanna 
10. Shri Vanlalzawma 
11. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
13. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K 
14. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 15. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
 
Secretariat 
1.Shri S.K. Sharma    -  Additional Secretary 
2.Shri Devender Singh   - Director 
3.Shri Ashok Balwani     -  Under Secretary 
 55

 
Witnesses (Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs) 
 
Sl. No. Name      Designation 
1.  Shri Nirmal Singh  - Secretary 
2.  Shri Malay Mishra  - Joint Secretary (DS) 
3.   Shri G. Gurucharan  - Joint Secretary (FS)  
4.  Shri J. Panda  - Protector General of        
        E migrants (PGOE)  
5.  Shri Ranbir Singh  - Director (E) 
6.  Ms. Sandhya Shukla - Director (SS) 
7.  Shri S.K. Khurana  - Deputy Secretary (Admin) 
   
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Mi nistry of Overseas Indian Affairs  
to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Com mittee then took evidenc e of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affair s on the various points arising out of the 
subject “Issues relating to Overseas Indians” and the replie s to the List of  
Points by t he Ministry. The representat ives of the Ministry of Overseas  
Indian Affairs replied to the queries made by the Members. 
 
The verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 56

APPENDIX-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 
 9TH JANUARY, 2007  
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs.  
  
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha  
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmine 
4. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
5. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
6. Shri Sebastian Paul 
7. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
8. Shri P.A. Sangma 
9. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
10. Shri M. Shivanna 
11. Shri Vanlalzawma 
12. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
14. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K. 
15. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
  
Secretariat 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Director 
2. Shri Ashok Balwani - Under Secretary 
 57

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then t ook up for consideration the draf t 14th Report 
on the subject “Issues relating to Ov erseas Indians ” of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their  
suggestions, if any, for incorporat ion in the draft Report.  Members 
suggested some modifications which have been suitably incorporated in 
the Report. 
4.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalise the Report and present the same to Parliament.  
5. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 58

APPENDIX-IV 
 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Recommendations/Observations 
1. 2.13 The Committee observe that the Overseas Indian workers 
are estimated at about 4-5 million and their remittances 
into India are estimated at  $12-15 billion annually. The 
Committee also observe that most of them belong to 
unskilled and semi-skilled cate gory and there has been a 
steady increase, to the tune of 1 million a year, in the 
number of persons emigrati ng for employment abroad. 
Taking note of the fact that  the Ministry propose to 
undertake skill upgradation and pre-departure training 
programmes for potential emigrant workers, the 
Committee recommend that the training programmes 
undertaken must keep in view  the changi ng nature of 
manpower requirement of c ountries around the world 
through the Indian Missions. The information regarding 
the training so imparted and the database of manpower 
availability should also be available with our Missions 
abroad. The Committee furt her recommend that the 
proposals received from Tam il Nadu, Andhra Pradesh 
and Kerala for starting emigrant workers training 
programmes should be followed up with the concerned 
states and the training progr ammes for emigrant workers 
started expeditiously. 
2. 2.14 The Committee are conc erned to note that Overseas 
Indian workers are facing numerous problems regarding 
non-payment/delayed payment  of wages, unilateral 
changes in the contract of workers, changing the jobs 
arbitrarily etc. In certain ca ses, the workers are not given 
any employment and  are left in the lurch in the foreign 
country. The Committee, theref ore, recommend that the 
Ministry should focus on the need to safeguard the 
interests of Indian worker s abroad, by entering into 
bilateral agreement with c ountries where there are 
substantial number of Indi an workers. The Committee 
appreciate that a beginning has sinc e been made by the 
Ministry for entering into bilateral agreements with Kuwait, 
Qatar, Oman and Malaysia. The Committee desire that 
the discussion/negotiation for bilateral agreement with 
these  countries be expedited  to ensure that the workers’ 
interests are protected and that they are no longer 
exploited by the unscrupulous agents in India and by their 
employers abroad. 

3. 2.15 The Committee welcome t he proposal of the Government 
to have an award called “Pravasi Bharatiya Shramik 
Puruskar” that will consist a citation and 1 lakh rupees in 
cash with the objective of  recognizing the outstanding 
contribution made by Overs eas Indian workers. The 
Committee note that there will be 10 such awards every 
year and the first series of such Awards conferred on 
January 9, 2007 during the valedi ctory session of Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas 2007. The Committee are happy that 
Government is instituting this  award in recognition of the 
huge contribution these workers make through their 
remittances to the national economy.  
4. 2.23 The Committee note that t here are 8 offices of the POEs 
from where applicants seek ing employment abroad and 
possessing a passport with Emigrant Clearance Required 
(ECR) endorsement can obtain emigration clearance. The 
Committee observed during their visit to some of the field 
offices of POE that these offices are headed by junior 
level officers. The Committee,  therefore, recommend that 
the field offices need to be revamped by upgrading the 
posts in the metropolitan cities to Deputy Secretary level. 
The Committee regret to note that there has been 
rampant corruption in the offices of POEs. The Committee 
find it even more regretful to  note that inspite of the 
admitted corruption  in the POE offices, the Government 
has done seemingly little to id entify officials with doubtful 
integrity and proceed agains t them. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that suitable measures be 
undertaken immediately to bring about transparency in 
the functioning of POEs and exemplary action be taken 
against officials indulging in corrupt practices.  
 
5. 2.24 During their study visit to  some of the offices of POEs 
during November 2006, the Co mmittee observed that the 
office accommodation were too small, remotely located, 
unkempt and without proper infr astructure in place. The 
Committee, therefore, desir e that the POE submit a 
detailed report within three mo nths on all the regional 
offices of POE indicating offi ce-wise staff strength, the 
number of applications receiv ed,  space requirement and 
actually available, suitability of the office location in terms 
of accessibility and the infrastructure needed to make the 
offices efficient and user friendly. Fo r the convenience of 
applicants, the Committee recommend that the POE 
offices may also open ‘May I he lp you’ counters, so that 
applicants are not exploited by soliciting spurious agents. 

 
6. 2.29 Taking note of the large scale exploitation and 
harassment of prospective emigrants by spurious 
Recruiting Agents (RAs), the Committee recommend that 
the Emigration Act 1983 be amended expeditiously by 
inserting provisions so t hat deterrent punishment is 
inflicted on spurious RA s and the RAs duping the 
emigrant workers. In order to curb the incidents of illegal 
emigration for which spurious RAs are responsible, the 
Committee further recommend that respective POE 
offices should hold regular  meetings with the Police 
Department of the concerned States to follow up on the 
cases registered and to c halk out ways and means for 
dealing with spurious recrui ting agencies. The Committee 
would also like the governm ent to widely publicise the 
blacklisted agents (both foreign and Indian) to preclude 
duping of unsuspecting workers seeking emigration. 
7. 2.34 The Committee observe t hat the proposal to introduce 
smart card was initiated way back in March, 2005, but 
despite considerable lapse of time no significant headway 
has been made. The explanation submitted by the 
Ministry for the delay in introduction of smart card in the 
field offices and at the Headq uarters of POE is found 
untenable by the Committee as I ndia is acclaimed to be 
one of the high-tech capital of  the world. The Committee, 
therefore, see no reason as to why the introduction of 
smart card should be dela yed so inordinately. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the government 
should expedite full computeriz ation of all the offices of 
POE, and impart necessary training to the staff so that the 
introduction of smart card  is facilitated without any 
operational difficulty. 
8. 2.37 The Committee note that government is not maintaining 
database of diaspora / NRIs living in different parts of the 
world. The Committee hardly need to emphasise the need 
for maintaining such a database country/region-wise, 
while acknowledging the need to promote, nurture and 
sustain a mutually beneficia l symbiotic relationship 
between India and it s diaspora. The dat abase so created 
should maintain information including the kind of workers 
required and the jobs avai lable and the emerging trends 
of em
ployment and made available on  the website of the 

Ministry. This, in the consi dered view of the Committee, 
would save the migrant work ers from the clutches of 
unscrupulous emigration agents.  
9. 2.44 The Committee are happy to  note that the Government 
has introduced the Pravas i Bharatiya Bima Yojana 
(PBBY), 2003 in an effort to sa feguard the interests of the 
emigrant workers. The Commi ttee also note that the 
PBBY, 2003 has now been upgraded as the PBBY, 2006 
and emigrant workers will no w get a minimum cover of 
Rs. 5 lakhs, instead of Rs . 2 lakhs. The Committee, 
however, note that as on dat e 11.07 lakhs policies have 
been issued, but the number of policies issued vis-à-vis 
the number of emigrant work ers is still far less. The 
Committee feel that there are many more potential 
workers in need of insurance and, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry must sensitise the workers on the 
benefits of getting insured. The Committee also desire 
that subscription premium should be reviewed so as to 
consider the scope to further reduce it. 
10. 3.16 The Committee welcome the proposal of the Ministry to 
establish an Overseas Indians Investment Promotion Unit 
to give sustained and focused attention to promoting 
investments by Overseas Indians  in India. Given that the 
remittances of Overseas Indian workers into India are 
huge and their potential for investments in India even 
more huge, the Committee appreciate the launch of an 
Information Service Portal in  association with UTI Bank, 
which provides useful information for investment 
opportunities in India. The Committee recommend that 
the proposed compendium on Policies, Incentives and 
Investment Opportunities fo r Overseas Indians and the 
Handbook for Overseas Indians  providing information on 
investment opportunities available with the State 
Governments should be brought out soon.  
11. 3.17 Realising t he potentials and capac ities of Overseas 
Indians to invest in India the Committee in their 6 th Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) had recommended for setting up of the 
investment promotion unit as the Committee felt that 
Overseas Indians are presently able to invest only a lower 
proportion of their resources in  India as compared to the 
Overseas Chinese who invest in China in a big way. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry must also 
commission a study of the ways in which Overseas 
Indians can make 
greater contribution throu gh 

investments in India. The study commissioned should 
also analyse the investment  patterns of the Overseas 
Indians in India so that pr omotion policies can be fine-
tuned. The Committee further recommend that the 
Ministry should finalize and  announce the investment 
promotion unit expeditiously. 
12. 3.18 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) has drawn up proposals for a comprehensive 
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act for Overseas Indians 
and that the Ministry have made some suggestions to 
MHA. The Committee also note that the matter has been 
referred to a Group of Mini sters (GoMs). The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should follow up the matter with 
the MHA expeditiously so t hat procedures are simplified 
for the Overseas Indians under the FCR Act. 
13. 4.7 The Committee are concer ned to note that the incidents 
of failed and fraudulent marriages of Indian women with 
NRIs have assumed alarming proportions. The 
Committee note that owing to huge costs involved, the 
victim Indian women are not abl e to take legal recourse. 
The Committee recommend that  an effective mechanism 
need be worked out in order to curb the menace of 
fraudulent marriages including compulsory registration of 
marriages and amendment to the Indian Marriages Acts, 
which may provide for, among other things, the 
jurisdiction of divorce proceedi ngs to be instituted only in 
the courts in whose jurisdiction the marriage was 
solemnized/registered. The Committee also recommend 
that the prospective bridegroom  should be made to give 
an affidavit to the effect that he is not married, and that 
affidavit must be notarized by the respective 
consulate/embassy. The Committee also desire that the 
guidance booklet on Marriages  with Overseas Indians 
should be brought out immediately and widely 
disseminated both in India where marriages take place 
and also distributed overs eas. The Committee further 
recommend that government should set up Gender Cells/ 
legal cells to provide legal aid and counseling to victims of 
fraudulent marriages. The Commi ttee note that in many 
countries there is provision under which the courts offer 
the services of attorneys free of charge and there are also 
social organizations whic h provide free legal aid 
counselling to Indian women.  The Ministry, therefore, 
need to prepare lists of such attorneys and other 
organisations who would be ready to work pro bono and 
put up on to the website of the Ministr y and our Missions 

so that victims of fraudulent marriages may approach 
them for free legal aid. 
14. 5.11 The Committee are happy to  note that the Ministry has 
started a scholarship progr amme for Diaspora children 
from 2006-2007 with the objective to make higher 
education in India accessible to the children of Overseas 
Indians and publicise Indi a as an education hub. The 
Committee also note that over 70 students have availed 
of the scholarship during the academic year 2006-2007. 
The Committee hope that the scholarship scheme will 
also enable diaspora students to act goodwill 
ambassadors between India and their adopted countries. 
The Committee recommend that  the scholarship scheme 
should be widely publicised to br ing greater awareness of 
the scheme among the diaspora populations. 
15. 5.12 The Committee also note that scholarships to study in 
India are also being offered by Ministry of External Affairs 
(MEA) and Ministry of Hu man Resource Development 
(MHRD). The Committee desire t hat the Ministry should 
explore the possibility of instituting a coordination 
mechanism so as to ensure that information regarding the 
children of PIOs/ NRIs availing scholarships under the 
schemes operated by Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) 
and Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD) 
is concurrently compiled and updated by the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs res ponsible for implementation of 
scholarship programme for diaspora children. 
16. 5.13  The Committee note that the Government has decided 
that 15% seats in all hig her and technical institutes 
(except courses in Medicine) may be filled on 
supernumerary basis over and above the approved intake 
and 1/3
rd of these are reserved for NRIs in the Gulf and 
South East Asia. The Committee also note that the 
Government has treated an exclusive scheme called 
DASA wherein 15% seats have been reserved since 
2001-2002 in 18 National Institutes of Technology and 
other centrally funded technical institutions, except Indian 
Institute of Technologies (IITs). The Committee observe 
that the number of students who availed the quota have 
been steadily increasing since 2001-2002. The 
Committee also note that t here is no nodal agency for 
monitoring the implementat ion of the quota and only 
notifications are issued to AICTE and UGC. The 

Committee feel that in the absence of a nodal agency, 
notifications alone may not be sufficient in implementing 
the quota. The  Ministry must  ensure, therefore, proper 
coordination  with  States  universities and other Central 
universities to facilitate adm issions of students under the 
quota. The Committee also recommend that the project to 
get the education profile of diaspora students mapped 
should be expedited. 
17. 5.18 The Committee note that there is a long pending demand 
from NRIs to set up a PIO Univer sity in India to facilitate 
wholesome and modern education for the children of 
Indian Diaspora. The Committe e are happy to note that 
the proposal is under active consideration of the 
Government and the Committee hope that such a 
university will be set up in due course so that India really 
emerges a hub of education for the children of India 
Diaspora  across the globe. 
18. 6.6  The Committee welcom e the launch of the Overseas 
Citizenship of India (OCI) card, which will strengthen links 
between the Overseas Indians a nd their country of origin. 
The Committee has been recommending the government 
to allow OCI cardholder to participate in the political 
process of the country. Gi ven that Overseas Indians 
contribute hugely to the economy through their 
investments and remittances, the Committee feel that it is 
time that the Government st op treating Overseas Indians 
as economic citizens by depriv ing them of their political 
rights. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
practice in the countries with dual citizenship that allow 
non-resident citizens to vote. The Committee have in their 
earlier reports (6 th and 10 th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) 
recommended and the Committ ee reiterate that the 
government must consider and explore the feasibility of 
extending the benefits of voting right to Overseas Citizens 
of India.  
19. 7.7  The Committee note t hat the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MUD) had earlier  allotted Plots no. 15A & 
15B in Chanakyapuri measuring 5854 sq. meters (1.45 
acres) in favour of MOIA in January, 2005. Another plot 
No. 15D measuring 3812 sq. meters was also allotted to 
the Ministry for the constr uction of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Kendra (PBK) during February, 2006. The Committee 
observe that the Ministry has taken inordinately long time 
to acquire the land. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action plan drawn for early construction of 
the PBK and the time frame for completion of the project.  

20. 8.4 The Committee are concer ned to note that even after 
three years of its creation, the Ministry is still without a 
minimum support staff. The Co mmittee feel that in the 
absence of the require staff, the Ministry may not be able 
to discharge its mandate. Many schemes/projects 
announced are yet to be implemented. The Committee 
regret to note that the Mi nistry still does not have any 
cadre staff of its ow n. The Committee, ther efore, feel that 
MOIA should continue its efforts to build its own and 
adequate cadre of staff. 
21. 8.7  The Committee would lik e to be informed of the time 
frame stipulated, if any, fo r setting up Overseas Indian 
Centres. Needless to say, t he setting up of such Centres 
will go a long way to establ ish regular link and build 
goodwill between India, the Indian diaspora and the 
countries of their residence.  
 
 
 

Annexure-I 
 
YEAR-WISE DETAILS OF PRIVATE REMITTANCES FROM THE YEAR 2001-2005 
 
 
YEAR 
(vide para 2.3 of the Report)
 
In US $ million 
 
 
In Rs. Crore 
 
2000-2001 
2001-2002 
2002-2003 
2003-2004 
2004-2005 
2005-2006** 
Upto 
0.09.2005. 
 
12,873 
12,125 
14,807 
18,885 
14,494 
12,043 
 
58,756 
57,821 
71,642 
86,764 
66,861 
52,563 
 
 67

Annexure-II 
 
YEAR-WISE INFORMATION REGARDING NUMBER OF WORKERS WHO WERE  
 
GIVEN EMIGRATION CLEARANCE FOR CONTRACTUAL EMPLOYMENT 
(vide para 2.20 of the Report) 
 
 
 Year No. of workers (in lakhs) 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2.79 
3.68 
4.66 
4.75 
5.49 
 68

Annexure-III 
 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF ANNUAL LABOUR OUTFLOWS FROM  
INDIA BY DESTINATION 
(vide para 2.20 of the Report) 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Country 2001 2002 2003  2004 2005 
1. U. A. E. 53673 95034 143804 175262 194412 
2. Saudi 
Arabia 
78048 99453 121431 123522 99879 
3. Kuwait 39751 4859 54434  52064 39124 
4. Oman 30985 41209 36816 33275 40931 
5. Malaysia 6131 10512 26898 31464 71041 
6. Bahrain 16382 20807 24778  22980 30060 
7. Qatar 13829 12596 14251 16325 50222 
8. Mauritius -- -- -- 3544 1965 
9. Maldives -- -- -- 3233 3423 
10.  Jordan -- -- -- 2576 1851 
Others 39865 83193 44044 10715 15945  
TOTAL 278664 367663 466456 474960 548853 
 
 
 69

ANNEXURE IV 
STATE-WISE FIGURES OF WORKERS GRANTED EMIGRATION 
CLEARANCE/ECNR ENDORSEMENT DURING THE YEARS 2001-2005 
(vide para 2.20 of the Report) 
 
S. 
No. 
State 2001 2002 2003  2004 2005 
1 Andaman&Nicobar  0 2 9 29 5 
2 Andhra Pradesh  37,331 38,417 65,971 72,580 48,498 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 61 73 0 
4 Assam 1,575 2,666 2298 2,695 669 
5 Bihar  9,711  19,222 17,104 21,812 9,366 
6 Chandigarh 2,435 2,813 2,374 2,405 807 
7 Chhattisgarh - 0 588 580 807 
8 Delhi 3,183 4,018 6,513 6,052 6,024 
9 Goa 2,255 3,545 3,494 7,053 1,627 
10 Gujarat 10,294 11,925 17,012 22,218 49,923 
11 Haryana 154 424 1,246 1,267 2,313 
12 Himachal Pradesh 116 1,724 1,690 1,506 762 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 1,366 1,323 42 1,944 486 
14 Jharkhand - 0 1,779 919 974 
15 Karnataka 10,095 14,061 22,641 19,237 75,384 
16 Kerala 61,548 81,950 92,044 63,512 1,25,075
17 Madhya Pradesh 5,035 7,411 10,651 8,888 5,312 
18 Maharashtra 22,713 25,477 29,350 28,670 29,289 
19 Manipur 0 2 50 29 0 
20 Meghalaya 0 0 1 0 0 
21 Mizoram 0 0 81 38 0 
22 Nagaland 0 1 54 46 0 
23 Orissa 3,014 1,742 5,370 6,999 1,258 
24 Others 7 0 0 0 24 
25 Pondichery 21 21 24 560 222 
26 Punjab 12,422 19,638 24,963 25,302 24,088 
27 Rajasthan 14,993 23,254 37,693 35,108 21,899 
28 Sikkim 3 16 3 0 0 
 70

29 Tamil Nadu 61,649 79,165 89,464 1,08,964 1,17,050
30 Tripura 2 1,114 4 2 1 
31 Uttar Pradesh 13,912 19,288 24,854 27,428 22,558 
32 Uttaranchal - 106 122 58 137 
33. West Bengal 4,830 8,338 8,906 8,986 5,102 
Total 2,78,664 3,67,663 4,66,456 4,74,960 5,48,853
Source: Offices of the Protectors of Emigrants 
 71

Annexure-V 
 
COUNTRY-WISE BREAK-UP OF BLACKLISTED FOREIGN  
EMPLOYERS LIST (PAC) 
(vide para 2.28 of the Report) 
                 
SL.NO. NAME OF THE COUNTRY NO. OF FOREIGN 
EMPLOYERS 
PLACED IN PAC 
1.  AZERBAIJAN 1 
2.  BAHRAIN 49 
3.  BRUNEI 2 
4.  JORDAN 7 
5.  KENYA 4 
6.  KUWAIT 16 
7.  LIBYA 2 
8.  MALAYSIA 122 
9.  MALTA 2 
10.  MAURITIUS 1 
11.  OMAN 7 
12.  QATAR 16 
13.  SAUDI ARABIA 54 
14.  UGANDA 2 
15.  UKRAINE 10 
16.  UNITED ARAB 
EMIRATES 
13 
 
17.  YEMEN 2 
                 TOTAL   310 
 
 
 
 72

AZHERBAIJAN 
BAHRAIN 
1.  ABC Bahrin 
2.  LIGHT STYLE GARMENT  
BAHRIN BAHRIN Bahrin 
3.  LIGHT STYLE GARMENT  
Bahrin 
4.  M/S BINIL MECHNICAL & CIVIL CONTRACTING  
Bahrin 
5. M/S AL HAMAD CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT CO., 
WLL. PO BOX 1125, MANANMA, BAHRIN 
6. M/S SPECTRUM BUILDERS 
PO BOX 20024, BAHRIN 
7. KINGDOM TOWERS BUILDING CONST., 
PO BOX 30993 
8. M/S FAIRMECH W.L.L., 
PO 54108, BAHRIN 
9. M/S AL KHAJAH EST.,  
P.O. BOX NO. 5042, BAHRIN 
10. M/S DOWN TOWN CONST. CO. 
P.O. BOX NO. 26312 
11. M/S ROBODH CONTRACTING EXT., 
P.O. BOX 26228 
12. M/S AWAL REFRIGERATION AND AIRCONDITIONING 
P.O. BOX 955,  
13. M/S AL DAHRANI CONST., 
P.O. BOX NO. 5763 
14. M/S BINIL MECHANICAL CONTRACTING 
BAHRIN 
15. M/S SATTAR TRADING 
P.O. BOX NO. 519 
16. M/S CONSOLIDATED CONTRACTORS CO., 
P.O. BOX 583 
17. WAQIF GARAGE 
BAHRIN 
18. M/S ABDULLA AHMED NASS 
PO.O. BOX 669 
19. M/S A.A.A. HOMES 
P.O. BOX 3119 
20. M/S KINGDOM GROUP OF COMPANIES 
BAHRIN 
1.  CASPIANPETROLEUM PROJECT [Edit] 
BAKU Azerbaijan 
 73

21. M/S MASTER CONSTRUCTION 
P.O. BOX NO. 15122 
22. M/S GRANDIUM CONSULTANTS WLL. 
P.O. BOX NO. 3201 
23. M/S ZAEDON BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 
P.O. BOX NO. 50063 
24. M/S EBRAHIM ABDUL AAL GROUP 
P.O. BOX 20418, MANAMA, BAHRIN 
25. 
M/S GEODATA, 
803, DIPLOMAT TOWER, DIPLOMATIC AREA, MANAMA 
BAHRIN 
26. M/S FIVE STAR EST FOR CONSTRUCTION 
BAHRIN 
27. M/S CONNECTION CONTRACTING CO., 
WLL 
28. AL ASAIL CONSTRUCTION, 
BAHRIN 
29. M/S ROYAL TOWERS CONSTRUCTIONS 
BAHRIN 
30. M/S MAJEED ABDULLA HASAN AL MUTAWEH 
BAHRIN 
31. M/S AL MANAZEL WORKERS SERVICES, 
BAHRIN 
32. M/S AL ABRAJ CARPENTARY WORKSHOP 
BAHRIN 
33. M/S MALUK BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, 
BAHRIN 
34. M/S MODERN CRAFT 
BAHRIN 
35. M/S AL RABHA CONTRACTING EST. 
BAHRIN 
36. M/S RELITY CONSTRUCTION CO., WLL 
BAHRIN 
37. M/S AL BENJERY LADIES TRAINING 
BAHRIN 
38. M/S ALTAF CONSTRUCTION CO., 
BAHRIN 
39. M/S M.S.C. CONSTRUCTION S.P.C. 
BAHRIN 
40. M/S S. PROJECTS CONSTRUCT 
BAHRIN 
41. M/S LEGEND CONTRACTING CO., 
BAHRIN 
 74

42. M/S HASSAN ABDUL MAJEED ABDUL HASSAIN AL SATTI ESTAB. 
BAHRIN 
43. M/S TRANS WORD INTERNET 
BAHRIN 
44. M/S S.A. PROJECTS CONSTRUCT 
BAHRIN 
45. M/S SHAIK ABDUL KARIM MOHAMMED AL ZEKRI ESTABLISHMENT 
BAHRIN 
46. M/S BABLAH CONTRACTING 
BAHRAIN 
47. M/S AL DAWOOD CONTRACTING EST. 
BAHRIN 
48. M/S FAHAD KHALID ISMAIL ALALAWI ESTABLISHMENT 
BAHRIN 
49. M/S SALEH ABDUL KARIM MOHAMMED ALZEKRI EST. 
BAHRIN 
BRUNEI 
1.  M/S RBJ INDUSTRIES  
brunei 
2.  RAJA ISTERI PENIGIVAN ANAK SAHIBA  
HOSPITAL, brunei 
JORDAN 
1.  JERUSALEM FACTORY FOR CAN BNOXES CO  
AMMAN Jordan 
2.  LAMA GARMENT FACTORY, IRBID JORDAN  
IRBID, JORDAN Jordan 
3.  M/S AL SHTIEA BUREAU OF CONST SERVICES  
AMAN Jordan 
4.  M/S PANORMA/RELIANCE GARMENT INDUSTRY  
55, QIZ, AL DULYAL ZARQA, AMMAN, JORDAN  
5.  M/S UNITED GARMENT CO. PVT. LTD.  
JORDAN  
6.  THE 4 CATERING COMPANY  
Jordan 
7.  UNITED GARMENT CO. PVT. LTD.  
JORDAN  
KENYA 
1.  M/S INDUSTRIAL PLANT LTD. NAIROBI KENYA  
KENYA  
2.  MACK CONSTRUCTION COMPANY  
P.O.BOX 2755 NAKURU, KENYA  
3.  OPTICA KENYA LTD.  
NAIROBI KENYA  
 75

4.  RICHFIELD ENG. LTD.  
NAIROBI Kenya 
 
KUWAIT 
1.  AL ATEEQI COMPANY  
POBOX NO.5646, SAFAT, CODE NO.13057 KUWAIT  
2.  AL BLASEM GENL TRADING & CONST. CO.  
Kuwait 
3.  AL WELAYA TRAVEL TOURISM  
Kuwait 
4.  AL-TAN GENER TRAD&CONT. AND mANTECHSERV 
ICES GROUP SAFAT Kuwait 
5.  ASAHI GENL TRADING & CONTRACCO.  
KUWAIT  
6.  FINESCO INTERNATIONAL TRDG.& CONTRTG.CO 
KUWAIT  
7.  FIRST KUWAITI COMPANY  
KUWAIT  
8.  GERSEN GENRAL TRAD& CONT. CO.  
KUWAIT  
9.  GHAZWAN TRADING &CONTRACTING CO.  
KUWAIT  
10. GOLDEN SHAHIN GROUP OF COMPANIES  
KUWAIT  
11. GULF INTERNATIONAL CONTRACTING CO.  
Kuwait 
12. KUWAIT AND GULF LINK TRANSPORT  
KUWAIT  
13. M/S FIRST PROJECTS GENERAL TRADING & CONTRACTING CO., PO BOX NO. 
47027, FAHAHEEL, KUWAIT FAHAHEEL Kuwait 
14. 
M/S SAAD MASHOOD AGENCY  
JLEEB ALSHUWAIKH, AYYED AYYAD COMPLEX, FIRST FLOOR, OFFICE NO.22, 
KUWAIT  
15. PEARAL CATERING SERV.  
KUWAIT  
16. RIC COOLEX REFRIDGERATION INDUSTRIES CO 
SHWWAK KUWAIT,PO BOX NO.2261 SAFAT KUWAIT  
LIBYA 
1.  AL-SHEHAB CO-MISUARTA,  
Libya 
2.  ORGANISATION OF NAHAR AL HAYAH FOR CONST 
RUCTION AND INVESTMENT TRIPOLI Libya 
 76

MALAYSIA 
1.  
ACTION op RENOUNED  
NO. 198, LEVEL 3, JALAN TUN SAMBANTHAN, BRICKFIELDS, 50470 KUALA 
LUMPUR KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
2.  AKESORI SDN, BHD NO. 35, LENGKONG RISHAH, 1, KAWASAN 
PERINDUSTRIAN SILLBIN, 30100 IPOH, PERAK Malayesia 
3.  
ANDALAS MEDICAL CENTRE  
77, PERISARAN TENGKU AMPUAN RIHIMAH 41200 KLANG SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
4.  ARTERIAL RESOURCES SDN. BHD LOT 2353-12, JALAN KEMPAS LAMS, OFF 
JALAN SKUDAI, 81300 JOHOR Malayesia 
5.  
AUSTRAL ENTERPRISES BERHAD  
24-31, JALAN SETIAWANGSA 8, TAMAN SETIAWANGSA, 54200 KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
6.  AYUB RESTORAN  
NO. 33, JALAN SUGU, TAMAN DAYA JOHOR Malayesia 
7.  
B.W. LUCKY ENTERPRISES  
LOT 173, JALAN KAMPUNG AIR KUNING, 34000 TAIPING, PERAK PERAK 
Malayesia 
8.  BANENG INDUSTRIES SDN, BHD  
BATU 2 1/2, JALAN TRANJUNG LABOH, 83000 BATU PAHAT, JOHOR Malayesia 
9.  BERESTU ENTERPRISE SDN BHD  
NO.16, JALAN 9, AMPANG JAYA, 68000 AMPAN SELANGOR MALAYSIA  
10.  BERESTU ENTERPRISE SDN. BHD. KLANG,  
SELANGOR Malayesia 
11.  BIO AXIS SDN. BHD NO. 6A LORONG ARA KIRI 3, LUCKY GARDEN BANGSAR, 
59000 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
12.  
BOON KOON VEHICLES INDUSTRIES SDN. BHD  
1177 JALAN DATO KERAMAT, 14300 NIBONG TEBAL, SEBARANG PERAL 
SELATAN, PALAU PINANG MALAYSIA  
13.  
CHINWELL FASTNERS CO. SDN. BHD.  
NO. 1583 MK 11, LORONG PERUSAHAAN UTAMA 1, BUKIT TENGAH 
INDUSTRIAL PARK, 14000 BUKIT MERTAJAM, PENANG Malayesia 
14.  CLASSIC ADVANTAGE HOSTEL AND CANTEEN  
JOHAR JOHAR Malayesia 
15.  
COSMO ENGINEERING SDN, BHD  
30, JLN, TRAMING 4, TMN, TAMING JAYA JLN BELAKONG, SERI KEMBANGAN, 
SELANGOR MALAYSIA  
16.  
DATABUDI ENGINEERING SDN BHD  
RON YING/MR. MASOOD HOSSAIN/GANESAN 41-A, JALAN SS. 19/6, 47500 
SUBANG JAYA MALAYSIA   
17.  
DIGITAL CONSTRUCTION SDN BHD   
NO. 14-A, JLN. SG. 3/2, TAMAN SRI GOMBAK BATU CAVES, SELGANGOR 
MALAYSIA   
18.  DIGITAL CONTINENTAL   
 77

NO. 32, JALAN SS 10/6C, 47500 SUBANG JAYA SELANGOR,  
MALAYSIA   
 
19.  DIGITAL POWER PROJECTS SDN. BHD   
NO. 44-A, JLN. 1/19 PETALLNG JAYA, 46000 SELANGOR, MALAYSIA   
20.  
DURGA CHARITABALE TRUST BERDAFFER   
K. TRENGGANU, TRENGGANU, SRI ARUMUGHA VINAYAGAR TEMPLE, NO. 9 
SG., TUAH BATU CAVES, SELANGOR MALAYSIA   
21.  
EMINENT CAPITAL SDN. BHD   
LEVEL 32, MENARA SHAHZAN INSAS, 30, JALAN SULTAN ISMAIL, 50520 KUALA 
LUMPUR KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
22.  
EURO PRESTASL SDN. BHD  
48-2, 2ND FLOOR, JALAN 1/27F SECTION C-7 PUSAT BANDAR, WANGSA MAJU, 
53300 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
23.  
EUROSA FURNITURE (M) SDN. BHD   
LOT 334, OFF JALAN HOSPITAL SUNGAL BULOH 47000 SUNGAL BULOH 
SELANGOR SELANGOR Malayesia 
24.  
EXCEL MOULD MANUFACTURING SDN. BHD   
NO. 84, SUBANG LIGHT INDUSTRIAL PARK, BLOCK E, LOT 546 OFF JALAN SS 
13/AK 4750 PETALING JAYA SELANGOR Malayesia 
25.  
F.W. FURNITURE SDN, BHD   
8, JALAN 1/4, KWS. PERINDUSTRIAN PENGKALAN 2, FASA 1, 31550 PUSING 
PERAK Malayesia 
26.  FUDEX RUBBER PRODUCTS (M) SDN, BHD   
JA 9158, JASIN INDUSTRIAL PARK, 77000 JASIN MELAKA MELAKA Malayesia 
27.  G.K.K. IMPORT EXPORT SDN. BHD.   
NO. 21, JALAN DATO HAMZAH, 41000 KLANG SELANGOR Malayesia 
28.  
GALLANT ELECTRONIC CO. (M) SDN, BHD   
LOT 1899 BATU 13, JT BALAKONG 43300 SERI KEMBANGAN, SELANGOR 
SELANGOR Malayesia 
29.  
GARDEN CITY HOTEL SDN, BHD   
NO. 213, & 214, JALAN BUNUS OFF JALAN MASJID INDIA, 50100. KUALA 
LUMPUR Malayesia 
30.  GOPAL CONSTRUCTIONS IM) SDN. BHD   
2634, JLN. SIMPANG KUKUT, PORT DICKSON, N. SEMBILAN Malayesia 
31.  
GRACEFUL TRANSFORMERS SDN. BHD   
NO. 202, BATU KG, TOK MUDA, JALAN KAPAR, 42200 KALANG SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
32.  
GRADO OPNE SDN, BHD   
NO. 45E, 5TH FLOOR, BANGUNAN BANGSA RIA JALAN MAAROF, KLANG, 
SELANGOR Malayesia 
33.  
GREATPAC SDN. BHD   
JASA EXPRESS, LOT 2222/2223 JALAN HOSPITAL, SUNGAL BULOH 
INDUSTRIAL AREA, 47000 SELANGOR Malayesia 
34.  HANORA SDH. BHD   
265 A. JLN. MAHKOTA, TMN. MALURI, CHERAS 55100 KUALA LUMPUR 
 78

Malayesia 
35.  
HOTLINE WOODEN FURNITURE SDN, BHD   
LOT NO. 9, JALAN 7 KAWASAN PERUSAHAAN CHERAS JAYA, BATU 9, JALAN 
BALAKONG CHERAS, 43200 SELANGOR Malayesia 
 
36.  HYLEX APPARELS JALAN  
KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
37.  
HYPER SPEED (M) SDN, BHD  
NO. 1, JAL 16/13C, SECTION 16 SHAH ALAM & NO. 27-A, JALAN TUN 
SAMBANTHAN, 4, BRICKFIELDS, KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
38.  
HYTEX APPARELS SDN, BHD  
LOT 25, JALAN E1/5, KAWASAN PERINDUSTRIA N TAMAN EHSAN, PETI SURAT 
NO. 6, KEPONG 52100 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
39.  
IDEAL SKILLS (M) SDN, BHD  
61-A, JALAN SG. 3/1, PUSAT BANDAR SRI GOMBAK, 68000 GOMBAK, KUALA 
LUMPUR Malayesia 
40.  
INSTANT GLORY SDN. BHD  
MEGAN PHILEO AVENUE, SUITE B-17-7, NO. 12, JALAN YAP KWAN SENG, 
MALAYSIA   
41.  INTISARI BAKERY   
LOT 1328, JALAN 11, KG. BARU AMPANG TAMBAHAN AMPANG Malayesia 
42.  
IVORY PEARL SDN, BHD   
LOT 5, PERISIARAN PERINDUSTRIAN KANTHAN 5, ESTEL PERINDUSTRIAK 
KANTHAN 31200 CHEMOR PERAK Malayesia 
43.  
J.M.I. ENTERPRISES   
15-3-08, SRI JOHOR FLAT, 21/2 MILES CHER A 56000 KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
44.  
JOOLEN ENTERPRISES SDN. BHD   
NO. 3B, LORONG BUKIT KUDA, OFF JALAN BATU TIGA LAMA, 41300 SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
45.  
JOVA INDUSTRIES SDN, BHD   
LOT 10, LORONG PERUSAHAAN 4A, KULIN INDUSTRY ESTATE, KULIM KEDAH 
Malayesia 
46.  
JUST SECES,   
LOT 2353-12, JALAN KEMPAS LAMA, OFF JALAN SKUDAI, 81300 JOHOR 
Malayesia 
47.  K. ARGO FARM PRODUCTS ENTERPRISES  
NO. 30, TAMAN SAUJANA, BATU GAJAH PERAK Malayesia 
48.  KERIS VIJAYA SDN BHD  
Malayesia 
49.  L.Y.K. CLEANING SERVICES SDN. BHD  
101B MAIN STREET AMPANG, AMPANG, 68000 SELANGOR Malayesia 
50.  
LAL QUILLA RESTAURANT SDN. BHD  
NO. 9, & A, PERISIARAN ARA KIRI, TAMAN LUCKY BANGSAR, 59100 KUALA 
LUMPUR Malayesia 
 79

51.  LEE SENG POTTERY SDN, BHD  
LOT 81, PLOT 115728, JLN. CERAMIC CHEPR, 11/11 CHEMOR, PERAK Malayesia 
52.  LIAN SENG WELDING SHOP  
MCLD PIASAU ROAD, P.O. BOX 669, 98007 MIRI SARAWAK Malayesia 
53.  
M.G.M. CATERER  
NO. 316, JLN. 24/39, TMN. PETALING KEPONG BARU, KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
 
54.  
MACLEAN SERVICES SDN, BHD  
384, JALAN 5/59 TAMAN PETALING 46000 PETALING JAYA SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
55.  
MALINDO MULTI-RESOURCES SDN. BHD  
7A, JALAN TANDOK, OFF JALAN MAAROF, BANGSAR 59000 KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
56.  MAN CHIN LEE POTERY WORKS  
LOT 65360 BATU 5, GOPENG, TO BATU GAJAH, PERAK Malayesia 
57.  MANJAMAS TIMES SDN, BHD  
4, 2ND FLOOR JLN. 1/128, HAPPY GARDEN 58200 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
58.  
MAXLIN GARMENTS SDN, BHD  
LOT 4979, BATU 2 1/2, JALAN TANJUNG LAHOBH 83000 BATU PAHAT, JOHORE 
Malayesia 
59.  
MEGA JUMBO PORT SERVICES SDN, BHD  
5211-C 3RD FLOOR, PERISIARAN RAJA MUDA MUSA, 42000 PORT KLANG 
SELANGOR Malayesia 
60.  METAL WAY FURNITURE INDUSTRIES (M) SDN.  
AL-283, JALAN KAMPUNG BARU, SUNGAI BULOH SELANGOR Malayesia 
61.  MODERN PLANING  
LOT 2354-6, JALAN KEMPAS LAMA, 81300 SKUDAL, BAHRU JOHOR Malayesia 
62.  MOHANA RESTORAN  
NO. 119, JALAN TUANKU KELANA KLANG Malayesia 
63.  
MR. MOORTHY  
A/1, MUTHU, 1C NO. 630724-10-5064, PNK ADVANCE ENTERPRISES, NO. 26-A 
JALAN 17/23, SECTION 17, SHAH ALAM SELANGOR Malayesia 
64.  NGAL CHEONG METAL INDUSTRIES SDN. BHD  
LOT 41730 BATU 14, JALAN PUCHONG 47100 PUCHONG SELANGOR Malayesia 
65.  
OMEGA SEMICONDUCTORS SDN, BHD  
8760, LOT 8, BATU BERENDAM FTZ, PHASE III, 75350 MELAKA MELAKA 
Malayesia 
66.  OZ-X-NET SDN, BHD  
15-3A, UOA, II JALAN PINANG 50450 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
67.  PERAI COATINGS (M) SDN. BHD  
4, JLN. PADI MAHANUR 13, BANDAR BARU UDA, JOHOR BARU Malayesia 
68.  
PINE-JATI CORPORATION SDN. BHD  
WISMA YOON CHENG, NO. 726 A-5-1A BATU 4 1/2 JLN.IPOH KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
 80

69.  
PROMTCON ENTERPRISE SDN. BHD  
AL 77 SUNGAI BULOH NEW VILLAGE, 47000 SUNGAI BULOH, SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
70.  Q  
440, JALAN TALANG TAMAN PRAI, 13600 PRAL, PULAU PINANG Malayesia 
71.  R.V. SALOON  
NO. 5, JALAN SARAWAK 17, KLANG SELANGOR Malayesia 
72.  
RAJESUWARI AGENCY  
MUNIANDI, 182, LALUAN SUGEL PARI, 7 TELUK KURIAN, 30100 IPOH, 
Malayesia 
73.  RAZIMCO SDN. BHD NO. 96, JALAN PINANG GADING 3, TAMAN PINANG 
GADING 70400 SEREMBAN N. SEM,NILAN Malayesia 
74.  RESTAURANT HOUSE OF INDIA  
61, GROUND FLOOR, JALAN TELUK SISEK, 25000 KUANTAN PAHANG Malayesia 
75.  
RESTORAN AKBAR SHAH  
26 & 28A, PERSIARAN ARA KIRI, LUCKY GARDEN, 59100 KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
76.  RESTORAN EHSAN  
NO. 74, JALAN YANG KALSON, 30250 IPHON PERAK Malayesia 
77.  
RESTORAN JAYA HARI VILAS  
NO. 88, JALAN DATO DAGANG, KUALA PILAH 72000 NEGERI SEMBILAN, 
Malayesia 
78.  
RESTORAN KAMPUNG BAIDURI  
NO. 11, JALAN PULAU KEMPAS 28/3, TAMAN ALALM MEGAH, 40000 SHAH 
ALAM SELANGOR Malayesia 
79.  RESTORAN NASI KANDAR  
NO. 50, LEBOH AMPANG, 50100 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
80.  
RESTORAN WANGSA UKAY  
NO. 2, WANGSA 2, BUKIT ANTARANBANGSA 68000 JALAN ULU KLANG, 
SELANGOR Malayesia 
81.  
RHODEN (M) SDN. BHD  
LOT. 1, JALAN 2, NORTH KLANG STRALTS, TA WANESE INDUSTRIAL PARK, 
42000 PORT KLANG SELANGOR Malayesia 
82.  
S&L DESIGN PLANNER  
50-A, JLN. TUN MOHD FUAD 1, TMN. TUN DR. ISMAIL 60000 KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
83.  S.J. MEDICAL PRODUCTS (M) SDN, BHD  
LOT 723, BATU 5 1/2, JALAN KAPAR 42100 KLANG, SELANGOR Malayesia 
84.  SALURAN PERSONA SDN. BHD  
36-B, 2ND FLOOR, JLN. SS 15/8, SUBANG JAYA SELANGOR Malayesia 
85.  SAMPOORNA CURRY HOUSE  
262, JALAN TUN SAMBANTHAN 50470 KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
86.  
SAN HIN LOONG ENGINEERING WORKS SDN, BHD 
PLO 100, BT. PERINDUSTERIAN JALAN, GENUNANG, 85000 SEGAMAT JOHOR 
Malayesia 
 81

87.  
SASA-AR ENTERPRISE SDN, BHD  
NO. 46, JALAN PBS 14/3, TAMAN PERINDUSTRIAN BUKIT SERDANG, 23300 
SERI KEMBANGAN SELANGOR Malayesia 
88.  
SIGNIVEST INUSTRIES SDN. BHD  
LOT 788, JALAN TELUK MENGKUOUNG, 42500 TELUK PUNGLIMAGORAND, 
KUALA LANGAT, SELA SELANGOR, DAUL EHSAN, Malayesia 
89.  
SIM TEE CHUNG SDN, BHD  
LOT 2439, DYNASTY CENTRE, MIRI BINTULU ROAD, MIRI, SARAWAK MALAYSIA 
Malayesia 
90.  
SIMMAH LIVESTOCKS SDN, BHD  
AG5730, ALOR GAJAH INDUSTRIAL ESTATE 78000 ALOR GAJAH, MELAKA 
Malayesia 
 
91.  
SION HEN SDN, BHD  
LOT 93, PARIT BUNTAR, INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, PARIT BUNTAR, PERAK 
Malayesia 
92.  
SIVAPERUMAL CONSTRACTOR  
POWER LINE, NO. 9, TAMAN CIVIL, 35500 BIDOR, IPOH, MALAYUSIA, SUB 
CONTRACTOR FOR SIM TREE CHUNG SDNN. BHD MALAYSIA  
93.  
SMART GLOVE SDN, BHD  
LOT 6487, BATU 5 3/4, SEMENTA JALAN KAPAR, 42100 KLANG SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
94.  
SOLID AUDIO SDN, BHD  
1650, MK, 13, JURU ESTATE, BUKTI MERTAJAM, 14000 PULAU PINANG PINANG 
Malayesia 
95.  SOON LEE ENTERPRISES  
17-A, TMN. TENGKU MALIK, JLN. SCUDAL JOHOR Malayesia 
96.  
SOUTH ISLAND GARMENTS SDN. BHD  
2468, SOLOK PERUSAHAAN DUA, KAWASAN PERUSAHAAN PERAL, 13600 PRAL, 
PENANG PENANG Malayesia 
97.  
SREE JAYAM CURRY HOUSE  
NO. 7, JALAN HELANG 13, BANDAR OCHONG JAYA, 47000 PUCHONG, 
SELANGOR Malayesia 
98.  
SRI PURVANESHWARAN RESTORAN  
NO. 40, JALAN KEMUJA, OFF JALAN BANGSAR, 59000 KUALA LUMPUR 
Malayesia 
99.  SRI TAMA ENTERPRISE  
NO. 20-A, JALAN CEMPAKA, 81750 JOHOR Malayesia 
100. 
STEP FURNITURE MANUFACTURER SDN. HD  
LOT NO. 102-103, JALAN PERUSAHAAN LAMA TAMAN PERINDUSTRIAN 
MAHKOTA BEHRANG 63700 SELANGOR Malayesia 
101. 
STEVIC PRECISION MOUNLDING CO.  
LOT 39, JIN. TAM MING 4, RAM MING JAYA INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, 43300 SERI 
KEMBANGAN SELANGOR Malayesia 
102. SUKWON IDCHE ENGINEERING SDN. BHD  
1080-1, TINGKAT 2, JL. SULTAN SULAIMAN, 20000 KUALA TERENGGANU, 
 82

TERENGGANU Malayesia 
103. 
SWARGA ENTERPRISES SDN. BHD  
NO. 1506, 1ST FLOOR, JALAN RASAH, 70300 SEREMHAN, N. SEMBILAN 
Malayesia 
104. 
TATEAMA AUTO MACHINE CO.,(M) SDN. BHD  
LOT 2, JALAN PELABUR, 23/1, SEKSYEN 23, 40300 SHAH ALAM SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
105. 
TETRACON ENGINEERING SDN. BHD  
LOT 106 & 110, RAWANG INTEGREATED INDUSTRIAL PARK, 48000 RAWANG 
SELANGOR Malayesia 
106. 
THIRU SANDALWOOD SDN. BHD  
LOT 6537, BATU 6, OFF JALAN KAPAR, P.O. BOX. 125, KLANG SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
107. 
TIARATAN INDUSTRIES SDN. BHD  
NO. 20, JALAN NAGIRI-1, VAIDOR LIGHT INDUSTRIAL ESTATE, 14200 SUNGAI 
BAKAP PENANG Malayesia 
108. 
TIMES OFFSET (M) SDN. BHD  
BANGUNAN TIMES PUBLISHING, LOT 46, SELANGOR HI TECH INDUSTRIAL 
PARK, BATU CAVES, SELGANGOR Malayesia 
109. 
TOKYO ALUMI MFG.(M) SDN. BHD  
OT 28, JALAN LADA HITAM, SECTION 16/12, 40000 SHAH ALAM SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
110. 
TOMMILINSON COLLECTION SDN. BHD.  
B1, WISMA TOMILINSON, ONE AMPANG BUSINES AVENUE, JIN AMPANG 
UTAMA, 1/2, 68000 AMPANG JAYA, KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
111. TONG HENG FARMING & TRADING CO.  
NO.707, PADANG TEMUSU, 08000 SUNGAI PETANI, KEDAH Malayesia 
112. 
TONG YONG METAL SDN. BHD.  
LOT 5781 & 5782, TAMAN SELAMAT, ALMA, 14000 BUKIT MERTAJAM PENANG 
Malayesia 
113. TRANSFAME SDN. BHD.,  
1, TMM. TUN DR.ISMALL, KUALA LUMPUR Malayesia 
114. 
triple j,  
TRIPLE J,(MR.GURUNATHAN@NATHAN@ZALNAL@JA YGURU),(a)4-B JLN 
WATAN4, TMM SRI WATAN, KL (B) TRIPPLE J CUSTOMER SERVICES PROMP T 
BLDG.JLN SULTAN KL Malayesia 
115. 
TUCK SING ENGRG. & CONS.  
LOT 9-102, KAWASAN PERINDUSTRIAN SEMAMBU 24550 KUANTAN, PAHANG 
Malayesia 
116. TWIN FURNITURE MANUFACTURER SDN BHD  
LOT 9-102 KAWASAN PERINDUSTRIAN SEMAMBU KAUNTAN PAHANG Malayesia 
117. 
UNITED INDUSTRIES SDN BHD.  
BANGUNANUNITED INDUSTRIES, 5 -1/2,MI LES,JALAN MERU,41050 KALANG, 
SELANGOR SELANGOR Malayesia 
118. UNITED SANOH INDUSTRIES SDN. BHD.  
5 1/2 MILES, JALAN MERU, 41050 KLANG SELANGOR Malayesia 
 83

119. 
UNR TOOLING SYSTEM SDN. BHD.  
LOT NO. ALP 12, 5TH MILE, JALAN INJAP 34/4, JALAN BUKIT KEMUNING, 
KLANG SELANGOR Malayesia 
120. 
WOODLANDER WOOD PRODUCTS SDN. BHD.,  
LOT 266, BATUU 221/2, SUNGAI LALANG, 43500 SEMENYIH, SELANGOR 
Malayesia 
121. 
WRP ASIA PACIFIC BHD.,  
LOT 1, JLN 3, KAWASAN PERUSAHAAN, BANDAR BARU SALAK TINGGI, 43900 
SEPANG Malayesia 
122. 
YE CHIU METAL SMELTING BERHAD  
LOT 5781 & 5782, TAMAN SELAMAT, ALMA, 14000 BUKIT MERTAJAM PENANG 
Malayesia 
MALTA 
1.  M/S ALBERTA  
MALTA  
2.  M/S INCCO  
MALTA Malta 
MAURITIUS 
1.  SWET & SUN LTD. MAUTIOUS  
Mauritius 
 
OMAN 
1.  AL-DAHLEEJ MANPOWER AGENCY  
AL KHUWAIR, SULTANAT OF OMAN  
2.  DARUISH-AST LLC,  
Muscat Oman 
3.  DARWISH AST LIC  
MUSCAT   Oman 
4.  MUSCAT INDIAN CO. LTD.   
OMAN   
5.  MUSCAT INDUSTRIES CO. LTD.   
Oman 
6.  SILVER SANDS HOTEL   
WADI KABIR, MUSCAT OMAN   
7.  SINGH AND COMPANY   
PO BOX NO.2138,PC 111,CPO SEEB OMAN   
 
QATAR 
1.  AJJAJ ENGINEERING CO.   
P.O. BOX 7407, DOHA Qatar 
2.  AKC CONTRACTING AND SUPPLY   
 84

Qatar 
3.  AL OBAITAY CONTRATING CO.   
Qatar 
4.  AL-DARWESH ENGG COMPANY   
DOHA Qatar 
5.  AL-SAIF CONSTR & BUI   
Qatar 
6.  AL-SARH TRADING CONT.CO.   
Qatar 
7.  AMLON LTD.   
Qatar 
8.  ASIAN TRADING & CONTRACTING CO.   
Qatar 
9.  CANDLE TRADING & CONTING CO.   
Qatar 
10.  CITY TRADING & CONTING CO.   
Qatar 
11.  FIRST TOUCH TRADING   
DOHA Qatar 
12.  GEMCO   
DOHA Qatar 
13.  
INTERNATIONAL ENG. & GENL. CONST.   
DOHA Qatar 
 
14.  LIBERATION GARMENTS FAC. Qatar 
DOHA Qatar 
15.  PRESTIGE APPARELS INDUSTRY WLL   
DOHA Qatar 
16.  WESTERN APPAREL INFA   
DOHA Qatar 
SAUDI ARABIA 
1.  ABDULLAH AL HAMRI   
JUBAIL JUBAIL Saudi Arabia 
2.  ABDULR   
Saudi Arabia 
3.  AL EKHWAH EST FOR TDG   
JEDDAH   Saudi Arabia 
4.  AL FAISAL CLINIC  RIYADH  Saudi Arabia 
5.  AL HASSAS   
JUBAIL   Saudi Arabia 
6.  AL HESAB CONGT EST   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
 85

7.  AL KHAREP OPERATION COP.   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
8.  AL MUBARAZ   
JUBAIL   Saudi Arabia 
9.  AL MUMAI GROUP   
JEDDAH  Saudi Arabia 
10. AL OMRAN EST   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
11. AL REHMAN TRADE EST,   
DAMMAM DAMMAN Saudi Arabia 
12. AL YEZEED CONSTRUCTION EST   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
13. AL-COMET TRADING AND CONTG. EST.   
JUBAIL-31961 Saudi Arabia 
14. AL-FAHYA EST FOR GEN. TRG & CONT.   
Saudi Arabia 
15. AL-GOZAR GROUP EST.   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
16. AL-JAREER EST FOR TRDG.   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
17. AL-SAGRI TRDG & CONT. EST   
Saudi Arabia 
18. AL-THAMER EST FOR TRADING & COMP   
PO BOX 6304, JEDDAH   Saudi Arabia 
19. AL-TURKI EST.   
Saudi Arabia 
20. 
AMIRA ABDU HASSAN DAHAB EST.   
RIYADH 11311,P.O.BOX 92 DABAB ST, OPPOSITE SAUDIHOLANDI BA RIYADH 
Saudi Arabia 
21. AMIRA MEDICAL EST   
RIYADH DAHBAB ST, OPPOSITE SAUDIHOLANDI BANK RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
22. ARABIAN GULF CO FOR MAINT & CONTR.   
Saudi Arabia 
23. ARIFF CONSTRUCTION EST   
RIYADH RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
24. AYED NASER AL-QHATARI SONS CO. AL-KHOBAR  
Saudi Arabia 
25. DALLAH GROUP CO.   
JEDDAH Saudi Arabia 
26. DASHEN CONTG. EST.   
Saudi Arabia 
27. Deloitte   
NASIR AL MATRAP RECRUTING OFFICE, Saudi Arabia 
 86

28. FAEIH BIN MOTAIB HASAN AL SUPATHI   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
29. HAMAS CONT. EST   
Saudi Arabia 
30. KHALLED MEERA EST   
JEDDAH Saudi Arabia 
31. M.AM AL KHARAFI EST.   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
32. M/S SAAD AHEMD AL ZAHARANIPST   
ALKHOBAR ALKHOBAR Saudi Arabia 
33. M/S THRIYA HAMDAD NASPER EST  
ALKHOPAR ALKHOPAR Saudi Arabia 
34. MARWAN AL FAZAL TRDG EST   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
35. MOHD. H. BABTEEN EST.   
JEDDAH Saudi Arabia 
36. MOHSIN MOHAMMED AL QAHTANI   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
37. NAIF AL SADDON EST.   
DAMMAM   Saudi Arabia 
38. NAJID & HIJAS DISPENSARY   
DAMMAM  Saudi Arabia 
39. RABYA LANDSCAPING CO.   
 JUBAIL Saudi Arabia 
40. REFUSE EQUIPMENT MANUF   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
41. RUBEIAN FACTORY   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
42. 
SAAD AHMAD AL-ZAHARANI EST ALKHOBAR   
Saudi Arabia 
 
43. SAAD AHMED MOHD AL MOOBIL   
RIYADH   Saudi Arabia 
44. SAP GENERAL P.   
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
45. SAUDI HILLS   
P.O.BOX 30671, AL-JUBAI 31951 KSA Saudi Arabia 
46. SAUDI OPERATING & MAINTENANCE CO.   
RIYADH  Saudi Arabia 
47. SEDER GROUP TRADING & CONT.   
P.P. BOX 8896, RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
48. SHAYEA AL ALI SHAUEA AL SHAYEA  
CONTRACTING EST. RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
 87

49. SULAIMAN AL-REDAI TRDG. EST.  
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
50. TASHELET COMMERCIAL EST  
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
51. TASHELET COMMERICIAL EST.  
RIYADH ROYADH Saudi Arabia 
52. TAWAIK EST.  
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
53. THIYA HA DAD NASPER EST ALKHOPAR  
Saudi Arabia 
54. TOLODO COMPANY & TRADING CONTRACTING  
RIYADH Saudi Arabia 
UGANDA 
1.  KAPAKWATA SAWMILLS LTD,  
KAMPALA Uganda 
2.  M/S WHITE POWER HO TRISHUL CENTRE  
KAMPALA KAMPALA Uganda 
UKRAINE 
1.  AL-MAJD GENERAL MAINTAK CO.  
Ukraine 
2.  AL-NAJAF MARINE SHIPPING LLC  
Ukraine 
3.  BESCO INTERNATIONAL (LLC)  
Ukraine 
4.  CLEANCO TRADING IMPORTING & SERVICES  
Ukraine 
5.  DUBAI TRANSPORT,  
Ukraine 
6.  EURO EMIRATES ELECTRICAL AND MACHANICAL  
DUBAI Ukraine 
7.  MASOOD OIL INDUSTRIES SUPPLIES & SERVICE 
ABU-DHABI Ukraine 
8.  MILLENIUM SHIP TRADING CO.  
PO BOX NO.20333 DUBAI Ukraine 
9.  NEW CLEANING EST  
Ukraine 
10.  STALLION MARINE ENGG LLC  
P.O.BOX 20985 SHARJAH Ukraine 
U.A.E 
1.  AL MAJAD GENL. MAINTENANCE CO.   
 88

DUBAI United Arab Emirates 
2.  AL NAJAT MARINE SHIPPING LLC   
SHARJAH United Arab Emirates 
3.  AL-KHATRI TRADING BUILDING CONTRACTING   
ESTABLISHMENT SHARJAH United Arab Emirates 
4.  BESCO INTERNATIONAL LLC.   
DUBAI United Arab Emirates 
5.  BIN FADHIL AL MAZROUI CONTRACTING CO.   
ABU DHABI ABU DHABI United Arab Emirates 
6.  CLEANCO TRADING IMPORTING&SERVICES   
ABUDHABI United Arab Emirates 
7.  EURO EMIRATES ELECTRICAL & MECH.   
DUBAI DUBAI United Arab Emirates 
8.  HOSPITALITY CATERING & SERVICES, AL AIN   
UAE United Arab Emirates 
9.  MILLINIUM SHIP TRADING CO.   
DUBAI DUBAI United Arab Emirates 
10.  NEW CLEANING EST. UAE   
UAE UAE United Arab Emirates 
11.  PRIME PROJECT INTERNATIONAL GENERAL TRAD  
LLC DEIRA, DUBAI,   United Arab Emirates 
12.  SEACOR ENVIRONMENT SERVICES MIDDLE EAST   
P.O. BOX NO. 3600 FUJAIRAH United Arab Emirates 
13.  WEST COAST EST.   
ABUDHABI United Arab Emirates 
YEMEN 
1.  M/S NATIONAL CO. LTD., SANNAYAMAM   
SANA Yamen 
2.  NATIONAL CO. LTD.   
SANNA Yamen 
 
 
 89

Annexure-VI 
 
 
NUMBER AND CITY-WISE BREAK-UP OF RECRUITING AGENTS IN THE 
INTERNAL WATCH LIST OF MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
(vide para 2.28 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Registration No. Firm Date of 
Registration 
Registration 
Valid upto 
Date since 
Under 
Watch 
1. 2938/CHENNAI/PER/1000PLUS/3/4892/97 
CLASSIC TOURS 
NO.5 (OLD NO.1) 4TH STREET DR 
SUBBARAYAN NAGAR, KODABAKKAM 
1998-12-22 2006-09-26 2006-01-27 
2. 2664/CHENNAI/COM/1000PLUS/3/4436/95 
SHUKLA AND ASSOCIATES PVT LTD 
NO.3. 52ND STREET, 7 ANENUE 
ASHOK NAGAR, CHENNAI 
1995-08-11 2007-08-10 2006-01-31 
3. 2882/CHENNAI/PER/1000PLUS/3/4802/97 
V.K. TOURS&TRAVELS 
10, AZIZ MULK, 4TH ASTREET, IST FLOOR, 
THOUSANDS LIGHT 
1997-05-09 2006-05-03 2006-02-06 
4. 3264/KER/PER/1000PLUS/1 AND3/4/5182/98  
CITY LINK TRAVEL CORPORATION 
TC26/693, CANTONMENT ROAD 
BAKERY JUNCTION 
2000-07-10 2008-04-09 2005-09-12 
5. 4095/KER/PER/300/3/6486/03 
R J INTERNATIONAL 
KAILASH PLAZA, PATTOM, 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
2004-06-15 2007-06-14 2004-12-09 
6. 3011/KER/PER/300/3/4916/97 
SALEEM INTERNATIONAL TRAVEL AND 
TRADE LINKS 
KAIRALI SHOPPING COMPLEX, 
AMBALATHARA 
1998-03-06 2007-03-05 2005-12-09 
7. 2775/KER/PER/1000PLUS/3/4347/95 
SKYWAY TOURS AND TRAVELS 
HOTEL MAS COMPOUND OVERBRIDGE 
TRIVANDRUM 
1996-02-07 2008-02-06 2004-12-09 
8. 3389/KER/PER/1000/3/5492/2000 
SUHAIL ENTERPRISES 
MASS TOWER, NEAR SUBJAIL 
2001-06-16 2007-06-15 2005-12-16 
9. 002258/KER/PART/100/3/3883/93 2000-05-19 2003-05-19 2005-04-19 
 90

SUJINA MANPOWER CONSULTANTS 
TC 11/640, USHUS, NANTHANCODE 
TRIVANDRUM 
10. 1937/BOM/PER/1000PLUS/2AND3/4/3416/92/93
ARABIAN SERVICES COMPANY 
107, DALAMAL CHAMBERS, 
29, NEWNEW MARINE LINES 
1993-03-18 2007-12-18 2005-03-04 
11. 352/BOM/PER/1000PLUS/3/206/84 
OMAN AGENCIES 
EMBASSY CENTRE, 9TH FLOOR, OFFICE NO 
1, 207 BACK 
BAY RECLAMATION, NARIMAN POINT 
1984-06-03 2006-06-02 2006-03-24 
12. 3317/MUM/PER/300/3/5408/2000 
TRADEMEN GARMENTS  
BLDG NO. 15, UNIT NO.603, FISHERMAN 
COLONY, 
OPP. ST. XAVIER’S TECHNICAL COLLEGE, 
MAHIM WEST 
2000-11-03 2006-11-02 2006-07-13 
13. 886/DEL/PER/1000/3/4132/94 
GEMINI VETERANS GLOBAL PLACEMENTS 
FA-36, VISHAL ENCLAVE, RAJOURI 
GARDEN 
2003-10-23 2011-06-30 2006-07-17 
14. 3274/DEL/PER/300/3/5443/2000 
MILLENIUM MANPOWER CONSULTANTS 
J-21, NEAR SHAKTI MANDIR MAIN 
MARKET, 
RAJOURI GARDEN 
2000-08-04 2011-08-03 2006-07-17 
15. 4156/DEL/PER/300/3/5555/2001/ 
SHAMBROS 
950/3, 3RD FLORR, NAIWALA  KAROL BAGH 
   
 91

 92
 