 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 19 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for 
the year 2007-08] 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for 
the year 2007-08] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2007  
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 

COEA NO. 68  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2007-2008………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (iv)  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….              1  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...             7 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observ ations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……       22 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            23 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………           24 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Comm ittee held on 7.11.2007...      25  
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
14th Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….       27 

 STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2007-2008) 
 
LOK SABHA 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
7. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain* 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
10. Shri L. Rajagopal  
11. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
12. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
13. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
14. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil 
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
19. Shri M. Shivanna 
20. Shri Vanlalzawma 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
24. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
26. Dr. Ram Prakash  
27. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
29. Dr. Karan Singh  
30. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
 
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 30th August, 2007  
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs (2007-2008) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 19th 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Go vernment on the Recommendations 
contained in the 16th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants  
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2007-08. 
 
2. The 16th Report was presented to  Parliament on 26 Apri l, 2007. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government on all the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Report were received on 8 August, 2007. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Acti on Taken Report at t heir 
sitting held on 7 Nov ember, 2007. The Minutes  of the sitting of the Committee have 
been reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action tak en by Government on the recommendations  
contained in the 16 th Report of the Standing Commi ttee on External Affairs (14 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
12 November, 2007                                                   Chairman,                 
21 Kartika, 1929 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Com mittee on External Af fairs deals with the 
Action Taken by the Government on the obs ervations/recommendations 
contained in their Sixt eenth Report on Demands for Gr ants (2007-2008) of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 
April, 2007. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been rece ived from the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs on all the obs ervations/recommendations contained in the r eport.  
These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 Total-11 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations w hich the Com mittee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
Total- NIL 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of 
Government have not been accepted b y the Co mmittee and  
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
Total- NIL 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of  w hich final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Total-01 
 
 
 
 1 
 

3. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations. 
 
A. Construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
4. The Committee expressed regret t hat there had hardly been any progress 
regarding construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK), the proposal of which 
had been mooted in 2004 and for which funds were earmarked in 2005-06 and 
2006-07.  All that the  Ministry could d o till the Committee made their report was  
wire fencing of the la nd allotted for PBK in New Delhi. Action for appointment of 
consultant was stated to be still in progress.  Cons idering that  two precious 
years had already been lost wit hout any substantial progress on the work of 
PBK, the Committee desired the Ministry to focus on accomplish ing the 
establishment of PBK in a reasonable time  frame with a view to harnessing the 
talent pool among the Indian Diaspora. 
 
5. The Minist ry of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken note have 
replied as under: 
 
“A decis ion to appoint NBCC as consultant-cum-project manager 
for the Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra has been taken and a formal MoU 
between M OIA and NBCC will be signed s hortly. Simultaneous ly, 
action to obtain certain statutory clearances is in progress.” 
 
6. The Committee note that a deci sion to appoint NBCC as Consultant-
cum-Project Manager for the constr uction of Pravasi Bha ratiya Ken dra 
(PBK) has been taken and  a f ormal MoU between the Ministr y and NBCC 
will be signed shortly.  The repl y of the Ministry  is, how ever, silent about 
the time frame for completion of the project.  The Committe e would like to 
be informed of the project schedule and details of the MoU.  
 2 
 

 
 
B. Complaints against Recruiting Agents 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
7. Taking note of the fact that as m any as 33 cases of complaints filed 
against recruiting agents in 2006 were reported to be still pending for final action, 
the Committee desired that the causes  for delay in finally  disposing of 
complaints should be looked into and su itable remedial measures taken to 
ensure expeditious action on complain ts. As regards 106 complaints 
dropped/settled in 2006, the Committee desired to be intimated of the number of 
complaints actually settled and the nature of such complaints. 
 
8. In their action taken reply, the M OIA have reported the present position of 
the 33 pending complaints of 2006 as under:- 
 
 (i) Registration Certificates cancelled -  4 cases 
 (ii) Settled/closed                                 -  8 cases 
 (iii) Still pending for final action             - 21 cases 
 
In the remaining 21 c ases, the complaints are stated to be pending due to 
several reasons such as non-receipt of replies/comments of the complain ants, 
Indian Embassies, Police authorities and p ending court cases etc. These c ases 
are being pursued for early settlement/closure. 
 
The MOIA have further stated that of  the 106 complaints settled/dropped,  
86 complaints    have been  settled. The nature of such complaints are as under: 
 
 
S.N. Nature of complaints No. of 
complaints 
1. Diversion of workers to another country 2 
2. Providing of different nature of job than 
promised 
1 
3. Overcharging the emigrants/ cheating 17 
4. Non-payment of salary  7 
5. Repatriation sought by emigrants 4 
 3 
 

6. Non-deployment  11 
7. Payment of less salary  5 
8. Grievances of emig rants reported by the 
Embassy 
2 
9. Breach of contract 3 
10. Seeking emigration clearance on forged 
visa/Recruitment wit hout authorization and 
attestation 
6 
11. Overcharging/breach of contract 1 
12. Poor liv ing condition s/ non-availability of 
proper facilities/Facing of other problems by  
the workers 
5 
13. Confusing advertisement by the Agent 7 
14. Sending workers for blacklisted company 4 
15. Handing over Registra tion Certificate to third 
party 
3 
16. Shifting of office without prior approval 8 
 
 
9. The Com mittee note that 29 out of  86 complaints settled related to 
serious o ffences such as breach of  contract, use of forged visa, 
recruitment w ithout authorizatio n and attesta tion, confusing 
advertisements, sending w orkers for blacklisted company , handing over 
Registration Certificate to third party, complaints of poor living conditions, 
etc.  The Committee would like to be informed as to what action was taken 
by the Government in respect of each  of these cases, given the serious 
nature of offences.   
 
 
C. Amendment of Emigration Act, 1983 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
10. The Committee have observed t hat there was an urgent need to convert 
the Emigration Act, 1983 into an effective instrument for prevention of irreg ular 
migration. The Committee were at a loss to understand why the bill for amending 
Emigration Act, 1983 to address the pres ent day concerns  in emigr ation 
management had not been introduced even one year after the Committee made 
a recommendation to this effect in their 10 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha). The 
 4 
 

Committee had urged that the amendment Bill s hould be introduced in 
Parliament without further loss of time. 
 
11. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“The process of inter-minister ial consultations has been 
completed. A Note for Cabinet is  being submitted to the Cabinet  
shortly.” 
 
12. The Committee re gret to note that no bill f or amending the 
Emigration Act 1983 has been introduced in Parliament so far despite 
repeated recommendations by this Com mittee.  The Minist ry of Over seas 
Indian Affairs have not given an y reaso ns for delay in this regard.  The 
Committee w ould like to k now the present status of the proposed  
amendment bill a nd the reasons f or delay  in introduction of the  
amendment bill.    
 
 
D. Automation of PoE Offices 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
13. The Committee were glad to not e that the pilot projec t for automation of  
Protector of Emigrants (PoEs) office, Delhi was almost oper ational which would 
usher in greater transparen cy, efficiency and acc ountability in the emigr ation 
process. The Committee had desired that a fter gaining experience from the pilot 
project, automation of the other PoE offices should be taken up in a time bound 
manner with a view to realizing the merits of e-governance. 
 
 
14. The Ministry in their action taken note replied as under: 
 
 
“The automation of the office of  PoE, Delhi became operational 
with effect from May 3, 2007.  This  has  made the emigration 
process much eas ier and transparen t. The computerization of the  
 5 
 

rest of 7 offices is being tak en up in a time bound manner and is 
expected to be completed shortly.”  
 
15. The Committee are happy to note that the automation of the  office of 
PoE, Delh i became operational in May 2007.  The Committee note the 
Ministry’s repl y that the auto mation process of the rest o f the 7 PoE  
Offices is being taken up and is expected to be completed shortly.  It is not 
clear what is the time frame for in troducing automation in the remaining 7 
PoE offices.  The Committee would await information in this regard. 
 
 
E. Setting up of PIO University 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
16. The Com mittee have noted that t he Cabinet has  given in- principle 
approval to the setting up of a Univer sity which will hav e 50% students from  
abroad and 50% from India. T he modalities of setting up the University were yet  
to be firmed up and notified. Needless to poin t out that the Univers ity will be first 
of its kind. All efforts should, therefore, be made to ensure that it is a University of 
excellence with international  academic standards and world-class  environment.  
The Committee had desired that  a detail note regarding this  university should be 
placed before the Committee for discussion before finalization of the proposal. 
 
17. The Ministr y of Overseas Indian Affairs in their action taken repl y 
have given details of the proposed University and also the broad guidelines 
for the University  as approved  b y the Government.  The Committee also  
held discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of Overseas Ind ian 
Affairs on 24.7.2007 regarding the pr oposed Universit y.  The Committee 
hope that the Ministry  will make all out efforts to ensure that  the proposed 
University w ill be a Un iversity of excel lence w ith international standards 
and world class environment.  
 
 6 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The assertion of the Ministry of Over seas India Affairs that no scheme or  
activity of the Ministry was affected due to the downward revision of the original 
budget estimates from Rs. 38 crore to Rs. 26 crore during 2006-07 clearly points 
to the fact that the init ial demand for grant for the year was far in excess of 
actual requirement. The Committee hope t hat the current year’s demand for 
grant of Rs. 50 crore is based on realistic estimates.  The Committee expect the 
Ministry to ensure effective implementat ion of all programme s and activities 
without surrendering funds and depriving t he beneficiaries of the intended 
benefits. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regards the Committee’s obs ervation that the Demands for Grants for 
the year 2006-07 was projected in exces s of actual requirement, it may be 
clarified that during t he mid-term appraisa l of the budgetary ex penditure it was  
found that many of the Schemes/programmes formulated by the Ministry had not 
reached the stage of implem entation. Accordingly, at the RE stage, the 
Demands for Grants was revised to Rs. 26 crore by the Ministry of Finance . For 
the FY 2007-08, the BE has been fixed at  Rs. 50 crore on the basis of projected 
expenditure on various Schemes and developmental acti vities to be undertaken 
by the Ministry during the current year. 
 
To ensure effective monitoring of  implementation of the various Sc hemes 
and activ ities during t he cour se of the year , instruct ions have been issued on 
regular multi lev el rev iews. This include monthly moni toring of the progress  of 
the Schemes by the Div isional Heads, bi-monthly Budget Review at  Joint 
 7 
 

Secretary level and Quarte rly Review by Secretary,  MOIA. with this, it is 
expected that implem entation of Schemes and other acti vities would be much 
more effective than in the previous years. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 
The Committee regret to observe t hat there has hardly been any progress 
regarding construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK), the proposal of which 
was mooted in 2004 and fo r which funds were earmarked in 2005-06 and 2006-
07. All that the Ministry could do so far was wire fencing of t he land allotted for 
PBK in Ne w De lhi. Action for a ppointment of  consult ant is stated to be st ill in 
progress. Such slow progress reflects poor ly on the Ministry. It is essential to 
ensure in the formative years of the Mi nistry that an efficient and dynamic  
administrative system is in place to spe edily achieve its main objectives. The  
Committee hope that necessary action will be taken in this regard. Conside ring 
that two precious years have alr eady been lost without any substantial progress 
on the work of PBK, the Committee desire t he Ministr y to focus on 
accomplishing the establishment of PBK in  a reasonable time frame with a vie w 
to harnessing the talent pool among the Indian Diaspora. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
A decision to appoint NBCC as  consul tant-cum-project manager for the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra has been taken and a formal MoU between MOIA and 
NBCC will be signed shortly. Simultaneously, action to obtain certain statutory 
clearances is in progress. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 

Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
It is a matter of concer n that with the creation of a separate Ministry  
having a k ey function of preventing irr egular migration, the number of workers  
who were not given any employ ment on re aching in the country of employment 
has sharply increased from 762 in 200 4 to 1152 in 2005 and to  1013 in 2006. 
Similarly, the number  of complaints agai nst recruiting agents has  shot up from 
41 in 2005 to 167 in 2006. The Secretary, MOIA wa s candid enough to admit 
that, there has been a nexu s between the recruiting agent s and officials of the 
Ministry. It is a sad reflection on t he quality of supervision of the Ministry over its 
officials. It is not clear whether the Ministry have ev olved any m echanism f or 
taking effective preventive measure, in cluding frequent surprise checks followed 
by swift and deterrent action against de linquent officials  to br eak the nexus 
between officials and recruiting agents. The Committee would like to be informed 
of the mechanism in this regard and its functioning. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MOIA have taken steps to improve the emigration process and make it 
more transparent. These steps include: 
 
 
(i) The posts  of POE at Delhi,  Mumbai & Chennai have been 
recently upgraded to the level of Deputy Secretary/Director  
while those at Thiruvanant hapuram and Hy derabad have been 
upgraded to the level of  Under Secretary. Th is is expected to 
ensure bet ter supervision & control and gr eater acco untability. 
New officers have been select ed bas ed on their r ecord for 
posting at PGE offices and have been posted to these POE 
offices during the past few months. 
 
 9 
 

(ii) A programme of Vigilance Au dit on a monthly basis at various  
POE offices has been prepared. The offices at Mumbai and 
Hyderabad have been audited. 
 
(iii) The Ministry is in close contact with CBI, Anti Corruption Branch 
to expedite action against errant officials. 
 
(iv) Computerization of POE o ffice, Delhi has  been completed and 
launched. This is expected to  ensure speed and transparency. 
The remaining seven offices are also being computerized. 
 
(v) Rationalization of procedure for processing of fresh applications 
& renewal of Recrui ting Agents has been done to en sure that 
only those with capability and good credentials are registered as 
RAs. 
 
(vi) In case where evidence of bribery and wealth disproportionate 
to known sources of income has been intimated by CBI,  
disciplinary proceedings have been initiated. 
 
(vii) A proposal is being c ontemplated to fully computerize office of 
the Protector General of Emigrants in the Ministry. 
 
(viii) Strict instructions ha ve been is sued to POEs for conductin g 
rigorous checks and adopting adequat e caution while granting 
emigration clearanc e. In order to curb the d iscretionary 
influence of the POEs, suitable Orders have been issued.  
 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 

Recommendation No. 4 
 
Incidentally, as many as 33 cases of complaints filed against recruiting 
agents in 2006 are r eported to be still p ending fin al action. The Com mittee 
desire that  the causes for delay  in fi nally dispos ing of complaints should be 
looked into and suitable rem edial measures taken to ensure expeditious action 
on complaints. As regards 106 comp laints dropped/settled in 2006, the 
Committee be intimated of t he number of complaints ac tually settled and the 
nature of such complaints. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(A) The present position of the 33 pending complaints of 2006 is as under: 
 
(i) Registration Certificates cancelled -  4 cases 
(ii) Settled/closed                                 -  8 cases 
(iii) Still pending for final action             - 21 cases 
 
In the remaining 21 cases, the complaint s are pending due t o several  
reasons such as non-receipt of replies/ comments of the comp lainants, Indian 
Embassies, Police authorities and pending court cases etc. These cases are 
being pursued for early settlement/closure. 
 
(B) Of the 106 complaints settled/dropped, 86 complaints  have been  settled.   
The nature of such complaints are as under: 
 
S.N. Nature of complaints No. of 
complaints 
1. Diversion of workers to another country 2 
2. Providing of different nature of job than promised 1 
3. Overcharging the emigrants/ cheating 17 
4. Non-payment of salary  7 
5. Repatriation sought by emigrants 4 
6. Non-deployment  11 
7. Payment of less salary  5 
8. Grievances of emigrants reported by the Embassy 2 
9. Breach of contract 3 
10. Seeking emigration clearance on forged 
visa/Recruitment without authorization and attestation 
6 
 11 
 

11. Overcharging/breach of contract 1 
12. Poor living conditions/ non-availability of proper 
facilities/Facing of other problems by the workers 
5 
13. Confusing advertisement by the Agent 7 
14. Sending workers for blacklisted company 4 
15. Handing over Registration Certificate to third party 3 
16. Shifting of office without prior approval 8 
 
 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Admittedly, there is an urgent need to  convert the Emigration Act, 1983 
into an effective instrument for preventi on of irregular migrat ion. The Committee 
are at a loss to understand why the bill for amending  Emigration Act, 1983 to  
address the present day concerns in  emigration management has not been 
introduced even one y ear after the Co mmittee made a recommendation to t his 
effect in their 10 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha). The Committee urge that the 
amendment Bill should be introduced in parliament without further loss of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The process of inter-ministerial consultations has been completed. A Note 
for Cabinet is being submitted to the Cabinet shortly. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 12 
 

Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee are glad to not e that t he pilot projec t for automation of  
Protector of Emigrants (PoEs) office, Delhi is almost operational which would 
usher in greater transparen cy, efficiency and acc ountability in the emigr ation 
process. The Committee desire that a fter gaining experienc e from the pilot 
project, automation of the other PoE offices should be t aken up in a time bound 
manner with a view to realizing the merits of e-governance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The automation of the office of PoE,  Delhi became operational wit h effect 
from May 3, 2007. T his has  made the emigration process much eas ier and 
transparent. The computerizatio n of the rest of 7 offi ces is being taken up in a 
time bound manner and is expected to be completed shortly.  
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Another programme embarked on pilot basis by the Ministry was Pre-
departure orientation  and sk ill up-gradatio n programme for emigrant workers 
which was reportedly well receiv ed in fi ve States (Tamil N adu, Andhra Pradesh,  
Punjab, Kerala and Karnataka) where t he programme was experimented on cost 
sharing basis in 2006-07.  The Committee are of the view that adequacy of the 
programme in terms of inputs, durati on and accrual of benefits needs to be 
assessed and the programme restructured , if need be, on the basis of outcome 
of such an assessment. The Committee feel  that su ch an exer cise will give 
sound basis for extending the programme to other States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Based on t he inputs r eceived from t he Five States and other knowle dge 
partners, the Ministry is in the process of suitable revising the scheme in terms of 
training inputs, durati on and expected re sults. Under the revised programme, 
 13 
 

ministry has signed a Memorandum of Unde rstanding (MoU) with the Ministry of 
Micro, Small and Me dium Enterprises. Similar MoUs will b e signed with three 
apex bus iness chambers (CII, FICCI  and ASSOCHAM) and reputed Non-
Governmental Organisations for implement ing pre-departure orientation and skill 
upgradation schemes through their training  institutes. The revised scheme is 
expected to cover most of the St ates. The duration of the training will range from 
two weeks to six months. 
 
 The State Governments of Kera la, Tamil Nadu,  Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka and Punjab which were released  financial assistance during the year 
2006-07under the scheme ‘Pr e-departure orientation and s kill up-gradatio n 
programme for emigrant workers’ ar e being persuaded to implement the scheme 
constantly.  The progress of implementation of  the Scheme was reviewed in a 
meeting which was attended by the representatives of the State Governments of 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Ke rala and Punjab.   They ar e of the view that this  
being a new programme and als o since the funds were released at a late st age 
during the year 2006- 07, the funds could no t be utilized so far. It was impr essed 
upon all State Governments to take steps  to make the people aware of the 
scheme through wide publicity, consider involving NGOs and other institutions in 
the implementation of the scheme and implement the sc heme at the earliest and 
furnish the utilization certificates.  
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
One of the appreciable measures init iated by the Ministry is pursuing 
bilateral agreements or MoUs with all ma jor labour rec eiving countries aimed a t 
promotion of overseas em ployment of Indian worker s and their protection and 
welfare. T he Ministry has rec ently signed an MoU with the UAE and have 
initiated the process with fi ve other countries – Malay sia, Saudi Arabi a, Kuwait, 
Oman and Bahrain. The Committee have no doubt that these bilateral labour  
agreements will g o a  long way in ameliora ting the problems of Indian wor kers 
 14 
 

abroad. The Committee hope that the Minist ry will simultaneously strive t o enter 
into such agreements with other major labour receiving countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The MoU with Kuwait has been signed re cently in April, 2007. The first  
meeting of the Joint Committee under t he bilateral MoU bet ween India and UAE 
was held in Dubai in May, 2007. The Addi tional Protocol to the existing Labour  
Agreement with Qatar has been finaliz ed and approval of t he Cabinet obta ined. 
The Proto col will be  formally signed s hortly. MoU with Malaysia has  been 
finalized and initialed on 28 th June 2007.  The approval of Cabinet is being 
obtained for signing it. A c ounter-draft has been received from Oman. Bilateral 
Negotiations will be held shortly. MoUs are being pursued with Bahrain & Yemen 
also. With Jordan we have an agreement  which was  signed in 1988. We have 
sent a draft for signing a fresh MoU to address present day iss ues. Efforts are 
being made to persuade Saudi Arabia too for negotiating on MoU.  An MoU with 
Poland is in its initial stages of discussion.  
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The plight of Indian wom en deserted or div orced by their overseas Indian 
spouses is a matter of concern to the Committee. The Committee observe that a 
scheme has been introduced recently to extend financial assistance for obtaining 
legal and counseling services t hrough Indian Miss ions abroad.  The sc heme 
reportedly envisages  paym ent of $1,000 merely fo r documentation and no 
payment is envisaged by way of fees to advocates. The Committee feel that this 
scheme should be extended to Indian women who are deserted by their spouses 
abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the provisions  of the schem e to provide legal and counseling 
assistance through Indian Miss ions abroad a woman holding Indian p assport 
 15 
 

whether domiciled in India or abroad is elig ible to avail benefit of the scheme in 
case of desertion or divorce by her overseas Indian spouse. The desertion of the 
Indian woman whet her in I ndia or abroad is immaterial for the purpos e of 
extending assistance under the scheme. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee note that the Cabinet has given in-principle approval to the 
setting up of a University which will have 50% students fr om abroad and 50%  
from India. The modalities of setting up the University are yet to be firmed up and 
notified. Needless to point out that the University will be first of its kind. All efforts 
should, therefore, be made to ensure that it is a University of excellence wit h 
international academic standards and wo rld-class environment. The Comm ittee 
desire that  a detail note regarding this university should b e placed before the 
Committee for discussion before finalization of the proposal. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The High Level Committee on Indian  Diaspora, appointed by the 
Government in 2000 had v isited various  countries with large concentration of  
Indian Diaspora. The Committee, in its Report submitted in 2001,  had 
recommended, among other things, the necessity of setting up of new 
Universities and professiona l institutions offering courses  of international 
standards in Management, Information Te chnology, Media, Agric ultural 
Research, Medicine, Food proc essing, etc . for the benef it of overseas Indians.  
The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affa irs was created in September, 2004. The 
mandate of the Ministry includes ‘new in itiatives for interaction by Overseas 
Indians wit h India in the field of educat ion’ among other things. The Minis try 
therefore endeavours to prom ote India as a competit ive destination for the 
benefit of Overseas Indian students.   
 
2. Hon’ble Prime Minister had initially announc ed setting up of an exclusive 
University for the PIOs during his meet ing with the Indian community in Malaysia 
 16 
 

in December, 2005.  This subject was al so discussed at the Pravasi Bharatiy a 
Divas (PBD) 2006 at Hyderabad.  At PB D ’07 in New Delhi, PM once again 
announced that the proposal for  establishing a University for Persons of Indian 
Origin is under active consideration of the Government.  The Global Organization 
for Persons of Indian Origin (GOPIO)  had also represented for setting up an 
exclusive University f or PIOs.  Overseas Indians  have voiced a demand f or an 
exclusive University for PIOs i n succe ssive PBDs.  The subject was further 
discussed at the GOPIO Session during PBD ’07. 
 
3. Overseas Indians look forward to t heir country of origin for meeting the 
higher educational needs of  their children.  Government has  created 15% 
supernumerary seats for foreign nationals /Persons of Indian or igin/children of 
Indian wor kers in the Gulf countries  in higher and technic al educationa l 
institutions in India. For medical courses 15% intake of the total regular seats are 
available in private unaided m edical/dental colleges  under  the management 
quota. These seats are scattered in a lar ge number of institutions throughout the 
country. Besides, some of them are not institutions of excellence sought by 
NRIs/PIOs. Further, the higher  educational institutions of excellence like I ITs, 
IIMs, etc., much sought after by Indian st udents, are always full with local intake 
leaving no scope for any provis ion for ov erseas Indian students.  In developed 
countries like USA and UK, higher educatio n is expensive. An exclusive PIO/NRI 
University in Ind ia will c ater to the ne eds of the PIOs/NRI s in sought after 
disciplines as well as impart educational standar ds at par with the best 
Universities in the world in one campus. 
 
4. Keeping in view the above,  the Ministry submitted a propos al to establish 
a PIO/NRI University withi n the Special Educational Zone (SEZ) in the Special 
Economic Zone (SEZ ), to be set up by ov erseas Indian Trusts or Register ed 
Societies with credibility in the fiel d of  education and having the requisit e 
finances. In its meeti ng held on 22 nd March, 2007, the C abinet approved the 
proposal with the direction that the policy be modified to allow th e University to 
be located in any  suitable place in the country by ensuri ng requisite flexibility in 
 17 
 

the choice of educational di sciplines and courses offe red. The br oad guidelines 
for the University, as approved by the Government, will be as follows: 
 
(i) The University will be located in any suitable place in the country.  
 
(ii) The University will be set up by Overseas Indian Trusts or Societies 
with cred ibility and e xperience in  the fie ld o f education  under th e 
overall supervision of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs.  
 
(iii) The institu tion will b e duly registered as a Socie ty under the 
Societies Registration Act 1860 ( XXI of 1860) or as a Trust with 
Trustees being appointed and v ested with legal po wers and duties  
and would have the status of “Dee med University” under Section 3 
of the UGC Act.  
 
(iv) Revenue surplus generated by the University will not be repatriated 
but ploughed back into the institution for further development. 
 
(v) 50% seats shall be r eserved for PIO/NRI students and 50% for 
resident Indian students.  The existing government policy on 
reservation shall apply on the 50%  reserved seats  for resident 
Indian students. 
 
(vi) While the resident Indian student s will be a llowed to pay for their 
educational expenses in Indian curr ency, the PIO/NRI students will 
pay in foreign currency for receiving educ ation in the University.  
Indian stud ents will p ay fees  at par with that of  IITs for technical 
education, AIIMS for medical education, IIMs for management 
courses, etc. 
 
(vii) The Univer sity shall offer courses in the ar eas Medic al Sc iences, 
Dental, Engineering and Tec hnology, Information Technology, 
Business Administration and Management, Bio-technology and Bio-
Informatics etc. However, specialisatio n such as Human Molecula r 
Biology and Genetics Programme, Graduate Programme in Genetic 
Counselling, Modern Molecular Geneti cs, etc. are also proposed to 
be included in the curriculum of the University as em erging areas. 
However, the Univ ersity will h ave flexibility in the choice of 
educational disciplines and courses offered.  
 
 
(viii) Full autonomy wil l be granted to the P IO/NRI University in 
curriculum design, appointment/selec tion of personnel, faculty, 
admission procedure, etc.  The University will also enjoy full 
 18 
 

autonomy in financial matters and fees for PIO/NRI students, intake 
of PIO/NRI students, etc. 
 
(ix) The University will conform to  the standards set by the regulatory  
bodies like UGC, AICTE, MCI, et c. as a minimum benchmark.  
However, the institution has  the option to benchmark itself to the 
best international standards.  
 
(x) Indian Missions will carry out us ual security checks while granting 
visa to prospective st udents as well as faculty/teaching staff to be 
recruited from abroad from among the PIO/NRI community as per 
existing visa regime.  Credentials  of the Society/Trust, which 
applies to set up the University, will b e initially verified by the Indian 
Mission. T he applicat ion will be forwarded through the Mission t o 
the Ministry.  
 
(xi) Prior approval of FCRA will be obtained by the Society/Trust setting 
up the University. The procedur e of  foreign research grants and 
Chairs to the PIO/NRI University wi ll be subject to the same norms 
and procedures applicable in t he case of similar grants being 
received by Universities elsewhere in India, namely the grant/funds 
for chairs should come only through bodies appr oved for the 
purpose (like UGC, CSIR, etc.) and be amenable to prior security  
clearance as well. 
 
(xii) The Univ ersity will be  bound to apply for and register all patents  
(products or process) resulting from research under taken at the 
PIO/NRI University with the patent authorities in India. 
 
(xiii) Scientific research pr ojects undertaken at the PIO/NRI University 
will be subject to prior Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) clearance 
(apart from any other prior approval s they may require) in projects 
in the restricted category as specified by MHA. 
 
(xiv) The selected party will arrange the land required for setting up the 
University and approach the BOA as  per the provisi ons in the SEZ  
Act and Rules for developing t he land and setting up of the 
university, if set up in the SEZ. 
 
(xv) A Screening Committee consisting of representatives of Ministries  
of Overseas Indian Af fairs, Comme rce, External Affair s, Finance,  
Human Resource Development, Heal th & Family We lfare, Home  
Affairs and academics will be set up for scrutinizing the applications 
submitted by Societies/Trusts desiring to set up the University.  
 
 19 
 

(xvi) An Adv isory Board will be set up with representatives from 
Ministries of Overseas Indian Affa irs, MEA, HRD, Hea lth & Family, 
UGC, AIU, AICTE, IMC, Dental Council of India, Nursing Council of 
India & Pharmacy Council of India and Academics.  The Advisor y 
Board will be headed by an Academic  person.  The Board will 
evaluate t he academic and infras tructure standards and their  
adherence to the norms set by UGC, AICTE, MCI and other 
statutory bodies as re quired under the UGC fo r granting the status  
of “Deemed Univ ersity” to the propos ed institution.  The Board wil l 
recommend to the Ministry of HRD and UGC for granting the status 
of “Deemed University” de-novo to the institution.   
 
(xvii) The University will adhere to the norms and procedures of Medica l 
Council of  India, Dental Counc il of  India, Indian Nursing Council 
and Pharmacy Counc il of India in in stituting courses in Medical,  
Dental, Pharmacy and Nursing cour ses and for recognition of such 
degrees granted by the University, under their respective Acts and 
Regulations. 
 
 
5. An advertisement has  been published in newspaper s in India and abroad 
(through Indian Miss ions in countries with large ov erseas Indian population) 
inviting “Expression of Inte rest” for empanelment and s hort-listing of overseas 
Indian Trusts/Societies for setting up th e University, from overseas Indian 
educational Societies/Trusts. The adverti sement and the guidelines for the 
University have als o been placed on the Mi nistry’s website. T he last dat e for 
receipt of the advertisements in the Ministry is 12 th August, 2007.  The propos als 
received will be examined by  the Screening Committee and the se lected 
proposal will be placed before the Cabinet. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee find there has be en considerable progress in 
implementing some of the major reco mmendations of the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas held in January 2007. These inclu de establis hment of PIO University, 
 20 
 

establishment of Overseas Indian Facilita tion Centre and implementation of pilot  
projects in Andhra Pr adesh and Bihar for extending t he primary health care in 
pursuance of an MoU signed between the M OIA and Association of American 
physicians of Indian origin.  The Committee desire that other major 
recommendations of PBD such as establis hment of institutional mechanis m to 
enable NRI community to become a knowle dge partner in India’s Development, 
designing of appropriate financial instrume nts and products to promote overseas 
Indian inv estments, etc. be given expeditious cons ideration f or appropriate 
action. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendations of the Committee ar e noted for appropriate action in 
consultation with the concerned Organisation/Department. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 7.08.2007] 
 
 
 21 
 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF  
THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
- NIL - 
 
 22 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
- NIL - 
 23 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Com mittee would like t o k now whether any feedback was  
received/obtained from the i ntended benef iciaries of the Social Security 
Agreement (SSA) with Belgium in November, 2006 and would like to be apprised 
of the same. The Committee hope that suc h a feedback will help the Ministry to 
arrive at appropriate decis ion on the question of s igning similar agreements with 
other countries. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Social Se curity Agreement (SSA) was signed with Belgium on 3 rd 
November, 2006. Further negotiations are scheduled in November, 2007 on 
finalizing administrative arrangements to be made by both the parties  for 
implementing the agreement. Thereafter th e agreement will come into force. The 
feedback will be obtained after the implementation of the SSA. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/9/2007-Parl. Dated 07.08.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
12 November , 2007                                 Chairman,  
 21 Kartika, 1929(Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 24 
 

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 7TH NOVEMBER, 2007  
   
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliam ent 
House Annexe, New Delhi  
   
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
  
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
7. Shri Mukeem Mohammad 
8. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
9. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
10. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
11. Shri P.A. Sangma 
12. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
13. Shri M. Shivanna 
14. Shri Vanlalzawma 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
16. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
17. Dr. Ram Prakash 
18. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
19. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
20. Dr. Karan Singh 
21. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
 25 
 

 
 
 
2.  XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the fo llowing draf t Reports f or 
consideration and adopted the same:- 
i) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX   
ii) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
iii) Draft Report on Actio n Taken b y the Go vernment on the  
recommendations contained in the 16th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs for the year 2007-2008.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized t he Chairman to finalise the Action 
Taken Reports and present the same to both Houses of Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXX Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 26 
 

 27 
 
Appendix -II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
SIXTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations                                       12 
 
(xviii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 
    Total-11 
Percentage: 91.67% 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
Total-NIL 
Percentage:0% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
Total-NIL 
 Percentage: 0% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in r espect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 8 
 
Total-01 
Percentage: 8.33% 
 
 
 
 