 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
    ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 17 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on the Subject “Issues Relating To Overseas Indians”] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
 

 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2007-2008) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on the Subject “Issues Relating To Overseas Indians”] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11. 2007  
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11. 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2007/Kartika,1929 (Saka) 

COEA NO. 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Ru les of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2007-2008 ………………             (iii)
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………         (iv)  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….           1    
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...          8       
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……     29   
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………          30    
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………        31         
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on  
07th November, 2007…………………………………………..         36 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
14th Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….        38   

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2007-2008) 
LOK SABHA 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
6. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
7. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
8. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain* 
9. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
10. Shri L. Rajagopal  
11. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
12. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
13. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
14. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil 
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
19. Shri M. Shivanna 
20. Shri Vanlalzawma 
21. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
24. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
26. Dr. Ram Prakash  
27. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
28. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
29. Dr. Karan Singh  
30. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 30th August, 2007  
(iii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (2007-2008) having 
been authorised by the Committee to present t he Report on their behalf, present this 
17th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 14 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on “Issues Relating to 
Overseas Indians”. 
2. The 14th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 March, 2007 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 20 March, 2007.  The Action Ta ken Replies of the Government on all 
the recommendations/observations contained in  the Report were received on 26 June, 
2007. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their 
sitting held on 7 November, 2007.   The Minutes of the sitting of the Committee have 
been reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by  Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 14 th Report of the Standing Committ ee on External Affairs (14 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
12th November, 2007                                           Chairman,                  
21 Kartika, 1929 (Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals wit h the Action Taken by Government 
on the observations/recommendat ions contained in the 14 th Report of Standing 
Committee on External Affairs on “Issues Relating to Overseas Indians”.  The 
14th Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 th March, 2007 
and to Rajya Sabha on 20th March, 2007. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been receiv ed from the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs on all the 21 observations /recommendations contained in the 
report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, w hich have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
Sl. Nos. 1 to 6, 8, 10 to 15, 17 and 19 to 21 
 Total-17 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations w hich the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Sl. Nos.  Nil 
Total-Nil 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of 
Government have not been accepted by  the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Sl. Nos.  Nil       
Total-Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Sl. Nos.  7, 9, 16 and 18. 
Total-04 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that fina l replies to the Recommendations/ 
Observations for w hich only  interim replies have been given by  the 
 1 

Government should be furnished w ithin three months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations. 
 
A. BILATERAL AGREEMENTS FO R SAFEGUARDING INTERESTS OF 
WORKERS 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 2 (Para No. 2.14)] 
 
5. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should focus on the 
need to safeguard the interest of Indian workers abroad, by entering into bilateral 
agreement with countries where there are substantial numbers of Indian workers.  
The Committee had appreciated that a beginning had since been made by the 
Ministry for entering into bilatera l agreements with Kuwait, Qatar, Oman and 
Malaysia. The Committee had also desir ed that the discussion/negotiation for 
bilateral agreement with these countries be expedited to ensure that the workers 
interests were protected so that they are no longer exploited by the unscrupulous 
agents in India and by their employers abroad. 
 
6. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“On 13th December 2006 a bilateral MOU in the field of manpower 
was signed with UAE.  Recently on 10 th April, 2007, the Ministry 
has signed a bilateral MOU on Labour, Employment and Manpower 
Development with the State of Ku wait as well.  The proposed 
Additional Protocol with the State of  Qatar was initialed by the two 
sides at official level on 20 th September, 2006.  In respect of 
Bahrain and Oman, the proposed MOU on Labour and Employment 
was sent to them in December, 2006.   Their response is awaited.  
With regard to MOU with Malaysia,  the draft was sent to the 
Government of Malaysia thr ough diplomatic channel.  The 
 2 

response from the Government of  Malaysia is awaited.  The 
Malaysian side also handed over a dr aft to us during the Joint 
Commission Meeting held on 14-16 January, 2006.  Our response 
will be sent to them shortly.  The Ministry has emphasized the need 
for signing an MOU with Yemen al so during the Joint Committee 
Meeting held in Delhi on 10-11 April, 2007.  The matter will be 
followed up.” 
 
 
7. The Committee w elcome the init iative of the Government to sign 
bilateral Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with UAE and Kuw ait in the 
field of manpow er to ensure protecti on of interests of Indian w orkers 
abroad.  The Committee hope that the proposed MoUs on Labour and 
Employment sent to Bahrain, Oman  and Malay sia and the additional 
protocol initialed w ith Qatar w ill be followed up vigorously  for expeditious 
signing of Memorandum of Understandi ng(MoU) with these countries.  The 
Committee also hope that steps will be taken for signing MoU in this regard 
with Yemen and w ith other countries having significant number of Indian 
workers.  
 
B. PRAVASI BHARTIYA SHRAMIK PURUSKAR  
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 3 (Para No. 2.15)] 
 
8. The Committee had welcomed the proposal of the Government to have an 
award called “Pravasi Bhartiya Shramik Puruskar” that would consist a citation 
and 1 lakh rupees in cash with the obj ective of recognizing the outstanding 
contribution made by Overseas Indian wo rkers.  The Committee noted that there 
would be 10 such awards every year and the first series of such Awards 
conferred on January 9, 2007 during the val edictory session of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas 2007.  The Committee were happy that  Government was instituting this 
 3 

award in recognition of the huge contri bution these workers made through their 
remittances to the national economy. 
 
 
9. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“The scheme of instituting a separate Pravasi Bharatiya Shramik Puraskar 
was examined.  However, it was decided that instead of a separate 
scheme of awards, the criteria for nomination for the existing Pravasi 
Bharatiya Samman might be suitably m odified to incorporate the category 
of workers in the existing award scheme. Action was being taken by the 
Ministry to include the workers in the Pravasi Bharatiya Sammman 
Scheme.” 
 
10. Having indicated to the Committee that the first series of “Pravasi 
Bharatiya Shramik Puraskar” w ere likely to be conferred on 09 th January, 
2007 during valedictory  session of Pr avasi Bharatiy a Divas 2007, the 
Committee wonder why timely action w as not taken by  the Government to 
ensure implementation of the proposal  either under a separate scheme or 
as a part of the existing award scheme.  The Committee do not expect such 
indifference and apathy  from the Mi nistry of Overseas Indian Affairs on 
matters handled by  them and urge  expeditious action to ensure 
implementation of the substance of the proposal at least in the forthcoming 
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas. 
 
C. MODERNISATION OF PROTECTOR GENERAL OF EMIGRANTS 
(POE) OFFICES 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 5 (Para No. 2.24)] 
 
11. During their study visit to some of the offices of Prot ector of Emigrants 
(POEs) during November 2006, the Co mmittee had observed that the office 
accommodation was too small, remotely  located, unkempt  and without proper 
infrastructure in place.  The Committ ee had, therefore, des ired that the POE 
 4 

submit a detailed report wit hin three months on all the regional offices of POE 
indicating office-wise staff strength, t he number of applications received, space 
requirement and actually ava ilable, suitability of the office location in terms of 
accessibility and the infrastructure needed to  make the offices efficient and user 
friendly.  For the convenience of app licants, the Committee recommended that 
the POE office might also open ‘May I help you’ counters, so that applicants were 
not exploited by soliciting spurious agents. 
 
12. It is observed from the details furnished by the Ministry that modernization/ 
renovation proposal in respect of most of the PoE Offices is under process.  
 
13.  The Committee are happy  to not e that modernization/ renovation 
proposal in respect of most of the o ffices of Protector of Emigrants (POEs) 
is under process.  The Committee desire that the process be completed 
expeditiously.  The Ministry ’s reply has, however, not disclosed the entire 
information regarding the POE at Thi ruvananthapuram.  No information 
regarding the workload of that office or details about its space requirement 
have been given.  The Committee would await the same.   
 
D. AMENDMENT OF EMIGRATION ACT, 1983 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 6 (Para No. 2.29)] 
 
14. Taking note of the large scale expl oitation and harassment of prospective 
emigrants by spurious Recruiti ng Agents (RAs), the Committee had 
recommended that the Emigration Act 1983 be amended expeditiously by 
inserting provisions so t hat deterrent punishment was inflicted on spurious RAs 
and the RAs duping the emigrant workers.  In order to curb the incidents of illegal 
emigration for which spurious RAs were  responsible, the Committee had further 
recommended that respective POE office s should hold regular  meeting with the 
Police Department of the c oncerned States to follow up on the cases registered 
and to chalk out ways and means for dealing with spurious recruiting agencies.  
The Committee would also like the government to widely publicise the blacklisted 
 5 

agents (both foreign and Indi an) to preclude duping of unsuspecting workers 
seeking emigration.  
 
15. The Ministry in their reply inter-alia have stated as under: 
“The Government has initiat ed a proposal for amendment of 
Emigration Act, 1983 in order to prov ide for promotion of overseas 
employment, better protection of  emigrant workers, heavier 
penalties for offences and stringent regulation of the recruiting 
agents” 
 
16. The proposal to amend the Em igration Act, 1983 has been pending 
for a long time now  and the Committee desire that the amendment Bill in 
this regard should be introduced in Pa rliament w ithout any further delay .  
The reply  of the Ministry  is, how ever, silent on the question of follow  up 
with the police department by  the offices of Protector of Emigrants (POEs) 
on cases registered and to find w ays for dealing w ith bogus Recruiting 
Agents (RAs).  The Ministry have also not responded to the suggestion that 
the Government should w idely publici se the list of blacklisted recruiting 
agents (both foreign and Indian) to  prevent unsuspecting w orkers being 
duped by them.  The Committee hope that  the Ministry  have taken note of 
these suggestions for urgent implementation.   
 
E. INVESTMENTS BY OVERSEAS INDIANS 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 11 (Para No. 3.17)] 
 
17. The Committee had, inter-alia, recomm ended that the Ministry must also 
commission a study of the ways in which Overseas Indians could make greater 
contribution through investments in Indi a.  The study commissioned should also 
analyse the investment patte rns of the Overseas Indians in India so that 
promotion policies could be fine-tuned.  
 6 

 
18. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs have not given any  response 
to the above suggestion.  The Co mmittee w ould aw ait the Ministry ’s 
specific response in this regard.   
 
F. PROBLEMS RELATING TO NRI MARRIAGES  
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 13 (Para No. 4.7)] 
 
19. The Committee were concerned to not e that the incidents of failed and 
fraudulent marriages of Indian wom en with NRIs had assumed alarming 
proportions. The Committee in this context had recommended among other 
things that the prospective bridegroom should be made to give an affidavit to the 
effect that he was not married, and that the affidavit must be notarized by the 
respective consulate/embassy.  
 
20. The Committee regret to note that th e reply of the Ministry  is silent 
on the suggestion that prospective bridegroom be made to give an affidavit 
to the effect that he is not married, a nd that the affidavit must be notarized 
by the respective consulate/ emb assy.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry have taken note of this recommendation for suitable action.  
 7 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 1 (Para No. 2.13)] 
 
The Committee observe that the Over seas Indian workers are estimated 
at about 4-5 million and their remittances into India are estimated at $12-15 
billion annually.  The Committee also obser ve that most of them belong to 
unskilled and semi-skilled category and ther e has been a steady increase, to the 
tune of 1 million a year, in the number of persons emigrating for employment 
abroad.  Taking note of the fact that the Ministry propose to undertake skill 
upgradation and pre-departure training pr ogramme for potential emigrant 
workers, the Committee recommend that  the training programmes undertaken 
must keep in view the changing nature of  manpower requirement of countries 
around the world through the Indian Missions .  The information regarding the 
training so imparted and the database of manpower availability should also be 
available with our Missions abroad.  T he Committee further recommend that the 
proposals received from Tamil Nadu, A ndhra Pradesh and Kerala for starting 
emigrant workers training programmes should be followed up with the concerned 
States and the training programmes for emigrant workers started expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is vital to give an opportunity to the prospective emigrants to upgrade 
and optimize their skills in the relevant trades before they pr oceed abroad. In 
order to address these issues, during 2006- 07 the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs in consultation with State Govt. launched a new scheme for skill 
upgradation and pre-departure ori entation of the prospecti ve emigrants.  Under 
the scheme, the Ministry pr ovides financial assistance at the rate of about Rs. 
 8 

1000 per worker.  During 2006-07 the scheme was implemented on pilot basis in 
five states i.e. Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Punjab.  An 
amount of Rs. 1 Crore each for Kerala  and Tamil Nadu and Rs. 65.61 Lakhs for 
Punjab, Rs. 50 Lakhs for Andhra Prades h and Rs. 84.39 Lakhs for Karnataka 
had been released The Ministry proposes to  extend this scheme to the top 10 
labour sending States duri ng the current financial and correspondence with the 
concerned State Governments is being done for the same.  The budget 
allocation for the year 2007-08 for the scheme is Rs. 9 crore. 
 
It may be mentioned that State Governm ents have significant role in the 
implementation of the schem e. The Protector of Emig rants, being in the field 
formation, has the relevant data of emigr ant workers and is in a better position to 
assist the State Governments about the training needs. Therefore, the Ministry 
has decided that the POEs and the Stat e Government will work together for 
superior implementation of t he scheme. This Ministry is  also pursuing the matter 
vigorously with the concerned state Govt. to utilize the funds. 
 
   Ministry also propose to work in partnership with the Apex Industry 
Associations like CII, FICCI and ASSOCHAM as well as with credible NGOs to 
expand the scope and delivery of the progr amme.  While imparting the skill up-
gradation and pre-departure tr aining the Government would keep in view the 
changing nature of manpower r equirements in countries around the world.  The 
Ministry has proposed establishment of a Council for Promot ion of overseas 
employment, which will play a vital role in assessing the labour market 
requirements and taking appropriate proactive  steps to help Indian workers avail 
the emerging opportunities.   
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
 
 
 9 

[Recommendation Sl. No. 2 (Para No. 2.14)] 
  
The Committee are concerned to note t hat Overseas Indian workers are 
facing numerous problems regarding non- payment/delayed payment of wages, 
unilateral changes in the contract of worker s, changing the jobs arbitrarily etc.  In 
certain cases, the workers are not given any employment and are left in the lurch 
in the foreign country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should focus on the need to safeguard the in terests of Indian workers abroad, by 
entering into bilateral agr eement with countries wher e there are substantial 
number of Indian workers.  The Committee appreciate that a beginning has since 
been made by the Ministry for entering into bilateral agreements with Kuwait, 
Qatar, Oman and Malaysia.  T he Committee desire that the 
discussion/negotiation for bilateral agreement  with these countries be expedited 
to ensure that the workers interests are protected and  that they are no longer 
exploited by the unscrupulous agents in India and by their employers abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
On 13 th December 2006 a bilateral MOU in the field of manpower was 
signed with UAE.  Recently on 10th April, 2007, the Ministry has signed a bilateral 
MOU on Labour, Employment and Manpower Development  with the State of 
Kuwait as well.  The proposed Additional Protocol with the State of Qatar was 
initiated by the two sides  at official level on 20 th September, 2006.  In respect of 
Bahrain and Oman, the proposed MOU on Labour and Employment was sent to 
them in December, 2006.  Their response is awaited.  With  regard to MOU with 
Malaysia, the draft was sent to the Go vernment of Malaysia through diplomatic 
channel.  The response from the Governm ent of Malaysia is awaited.  The 
Malaysian side also handed over a draft to us during the Joint Commission 
Meeting held on 14-16 January, 2006.  Our response will be sent to them shortly.  
The Ministry has emphasized the need for signing an MOU with Yemen also 
 10 

during the Joint Committee Meeting held in Delhi on 10-11 April, 2007.  The 
matter will be followed up. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 3 (Para No. 2.15)] 
 
 The Committee welcome the proposal of the Government to have an 
award called “Pravasi Bhartiya Shramik Puruskar” that will consist a citation and 
1 lakh rupees in cash with the objec tive of recognizing the outstanding 
contribution made by Overseas Indian wo rkers. The Committee note that there 
will be 10 such awards every y ear and the first series of such Awards conferred 
on January 9, 2007 during the valedictory session of Pr avasi Bharatiya Divas 
2007. The Committee are happy that Governm ent is instituting this award in 
recognition of the huge contribution t hese workers make through their 
remittances to the national economy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The scheme of instituti ng a separate Pravasi Bharatiya Shramik Puraskar 
was examined.  However, it was deci ded that instead of a separate scheme of 
awards, the criteria for nomination for the existing Pravasi Bharatiya Samman 
may be suitably modified to incorporate t he category of worker s in the existing 
award scheme. Action is being taken by the Ministry to include the workers in the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Scheme. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 11 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 4 (Para No. 2.23)] 
 
 The Committee note that there are 8 offices of the POEs from where 
applicants seeking employment abroad and possessing a passport with 
Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) endorsement can obtain emigration 
clearance. The Committee observed during thei r visit to some of  the field offices 
of POE that these offices are headed by junior level officers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that  the field offices need to be revamped by upgrading 
the posts in the metropolitan cities to  Deputy Secretary level. The Committee 
regret to note that there has been rampant corruption in some of the offices of 
POEs. The Committee find it even more r egretful to note that inspite of the 
admitted corruption in the POE offices, the Government has done seemingly little 
to identify officials with doubtful in tegrity and proceed against them. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend t hat suitable measures be undertaken 
immediately to bring about transparen cy in the functioning of POEs and 
exemplary action be taken against officials indulging in corrupt practices.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It was strongly felt that the posts of t he Protectors of Emigrants must be  
upgraded in order to change the work cultur e in emigration, to cope with ever 
increasing volume of emigration, to s upport the e-governance initiative of the 
Ministry and to enable the POEs to effe ctively discharge their mandate under the 
law and to protect the em igrants from the ill-cons equences of an imperfect 
overseas employment market. Consequently, the posts of Protector of Emigrants 
in the three metropolitan cities, namely, Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai, have been 
 12 

upgraded to the level of Deputy Secretar y and those at Thiruvananthapuram and 
Hyderabad, to the level of Under Secretary.  
As regards action relating corruption in POE Offices, some officials with 
doubtful integrity are under suspensi on and departmental action has been 
initiated against them.  Further, to bri ng about transparency in the functioning of 
POE offices, computerisation of the wo rk of POE offices has been initiated and 
computerisation of POE office at Delhi has been completed.  Action for 
computerisation of other POE offi ces are under consid eration and will be 
completed soon.  Strict instructions have been issued to the POEs for conducting 
rigorous checks and adopting adequate caut ion while granting emigration 
clearance. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 5 (Para No. 2.24)] 
 
 During their study visit to some of the offices of POEs during November 
2006, the Committee observed that the o ffice accommodation was too small, 
remotely located, unkempt  and without proper infrastructure in place.  The 
Committee, therefore, desir e that the POE submit a detailed report within three 
months on all the regional o ffices of POE indicating office-wise staff strength, the 
number of applications received, space requirement and actually available, 
suitability of the office location in terms  of accessibility and the infrastructure 
needed to make the offices efficient and user  friendly.  For the convenience of 
applicants, the Committee, recommend that the POE office may also open ‘May I 
help you’ counters, so that  applicants are not exploit ed by soliciting spurious 
agents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 

Reply of the Government 
Position was indicated in the statement given below: 
 
POE Staff Strength 
(sanctioned / 
in position) 
Number of 
Applications 
received (2006) 
Space requirement Office location in terms of 
accessibility 
Infrastructure May I 
Kolkata 3 (Three) 
POE - 1 
LDC – 1 
Gp D – 1 
ECR – 7397 
ECRS 32,901 
Present area – 800 
sq. ft. 
(The present area is 
quite sufficient) 
In a central Government 
Office Complex at Salt Lake 
and easily accessible 
Modernisation 
/ Renovation 
proposal is 
under process 
The office 
the possibl
to the pu b
emigrant(s)
this offic e
telephone 
prey to the 
Hyderabad 3 (Three) 
POE - 1 
Asstt – 1 
UDC – 1 
Helper – 
contract basis 
ECR – 50977 
ECRS – 44605 
Present Area – 1614 
sq. ft. 
(the present area is 
sufficiently spaced) 
Centrally located in the main 
part of the city called 
Nampally which is easily 
accessible and premises are 
well kempt. 
-do- Since this 
with not mu
load one 
sufficient to
as well 
individual c
Thiruvanan
thapuram 
8 (Eight) 
POE - 1 
Asstt – 1 
UDC – 2 (1-
Vacant) 
LDC - 2 
Gp D – 2 
-- Present Area -  The present accommodation 
is best suited accommodation 
for the staff and public.  It is 
also easily accessible for the 
public as it is situated within a 
radius of 1 km from Railway 
station and Central Bus 
Stand.  
-- May I hel p
better than
as public c
documents
application
counter 
manpower 
Cochin 8 (eight) 
POE – 1 
Asstt – 2 
UDC – 1(V) 
LDC – 2 
Peon – 1(V) 
Watchman - 1  
ECR – 180 per 
day  
ECRS – 115 per 
day 
Actual – 3393.86 sq. 
ft. 
Required – 4000 sq. 
ft. 
The Present location is good 
in terms of accessibility being 
in the heart of the city and 
near Railway Station / Bus 
Terminal. 
Since the owner is asking to 
vacate the premises, the 
process of searching an 
alternative office 
 May I h
commenda
the limited 
POE, Coc h
in addition 
would be 
the recomm
 14 

accommodation is under 
process and will be finalised 
soon 
 
Chandigarh 3 (three) 
POE – 1 
Asstt – 1 
LDC – 1 (V) 
3200 workers 
and 800 visitors 
in a month. 
 There are two rooms 
available for working.  CPWD 
has been requested for 
granting an additional room 
and also for making 
arrangements for providing 
additional provisions for 
convenience of public. 
  
Delhi 13 (Thirteen) 
POE-I – 1 
POE-II – 1 
Asstt – 2 (V) 
UDC – 2 
Steno – 1(V) 
LDC – 1 
Record Sorter 
– 1 
Peon – 2 
Sweeper – 1 
Chowkidar–
1(V) 
 
ECR – 108606 
ECRS – 120233 
during 2006 
There is no crunch of 
space. 
The office is located in 
canteen block of Jaiselmer 
House, Mansingh Road.  
Located centrally, well 
connected by bus services, 
Metro station and Railway 
station are also close. 
The building owned by 
CPWD requires minor 
changes and the matter has 
already been taken up with 
CPWD. 
 The functio
computeriz
facilitate the
for filing on
create a fa
for hiring s
wages / c
considerati
Mumbai 30 (Thirty) 
POE- DS – 1 
(1-US level in 
place) 
POE-II – 3-
1*=2 
[*transferred to 
POE, Thiruvn.] 
Asstt. – 3 (1-V) 
UDC – 6 
LDC – 8 
ECR - 278511 
ECRS - 192256 
The present Area is 
6588 sq.ft, is 
adequate as per 
requirement. 
 
The present premises 
are dilapidated.  
Efforts are on to 
acquire new 
premises through 
State  Government 
Located at Khira Nagar, SV 
Road, Santacruz(W), 
Mumbai. 
It is  only after 
a suitable 
accommodatio
n allotted the 
office can be 
modeled to 
give a 
corporate look 
 
 15 

Gp D – 9 
 
 
 
as well as Ministry of 
UD.  Secretary, UD of 
the Government of 
Maharashtra has 
been requested for 
allotment of suitable 
accommodation. 
Chennai 10 (Ten) 
POE-DS – 1 
POE-II – 1 
Assistant – 1 
UDC – 3 
LDC – 2 
Peon- 1 
Watchman - 1 
ECR – 136887 
ECRS -  89858 
Average number 
of applications 
received per day 
– 800 
Space Requirement – 
3500 sq. ft. 
Actual Space – 2560 
sq. ft. 
Matter is being taken up with 
Tamil Nadu Housing Board, 
Govt. of Tamil Nadu, for 
allotting alternate 
accommodation. 
 A special 
guiding 
public/emig
POE offic e
also plac e
parts of th
general p
drinking w a
also be 
accommod
acquired. 
 
 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
 16 

Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 6 (Para No. 2.29)] 
 
Taking note of the large scale exploi tation and harassment of prospective 
emigrants by spurious Recruiting Agent s (RAs), the Committee recommend that 
the Emigration Act 1983 be amended expeditiously by inserting provisions so 
that deterrent punishment is inflict ed on spurious RAs and the RAs duping the 
emigrant workers.  In or der to curb the incidents of illegal emigration for which 
spurious RAs are responsible, the Commi ttee further recommend that respective 
POE offices should hold regular meeti ng with the Police Department of the 
concerned States to follow up on the cases registered and to chalk out ways and 
means for dealing with spurious recruiti ng agencies.  The Committee would also 
like the government to wi dely publicise the blacklisted agents (both foreign and 
Indian) to preclude duping of unsuspecting workers seeking emigration.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has initialed a pr oposal for amendment of Emigration 
Act, 1983 in order to provide for promot ion of overseas employment, better 
protection of emigrant wo rkers, heavier penalties for offences and stringent 
regulation of the recruiting agents.  It is also proposed to insert a penal clause 
against the offence of human smuggling.   A direction has been issued under 
section 38 of the Emigration Act to the PGE to monitor prosecutions launched 
under the Act. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 17 

[Recommendation Sl. No. 8 (Para No. 2.37)] 
 
 The Committee note that government is not maintaining database of 
diaspora/NRIs living in different parts of the world. The Committee hardly need to 
emphasise the need for maintaining such a database country/region-wise, while 
acknowledging the need to prom ote, nurture and sustain a mutually beneficial 
symbiotic relationship between India and its diaspora. The database so created 
should maintain information including the kind of workers required and the jobs 
available and the emerging trends of employment and made available on the 
website of the Ministry. This, in the considered view of the Committee, would 
save the migrant workers from the clutches of unscrupulous emigration agents.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The ‘Overseas Indian Facilitation Cent re’ launched by Hon’ble Minister of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on 28 th May, 2007 has also been entrusted with the job 
of maintaining a database of the Indian diaspora/NRIs livi ng in different parts of 
the world. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 10 (Para No. 3.16)] 
 
The committee welcome the proposal of  the Ministry to establish an 
Overseas Indian Investment Promotion Unit to give sustained and focused 
attention to promoting investments by Over seas Indians in India. Given that the 
remittances of Overseas Indian worker s into India are huge and that their 
investment potential is enormous, the Committee appreciate the launch of an 
Information Service Portal in associati on with UTI Bank, which provides useful 
information of Investment opportunity in  India. The Committee recommend that 
the proposed compendium on policies, Incent ives and Investment opportunities 
for Overseas Indians and the Handbook for Overseas Indians providing 
 18 

information on investment opportunities available with the State Government 
should be brought out soon. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The compendium of policie s, incentives and investment opportunities for 
Overseas Indians and the hand-book for Ov erseas Indians providing information 
on investment opportunities have al ready been published and released by the 
Prime Minister during 5 th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas hel d in New Delhi from 7-9 
January 2007. ‘Overseas Indi an Facilitation Centre’ as a single stop shop for 
dissemination of investment related information and for providing hand holding 
services to the potential overseas Indian investors has been launched by Hon’ble 
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs on 28th May, 2007. 
 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 11 (Para No. 3.17)] 
 
Realising the potentials and capacities of  Overseas Indians to invest in 
India the committee in their 6 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) has recommended for 
setting up of the investment promotion unit as the Committee felt that Overseas 
Indians are presently able to invest only a lower proportion of their resources in 
India as compared to the Overseas Chines e who invest in China in a big way.  
The Committee recommend that the Minist ry must also commission a study of 
the ways in which Overseas Indians can make greater contribution through 
investments in India.  The study commissioned should also analyse the 
investment patterns of the Overseas Indi ans in India so that  promotion policies 
can be fine-tuned.  The Committee further  recommend that the Ministry should 
finalize and announce the investment promotion unit expeditiously. 
 
 
 19 

Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal of the Ministry to est ablish a trust titled ‘Overseas Indian 
Facilitation Centre’ as a single stop shop for dissemination of investment related 
information and for providing hand holding se rvices to the potential overseas 
Indian investors has been appr oved by the cabinet. The facilitation center will 
also work as a repository of Overseas Indian investm ent related issues and will 
suggest to the Ministry ways to enhance Overseas Indians investment in India. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 12 (Para No. 3.18)] 
 
 The Committee also note that the Mi nistry of Home Affairs (MHA) has 
drawn up proposals for a comprehensive Fo reign Contribution Regulation Act for 
Overseas Indians and that the Ministry  have made some suggestions to MHA. 
The Committee also note that the ma tter has been referred to a Group of 
Ministers (GoMs). The Committee desire t hat the Ministry should follow up the 
matter with the MHA expeditiously so t hat procedures are simplified for the 
Overseas Indians under the FCR Act.         
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken not e of the concerns of the Committee. The matter is 
being followed up with the Ministry of Home  for expeditious simplification of the 
Foreign Contribution Regulation Act. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
 
 
 20 

[Recommendation Sl. No. 13 (Para No. 4.7)] 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the incidents of failed and 
fraudulent marriages of Indian women with NRIs have assumed alarming 
proportions. The Committee note that owing to huge costs involved, the victim 
Indian women are not able to take l egal recourse. The Committee recommend 
that an effective mechanism need be worked out in order to curb the menace of 
fraudulent marriages including compulso ry registration of marriages and 
amendment to the Indian Marriages Acts, which may provide for, among other 
things, the jurisdiction of divorce proceedings  to be instituted only in the courts in 
whose jurisdiction the marriage was sole mnized/registered. The Committee also 
recommend that the prospective bridegroom  should be made to give an affidavit 
to the effect that he is not married, and t hat the affidavit must be notarized by the 
respective consulate/embassy. The Co mmittee also desire that the guidance 
booklet on Marriages with Overseas Indians  should be brought out immediately 
and widely disseminated both in India w here marriages take place and also 
distributed overseas. The Committee further recommend that government should 
set up gender Cells/legal cells to provide legal aid and counselling to victims of 
fraudulent marriages. The Committee note t hat in many countries there is 
provision under which the courts offer the services of attorneys free of charge 
and there are also social organizations which provide free legal aid counselling to 
Indian women. The Ministry , therefore, need to prepare lists of such attorneys 
and other organizations who would be ready to work  pro bono and put up the list 
on the website of the Mini stry and our missions so t hat victims of fraudulent 
marriages may approach them for free legal aid.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken the following steps  to tackle the problems arising out of 
NRI marriages : 
 
 21 

i) Compulsory Registration of Marriages 
 
 The Hon’ble  Supreme Court in a re cent case of Mrs. Seema Vs Ashwani 
Kumar has held that marriages of all pers ons who are citizens of India belonging 
to various religions should be made compulso rily registrable in their respective 
States where the marriage is solemnized. The Hon’ble Court has also directed 
the Union Government and the State Go vernments to frame suitable rules and 
procedures for compulsorily registration of marriages.  
  
 MOIA has drawn the a ttention of the States/ UTs to the aforesaid 
judgement of the Suprem e Court and requested them to make laws for 
compulsory registration of marriages and m onitoring the progress in this regard.  
In this regard, the Ministry of Wom en and Child Development has submitted a 
draft legislation to the Ministry of Law & Justice, Legislative Department. 
 
 
ii) Constitution of  inter Ministerial Sub-Committee 
  
 An inter Ministerial Sub-Committee has  been constituted, inter–alia ,  to 
discuss the clauses that could be insert ed in the bilateral agreements between 
India and the foreign countries to protect the interests of  victims of failed and 
fraudulent marriages. The Committee has already met and is expected to finalise 
its recommendations soon.  A special task forc e comprising officers of Ministry of 
External Affairs and Ministry of Law and Justice has been constituted to study the 
problems and give their recommendations. 
 
iii)     Amendments in the Indian Passport Act 
 
 The CPV Division of Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs has been requested to 
study the and give recommendation for making suitable amendments in the 
 22 

Indian Passport Act including suggestion to include photograph of the spouse 
in the passport.  
 
iv) Guidance Booklet on NRI Marriages 
 
 The Ministry has brought out a guidance booklet on “Marriages to 
Overseas Indians” for the benefit of pros pective brides and their families. The 
guidance booklet was released by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on the eve of PBD, 
2007. This booklet contains informati on on safeguards available to women 
deserted by their NRI spouses, legal remedi es available , authorities that can be 
approached for redressal of grievanc es and non governmental organizations 
which can provide assistance. The gui dance booklet is being sent to all 
States/UTs and the Indian Embassies in the countries having high concentration 
of Indian diaspora for wide disseminat ion of information among the groups 
concerned.  
 
 
v) Scheme to provide financial assistance to women in distress 
 
The Ministry has launched a scheme to provide legal and counseling 
services to women in need and facing desertion/divorce proceedings in courts 
overseas through Indian Missions abr oad. Under the scheme, funds have 
been placed at the disposal of Indian Missions in USA, UK, Canada, Australia 
, New Zealand and the countries in Gulf  which will be released to the Indian 
Women’s Associations, NGOs etc em panelled with the Missions to provide 
legal and counseling services to Indian women victims of NRI marriages.   
 
vi) Awareness campaign to educate prospective brides and their families  
 
   The Ministry has brought out information pamphlets in English, Hindi, 
Punjabi, Malayalam  and Telugu to make  Indian women awar e of their rights 
 23 

and responsibilities  and to take precaut ions before entering  into marital 
alliance with overseas Indians. These pamphlets have been sent to the State 
Governments concerned for distri bution through village panchayats, 
Anganwadis, Railway Stations, Airports, Hospitals /Dispensaries, NGOs/Self 
Help Groups etc. 
 
 The Ministry has also launched t he publicity campaign through electronic 
scrolls on regional T.V networ ks which were primarily aimed  to cover the States 
of Punjab and Andhra Pradesh. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 14 (Para No. 5.11)] 
 
 The Committee are happy to note t hat the Ministry has started a 
Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children from 2006-2007 with the objective 
to make higher education in India accessibl e to the children of Overseas Indians 
and publicise India as an education hub. T he Committee also not e that over 70 
students have availed of the scholarsh ip during the academic year 2006-2007. 
 The Committee hope that the sc holarship scheme will also enable 
Diaspora students to act as goodwill ambassadors between India and their 
adopted countries. The Committee recomm end that the scholarship scheme 
should be widely publicized to bring greater awareness of the scheme among the 
Diaspora populations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Scholarship  Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) was launched 
in the year 2006 and 67 student s from various countries are pursuing their 
 24 

studies in various educational  institutions in India. The SPDC for the academic 
year 2007 has also been launched recent ly. The Scheme has been expanded to 
include 40 countries with Indian diaspora population of 20,000 or more.  The 
scholarship amount has also been incr eased from US$ 1800/- to US$ 3600/- 
which would meet the institutional expenses upto 75%. The programme have 
been publicized through the webs ites of the Ministry, Educational Consultants 
India Limited (Ed.CIL) and through Indian Missions abroad.  Ed.CIL has also 
publicized the Scheme through their road shows in various countries. The 
response received this year is overwhelming. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 15 (Para No. 5.12)] 
 
 The Committee also note that scholarship  to study in India are also being 
offered by Ministry of External Affair s (MEA) and Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (MHRD).  The Committee desir e that the Ministry should explore 
the possibility of institut ing a coordination mechanism  so as to ensure that 
information regarding the children of P IOs/NRIs availing scholarships under the 
schemes operated by Ministry of External  Affairs (MEA) and Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (MHRD) is c oncurrently compiled and updated by the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs res ponsible for implementation of scholarship 
programme for Diaspora children. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following the recommendation of the Standing Committee on External 
Affairs for constitution of a Joint Commi ttee for provision of scholarships to 
foreign students by various Ministries, a meeting attended by the representatives 
of the Ministries of External Affairs,  Human Resource Development, Overseas 
Indian Affairs and Indian Council for Cult ural Relations (ICCR) was held on 22 nd 
February, 2007.   It was decided to shar e data concerning country-wise break up 
 25 

of scholarships, institutions, financial liability of different schemes and to continue 
the dialogue between different Ministries to reduce duplication of the schemes. It 
was also decided to work jointly towa rds reduction of problems and time in 
implementation of joint scholarships.   
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 17 (Para No. 5.18)] 
 
The Committee note that there is a long pending demand from NRIs to set 
up a PIO University in India to facilitate wholesome and modern education for the 
children of Indian Diaspora.  The Commi ttee are happy to note that the proposal 
is under active consideration of t he Government and the Committee hope that 
such a university will be set up in due course  so that India r eally emerges a hub 
of education for the children of India Diaspora across the globe. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Cabinet approval for setting up a policy framework for the establishment of 
a NRI/PIO University in the Special Economic Zone has been obtained.  
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 19 (Para No. 7.7)] 
  
The Committee note that Ministry  of Urban Development (MUD) had 
earlier allotted Plots No. 15A & 15B in  Chanakyapuri measuring 5854 sq. meters 
(1.45 acres) in favour of MOIA in  January, 2005. Anot her Plot No. 15D 
measuring 3812 sq. meters was also allotted to the Ministry for the construction 
of Pravasi Bhartiya K endra (PBK) during February, 2006. The Committee 
observe that the Ministry has taken inor dinately long time to acquire the land. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan drawn for early 
construction of the PBK and the time frame for completion of the project. 
 26 

Reply of the Government 
 
A proposal to appoint NBCC as consul tant-cum-project manager for the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra is awaiting financial concurrence. It is expected to be 
finalised shortly. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 20 (Para No. 8.4)] 
 
The Committee are concerned to note that even after three years of it 
creation, the Ministry is still without a minimum support staff. The Committee feel 
that in the absence of the required st aff, the Ministry may not be able to 
discharge its mandate. Many schemes /projects announced are yet to be 
implemented. The Committee r egret to note that the Mi nistry still does not have 
any cadre staff of its own. The Committ ee, therefore, feel that MOIA should 
continue its efforts to build its own and adequate cadre of staff. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The total number of sanctioned posts in th is Ministry is 105.  All the Group 
A posts up to the level of U nder Secretary are filled up. The posts of the level of 
Section Officer(S.O.) and below up to L.D.C. are filled up by the Cadre controlling 
authority i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs.  Apart from this, 12 posts are filled by MEA 
from their cadre and 3 posts by Departm ent of Official Languages. After creation 
of this Ministry in May, 2004, no cadre had been assigned to this Ministry by the 
DOP&T.  However, the lower level posts were filled up in consultation with the 
DOP&T through inter cadre transfer.  Recently, the DOP&T has declared the 
MHA as the cadre authority for the posts of  the level of S.O. and below up to the 
level of LDC in this Ministry.  MH A has been requested to post candidates 
against the vacant posts.   
  
 27 

[Recommendation Sl. No. 21 (Para No. 8.7)] 
 
 The Committee would like to be informed of the time frame stipulated, if 
any, for setting up Overseas Indian Center s. Needless to say, the setting up of 
such Centers will go a long way to es tablish regular link and build goodwill 
between India, the Indian diaspora and the countries of their residence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cabinet has since approved setti ng up an Overseas Indian Centre 
(OIC) at Dubai with the aim to provide legal, medical and financial counseling to 
the Indian workers in the Gulf region.  Government sanction for setting up the 
Centre was issued on 18th April, 2007. In addition to this, sanction for the posts of 
Counselor – Community Affairs (Dev elopment) with supporting staff to be 
positioned in Indian Missions at Washington (USA) and Kuala Lampur (Malaysia) 
have been issued on 29.05.2007. Action has been initiated for selection of 
personnel for posting in the Overseas Indian Centers. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
 28 

 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF  
THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
-- NIL -- 
 29 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
-- NIL -- 
 
 
 
 
  
 30 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 7 (Para No. 2.34)] 
 
 The Committee observe that the pr oposal to introduce smart card was 
initiated way back in March, 2005, but des pite considerable lapse of time no 
significant headway has been made. The ex planation submitted by the Ministry 
for the delay in introduction of smart card in the field offices and at the 
Headquarters of POE in found untenable by the Committee as India is acclaimed 
to be one of the high-tech c apital of the world. The Committee, therefore, see no 
reason as to why the introduction of  smart card should be delayed so 
inordinately. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the government should 
expedite full computerization of all office s of POE, and impart necessary training 
to the staff so that the introduction of  smart card is facilitated without any 
operational difficulty. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action for computerization of all the o ffices of POEs is already started.  
The office of POE Delhi is already computerized and other POE offices are in the 
process of computerization, which will be completed in 2-3 months.   
For the issue of smart cards to emigrant workers the Department of Space 
has been requested by the Mini stry on 23.3.2007 to give a fresh proposal of the 
Consortium of M/s Semi Conductors Lt d. Chandigarh and M/s Bharat Electrical 
Ltd. (BEL). The final proposal from Department of Space is awaited.   
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
 
 31 

 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 9 (Para No. 2.44)] 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Government has introduced the 
Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) , 2003 in an effort to safeguard the 
interests of the emigrant workers.  The Committee also note that the PBBY, 2003 
has now been upgraded as the PBBY, 2006 and emigrant workers will now get a 
minimum cover of Rs. 5 lakhs, instead of  Rs. 2 lakhs.  The Committee, however, 
note that as on date 11.07 lakhs policies have issued, but the number of policies 
issued vis-à-vis the number of  emigrant workers is still far less.  The Committee 
feel that there are many more potent ial workers in need of insurance and, 
therefore, recommend that t he Ministry must sensitise the workers on benefits of 
getting insured.  The Committee also desire that the subscription premium should 
be reviewed so as to consider the scope to further reduce it. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  A compulsory Insurance Scheme known as Pravasi Bharatiya Bima 
Yojana, (PBBY) 2003 which was notified on 13.11.2003 came into force on the 
25th day of December, 2003.  The scheme was later revised on 25.1.06 with 
amendment coming into force w.e.f. 1.2.06. 
Subscription to the insurance co ver under PBBY is mandatory for all 
intending emigrant workers,  who apply for and obtain emigration clearance from 
the Protector of Emigrants (POE) as r equired under the Emigration Act, 1983 (31 
of 1983).  Emigration is not granted by the POE unless the emigrant worker 
subscribes to the insurance cover under  PBBY.  Since 25.12.03,  till April, 2007, 
clearance has been granted by the POEs to approximat ely 19.35 lakh persons 
going for employment abroad, and therefor e the number of po licies issued under 
the PBBY till date is 19.35 lakh approximately. 
 
 32 

The issue relating to review of t he subscription amount alongwith add on 
benefits to the emigrant workers under the PBBY, is under consideration in 
consultation with the insurance companies.  
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 16 (Para No. 5.13)] 
 
 The Committee note that the Governm ent has decided that 15 % seats in 
all higher and technical instit utes (except courses in Medicine) may be filled up 
on supernumerary basis over and above the approved intake and 1/3 rd of these 
are reserved for NRIs in the Gulf and South East Asia.  The Committee also note 
that the Government has introduc ed an exclusive scheme called Direct 
Admissions of Students Abroad (DASA) wherein 15 % seats have been reserved 
since 2001-2002 in 18 National Institutes  of Technology and other centrally 
funded technical institutions, except Indian Institutes of Technologies (IITs).  The 
Committee observe that the number of students who availed the quota have 
been steadily increasing since 2001-2002.  The Committee also note that there is 
no nodal agency for monitoring the impl ementation of the quota and only 
notifications are issued to  AICTE and UGC.  The Commi ttee feel that in the 
absence of a nodal agency, notifications  alone may not be sufficient in 
implementing the quota.  The Ministry  must ensure, th erefore, proper 
coordination with States uni versities and other Central universities to facilitate 
admissions of students under the quota.  The Committee also recommend that 
the project to get the educ ation profile of Diaspor a students mapped should be 
expedited. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has take the following action in this regard: 
 
(i) Letters have been written to UGC and AICTE  to furnish a list of 
institutions which are act ually implementing the 15% 
 33 

supernumerary quota reserved for PIOs/NRIs and foreigners. It has 
also been requested to them to instruct all the educational 
institutions to implement the quota.   
 
(ii) A proposal has been  sent to Ed .CIL to conduct a survey on the 
implementation of the 15% s upernumerary quota by different 
educational institutions in India.  
  
Follow up action on the above is being taken. 
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
[Recommendation Sl. No. 18 (Para No. 6.6)] 
 
 The Committee welcome the launch of the Overseas Citiz enship of India 
(OCI) Card, which will strengthen links bet ween the Overseas Indians and their 
country of origin.  The Committee has been recommending to the Government to 
allow OCI cardholder to participate in the po litical process of the country.  Given 
the contribution of Overseas Indians to the Indian economy through their 
investments and remittances, the Committee feel that it is time that the 
Government stop treating Overseas Indi ans as mere economic citizens.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the practice in countries allowing dual 
citizenship and conferring the right to vo te on their non-resident citizens.  The 
Committee have in their earlier reports (6 th and 10 th Report, 14 th Lok Sabha) 
recommended, and the Committee reiterate t hat the Government must consider 
and explore the feasibility of extending t he benefits of voting right to Overseas 
Citizens of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Presently, there is no proposal to confer voting rights to Overseas Citizens 
of India as they are not Indian citizens and hold nationalities of foreign countries. 
 34 

However, Government is currently exam ining a proposal to extend voting rights 
to Non-resident Indians. Details of practi ce followed in other countries allowing 
dual citizenship and conferring the right to  vote on their non-resident citizens are 
being collected.  
[MOIA OM No. H-11013/7/2007-Parl. Dated 26.6.2007] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI      DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
12th November, 2007                                                 Chairman,                  
21 Kartika, 1929 (Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 35 

Appendix -I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 7TH NOVEMBER, 2007  
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to  1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi  
   
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
5. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
6. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
7. Shri Mukeem Mohammad 
8. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
9. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
10. Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu 
11. Shri P.A. Sangma 
12. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
13. Shri M. Shivanna 
14. Shri Vanlalzawma 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha 
16. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
17. Dr. Ram Prakash 
18. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
19. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
20. Dr. Karan Singh 
21. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Director 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Lalkithang - Under Secretary 
 36 

 
2.  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adopted the same:- 
i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 14th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on the subject “Issues relating to Overseas 
Indians”.   
ii) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
iii) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Action 
Taken Reports and present the same to both Houses of Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXX Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 37 

 38 
Appendix -II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
FOURTEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations                                       21 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Sl. Nos. 1 to 6, 8, 10 to 15, 17 and 19 to 21 
 
    Total-17 
Percentage: 80.95% 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Sl. Nos. NIL 
Total-NIL 
Percentage:0% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Sl. Nos. NIL 
Total-NIL 
 Percentage: 0% 
 
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Sl. Nos.  7, 9, 16 and 18. 
 
Total-04 
Percentage: 19.05% 
 
 