 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2008-2009) 
 
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 22 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2008-09] 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 

TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 
2008-09] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008 
               Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930(Saka) 
 
 
 

COEA NO. 74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2008 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by  

 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2008-2009………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (iv)  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….            01  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           10 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…       16 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            19 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………           21 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee                           23  
held on 6.11.2008……………………………………………… 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the                           
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
20th Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….       25    
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2008-2009) 
LOK SABHA 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar  
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
9. Shri L. Rajagopal  
10. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
11. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
12. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
13. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
14. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
15. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
16. Shri M. Shivanna 
17. Shri Vanlalzawma 
18. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
19. Vacant* 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Bhuneshwar Kalita 
24. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi ** 
25. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
26. Shri Balbir Punj 
27. Dr. Ram Prakash 
28. Shri Bharat Kumar B. Raut 
29. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
30. Dr. Karan Singh 
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain           - Director 
3. Shri Hoti Lal  - Deputy  Secretary-II 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey - Committee Officer 
________________________________________________________________ 
* Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
disqualification for being Member of the Lok Sabha in terms of para 2(1)(b) of the 
Tenth Schedule to the Consitution w.e.f. 12.9.2008 
  
**     Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon expiry 
of his term w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
  
(iii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (2008-2009) having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
22nd Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 20 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2008-09. 
 
2. The 20th Report was laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008 and presented to Lok 
Sabha on 16 April, 2008. The Ac tion Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 28 July, 2008. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 06 November, 2008. The Minutes of  the sitting of the Committee have been 
reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 20 th Report of the Standing Committ ee on External Affairs (14 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
14 November,  2008                                                           Chairman,                 
23 Kartika, 1930 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

           
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
Action Taken by Government on the obser vations/recommendations contained in 
their Twentieth Report on Demands for Gr ants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of 
External Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April, 2008. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been receiv ed from the Ministry of External 
Affairs on all the observations/recommendat ions contained in the Report.  These 
have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by  
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1-3, 6-8, 11-12 and 15 
 Total-09 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  w hich the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  5, and 13-14 
Total-03 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of 
Government have not been accepted by  the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
Total- 01 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 and 9 
Total-02 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for w hich only  interim replies have been 
given by the government should be furnished w ithin three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the ac tion taken by the Government on 
some of their observations/recommendations. 
 1

A. Manpower Strength of the Ministry of External Affairs 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
5. The Committee had commented upon in their Twentieth
 
Report (2008-
09) the need to raise the manpower strength of the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs 
to cope with the expanding role of the Ministry. The Committee were of the view 
that cadre strength of Minist ry of Ex ternal Affairs w as grossly inadequate and 
needs to be substantially increased. The Mi nistry of Ex ternal Affairs had since 
made a proposal to create 514 posts out of which 314 posts were at middle and 
junior level. The Committee had been in formed that Cabinet Secretariat had 
advised Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs to sort out creation of these posts in 
consultation with the Ministry of Fi nance. The Committee urged that there 
should be no further delay in decidi ng the proposed ex pansion of the cadre 
strength, keeping in view MEA’s enl arged roles and responsibilities brought 
about by India’s increasing international engagements 
 
6. The Ministry of External Affairs in t heir action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“The proposal for ex pansion of t he MEA personnel strength is being 
actively processed in consultation with Cabinet Secretariat.” 
 
7. T he Committee are not satisfied w ith the Government’s reply  that the 
proposal for expansion of the MEA personnel strength is still being 
processed in consultation w ith Cabinet Secretariat.  The Committee desire 
that concerted efforts be made fo r the proposed expansion of the cadre 
strength keeping in view  the Ministry  of External Affairs’ enlarged role and 
responsibilities brought about by  India’s increasing international 
engagements.  They desire to be informed of the action taken in the matter at 
the earliest.   
 
 
 
 
 
 2

 
B. Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
 
8. The Committee had noted that t he Framework Agreement and 
protocols for the Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Project were ex pected to be 
signed on 2 April 2008. The project envisaged connectivity between Indian 
ports on eastern seaboard and North East ern Region of India via Myanmar. 
The project w as to assure better connectivity with North Eastern States 
reducing distance, saving f uel and time. The project w as expected to cost 
Rs.536 crore and time line for completion w as 5 years. The Committee 
desired that there should be periodical monitoring of the project to ensure that 
the project was completed in time and without cost escalating. 
 
9. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
“……………. it has been agreed that the respec tive nodal agencies (Ministry of 
External Affairs from Indian side and t he Ministry of Foreign Affairs from 
Myanmar side) shall appoint a Multi-Sect oral group with a view to advising and 
supervising the overall progress of wo rk on the project. The group shall hold 
periodic meetings to review progress.” 
 
10. The Committee note that the Framew ork Agreement betw een Govt. 
of India and Govt. of My anmar on Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport 
Project was signed on 2 April, 2008 and bot h of them agreed to appoint a 
Multi-Sectoral group w ith a view  to advising and supervising the overall 
progress of work on the project and group shall hold periodic meetings to 
review progress from time to time. Considering the importance of the 
project, the Committee desire to be informed of the action taken in the 
matter from time to time. 
 
 
 
 
 3

 
C. Setting up of the 'India-International Development 
Cooperation Agency (IIDCA)' 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
11. In order to have an organized set up of project delivery, an agency by 
name 'India-International Development  Cooperation Agency (IIDCA)' was 
proposed to be set up during 2007-08. Regr ettably, the proposal had suffered 
delay and was expected to start functioning in  5-6 months' time. The delay w as 
attributed to the long drawn process of  inter-ministerial consultations. The 
Committee felt that delay in such consultations could have been avoided, had 
there been inter-ministerial meeting to  discuss and decide such issues. The 
Committee ex pected Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs to take necessary steps to 
ensure that there was no further delay in implementation of the proposal. 
12. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“……………………….  
ii) Inter-ministerial consultations have been held to resolve 
various issues to ex pedite the setting up of the IIDCA (IAPD). 
Following these inter-ministerial consultations, a Cabinet Note 
outlining the structure, mandat e and functions of the proposed 
agency was submitted for Cabinet's approval on 7 March 2008. 
However, Cabinet Secretariat has suggested revisions and these 
modifications are being carried out and a revised Cabinet Note is 
to be submitted to the Cabinet shortly.” 
  
13. The Committee find that inter-ministerial consultations w ere held to 
resolve various issues to expedite the setting up of the 'India-International 
Development Cooperation Agency  (IIDCA)'.  A Cabinet Note outlining the 
structure, mandate and functions of the proposed agency was submitted for 
Cabinet’s approval on 7 March, 2008.  Cabinet Secretariat has suggested 
revisions and these modifications ar e being carried out by  MEA and a 
revised Cabinet Note is y et to be s ubmitted to the Cabinet.  The Committee 
feel that the proposal h as already  suffered inordinate delay  for w ant of 
Cabinet’s approval. They  desire to be  informed of the action taken in the 
matter  at the earliest.   
 4

  
D. Utilization of Scholarship Scheme 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
 14. There were as many as 1210 sl ots of scholarship under ITEC, SAARC 
and SCAAP that remained unutilised duri ng 2007-08. The under utilisation was 
attributed to change-over on account of streamlining of the overall delivery 
system, introduction of dedicated on-line system, etc. The Committee in this 
connection find that scholarship schemes w ere administered by different 
agencies within the Government, each hol ding separate ex amination for grant 
of scholarship. The Committee felt that there w as a need for holistic look at the 
whole issue with a view to bringi ng about proper co-ordination among the 
agencies in all aspects of administering scholarship schemes to ensure better 
standard and delivery. 
 
15. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
 
1)………………….. 
2. With regard to under-utilizat ion of ITEC/SCAAP slots during 
2007-08, this arose because of the streamlining/improvement of the 
overall delivery introduced during the year both in terms of course 
content, logistics and facilities and stricter enforcement of guidelines 
and eligibility criteria.  The guidelines were also more clearly defined 
to avoid mismatches and to ensur e quality of participation. A new 
dedicated on-line system was introduced mid-year.  The change-
over resulted in delays and more re jections.  There is an overall 
pattern that the quality of the participants has improved 
considerably.  Despite the higher re jection rate, overall utilization in 
2007-08 is still higher as compared to the previous year. 
 
3) SAARC Scholarships also remain underutilized mainly due to 
following reasons:- 
(i) delay in receipt of applications due to multiple 
channels of communication involving SAARC 
Secretariat, foreign Ministries in respective countries, 
Indian Missions concerned etc.; 
(ii) receipt of incomplete applications; 
(iii) applications do not conform to eligibility criteria; and 
(iv) lack of awareness about the scheme 
 
 
 5

 
4. To address these problems wit h a view to ensure optimum 
utilisation, Government are str eamlining the process which would 
include enhanced notice of offer to SAARC Secretariat, increased 
monitoring of the scheme and ensur ing its greater publicity by 
posting information on the SAARC website.” 
 
 
16. The Committee are concerned to note that SAARC Scholarships 
remained underutilized due to delay  in receipt of applications, multiple 
channel of communication involving SAARC Secretariat, foreign 
Ministries in respective countries, Indi an Missions concerned, receipt of 
incomplete applications besides the applications which do not conform to 
eligibility criteria and lack of awareness about the Scheme.  The 
Committee are informed that under-ut ilization of ITEC/SCAAP slots in 
2007-08 arose because of streamlining introduced in overall delivery  
mechanism. The Committee hope that steps taken by  the Ministry  to 
streamline the process w ill certainly  improve the sy stem and better 
utilization of scholarships w ill be ensured.  Reiterating their earlier 
recommendation for maintaining proper co-ordination among the various 
agencies, the Committee w ant that the Scholarship Scheme should be 
fully utilized.  They  desire to be informed of the progress in this regard 
periodically.   
 
 
E. Simplification of the procedures in issuance of Passports 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
 
 17. There had been a great deal of confusion and resultant delay in Passport 
Offices due to lack of clarity regarding rules/ instruction, norms, etc. which 
necessitated applicants to undertake several visits to passport authorities and 
led to harassment of public as illustrated in Chapter VI of that Report. The issue 
inter-alia related to absence of precis e definition of terms used in passport 
related matters, ambiguity in instructions  leading to different interpretation by 
 6

different Passport Offices, lack of public accessibility to rules, instructions and 
clarifications issued by Chief Passport offi cer. All this called for a fresh look at 
the entire gamut of rules/ instructions / clarifications and the public display 
system regarding passport matters with a view to making the functioning of 
passport offices more effective and people friendly and see that prevailing state 
of confusion was not shifted to t he proposed Passport Seva Project under 
Public Private Partnership. The Committee hoped that action would be taken 
accordingly. 
 
18. The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“1. ………………….  
 
2. While major simplification of the procedures has been carried 
out over the years viz. implement ation of the Passport Information 
Service on Net (PISON) in 2003 and substantive liberalization 
procedures in December 2006, in  the absence of a comprehensive 
computerised system combined with lack of training of employees 
and lack of a comprehensive management information system, 
unfortunately, a number of procedural errors are committed in the 
Passport Offices.  
 
 
3. As part of implementation of  the Passport Seva Project, a 
training manual is being devel oped to clarify the rules and 
procedures in simple language. T he passport issuance procedures 
will be comprehensively computerized in the Passport Seva Project, 
including a comprehensive managem ent information system. The 
website of the CPV Division will al so be modified as part of the 
Passport Seva Project to contain all relevant information for the 
public. Passport applicants will also be able to seek necessary 
clarifications from the national call centre that is envisaged under 
the Project.”  
 
 
19. The Committee note that in the absence of a comprehensive 
computerised system combined with lack of training and a comprehensive 
management information sy stem, a numbe r of procedural errors are being 
committed in Passport Offices.  The Mini stry has further informed that w ith 
implementation of “Passport Seva Project” the Passport issuance 
 7

procedure will be streamlined.  The Committee expect that the problems of 
passport seekers w ould be addressed pr operly and effectively , after 
implementation of “Passport Seva Proj ect”. The Committee desire to be 
regularly informed of the progress ma de in respect of issuance of 
Passports.  
 
F. Indian Prisoners and Fishermen in Pakistan Jail 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
20. An estimated 199 Indian prisoners and 436 Indian Fishermen are 
reportedly in Pakistan jails and the nat ionality status of 39 prisoners and 97 
fishermen had been confirmed by India.  MEA had informed that Consular 
Access to the remaining 160 prisoners and 339 fishermen had been 
repeatedly sought by the Indian High Commission in Islamabad. It had been 
stated that the Judicial Committee (c omprising 4 retired judges each from 
India and Pakistan) which had been formed to speed up the repatriation of all 
prisoners who had completed their tenure had recommended that by 31 st 
March 2008 all those fishermen whose nationality status had been confirmed 
would be released and Consular acce ss provided to the others. The 
Committee regretted to learn that  that had not happened. The Committee 
hoped that the matter would be  taken up vigorously with Pakistan to ensure 
safe and quick release of the 97 fishermen and Consular Access to the 
remaining 339 fishermen and the 160 prisoners. 
 
21.  The Ministry of External Affairs in their action taken reply have stated as 
under: 
“……………………………….. 
 
2. The India Pakistan Judicial Committee consisting of 
retired judges from India and Pa kistan visited various jails 
in Pakistan from 9-14 June, 2008 to identify prisoners in 
jail and also to recommend various measures for their 
early repatriation. Visit of the Committee to jails in India is 
expected to take place in the end of July 2008.  
 
 8

3 Government continues to take this matter up vigorously 
with the Government of Pakistan including at the highest 
political level. It has been brought to their attention that 
notwithstanding high-level commitments given by 
Pakistan, actual implementation is not effective.” 
 
22. The Committee find that there ar e 412 fishermen and estimated 202 
Indian Prisoners languishing in Pakistani Jails.  The India-Pakistan Judicial 
Committee consisting of retired judg es of India and Pakistan visited 
various jails in Pakistan from 9-14 June, 2008 to identify  prisoners and 
recommended various measures for their early repatriation.  Visit of the 
Committee was expected to take place in India in the end of July, 2008.  The 
Committee w ould like to be apprised of  the outcome of the visit of the 
Committee.  The Committee reiterat e their earlier recommendation to 
ensure safe and quick release of rema ining fishermen and prisoners in 
Pakistan at the earliest. 
 9

CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
 
 The Committee observe that as agai nst the projection of Rs. 768 crore 
under plan head, the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs has been provided only Rs. 
579 crore during the year 2008-09. The s hortfall is to the ex tent of Rs. 189 
crore. MEA has stated that in case additional funds are required, the Planning 
Commission would be approached at the RE stage for higher allocation. 
Considering the healthy utilization of funds by Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs, the 
committee suggest adequate additional allocation be made to MEA. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As of now, it appears that the Ministry will be able to fulfill its 
commitments with the funds allocat ed in BE 2008-09 under the Plan Head. 
Additional funds, if any, would be sought at the RE stage.  
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee in their 15 th Report had pointed out discrepancies in the 
budget documents and cautioned the Minist ry to take ex treme care and 
ensure that documents / information pres ented to Parliament are flawless. 
Unfortunately, the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs does not seem to have taken 
care of this aspect. It is observed that this year too there are discrepancies in 
the figures shown under Technical and Economic Cooperation in the 
Outcome Budget and the Demands for Grants documents for 2008-2009. The 
Committee view this lapse seriously. The Committee hope that the matter will 
be looked into at senior level and responsibility fixed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observation made by the Co mmittee has been noted for strict 
compliance. It will be ensured that no such  discrepancies / lapses take place 
in the future. 
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 
 10

 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee had desired (15 th Report) that all relevant project details such 
as original and anticipated dates of co mpletion, factor-wise analysis of cost 
escalation, impact of cost over-run on viability of projects should be disclosed 
in the Outcome Budget. The Ministry of External Affairs assured in the Action 
Taken Reply that this suggestion will be implemented during the ex ercise for 
next Outcome Budget. The Committee ar e disappointed to see that the 
desired information has not been shown in the Outcome Budget of 2008-09. 
The Committee have been informed that Minist ry of External Affairs is making 
efforts to collect up-to-date informati on to be incorporated into a separate 
corrigendum in the Outcome Budget for 2008-09. The Committee would await 
the corrigendum for Outcome Budget of 2008-09. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In compliance of the directions of the Standing Committee, an Addendum to 
the Outcome Budget 2008-09 of the Ministry, providing the additional 
information relating to projects, such as cost and/or time over-run, factor-wise 
analysis of cost escalation, impact of cost over-run on viability of projects etc., 
has been issued (Annexure A). 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee note that the Framework Agreement and protocols for the 
Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Project were ex pected to be signed on 2 April 
2008. The project envisages connectivi ty between Indian ports on eastern 
seaboard and North Eastern Region of India via Myanmar. The project will 
assure better connectivity with North Eastern States reducing distance, saving 
fuel and time. The project is ex pected to cost Rs.536 crore and time line for 
completion is 5 years. The Committee desire that there should be periodical 
monitoring of the project to ensure that  the project is completed in time and 
without cost escalating. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Vide Article 2 of the Framework Agreement between Government of India and 
Government of Myanmar on the Ka ladan Multi Modal Transit Transport 
project signed on 2 April 2008, it has been agreed that the respective nodal 
agencies (Ministry of Ex ternal from I ndian side and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs from Myanmar side) shall appoint a Multi-Sectoral group with a view to 
advising and supervising the overall pr ogress of work on the project. The 
group shall hold periodic meetings to review progress.  
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 11

 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 
 The Committee note there has been hardly any progress, regarding the 
Iran-Pakistan-India gas pipeline projec t. Four bilateral Joint Working Group 
meetings with Iran and Pakistan and si x trilateral meetings with Iran & 
Pakistan have reportedly been held so far on the project. It has been stated 
that a pricing formula was agreed to be considered subject to the transit fee 
and transportation tariff issue being c oncluded with Pakistan. The Committee 
have been informed that talks on the gas pipeline will be resumed shortly. The 
Committee hope that the matter will be taken up on priority basis to arrive at 
an acceptable agreement on issues involv ed, keeping in view our concerns 
on energy front. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government is committed to the Iran-Pakistan-India IPI Gas Pipeline 
Project to enhance the energy security fo r the country. Bilateral meetings with 
Pakistan at official level on April 16- 17, 2008 and at Ministerial level on April 
25, 2008 were held in Islamabad between t he Minister of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas and his Pakistani counterpart. The structure of pipeline project in 
Pakistan, and transit fee and transporta tion tariff for passage of gas through 
Pakistan territory were discussed in detail. The occasion of the visit of the 
President of Iran to New Delhi was also  availed of to have discussions on the 
pipeline and specific proposals with regard to financial structure of the project, 
investment pattern, joint and mutual responsibility for project safety and 
assured gas supply, operational respons ibilities etc. were made to the  
Government of Iran. These proposal s were thereafter shared with the 
Government of Pakistan during the visit of the Ex ternal Affairs Minister to 
Islamabad on 20-21 May 2008. 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Regarding cooperation with Nepal, the Committee desires that once the 
popular government is in place in Nepal , the question of starting hydroelectric 
projects, road projects, railways etc. be taken up on priority basis which will 
benefit both countries mutually.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Constituent Assembly elections in Nepal were held on April 10, 2008. 
Nepal was declared a Republic by the ve ry first meeting of the Constituent 
Assembly on May 28 th, 2008. The new government is ex pected to be formed 
shortly. It may take some time fo r the new government to settle down and 
become fully functional. Bilateral cooper ation with the Government of Nepal 
 12

on the areas recommended by the Standing Committee would be taken up on 
priority basis soon thereafter. 
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
   There has been a great deal of c onfusion and resultant delay in 
Passport Offices due to lack of clarity regarding rules/ instruction, norms, etc. 
which necessitates applicants to undertake several visits to passport 
authorities and leads to harassment of pub lic as illustrated in Chapter VI of 
this Report. The issue inter-alia relate  to absence of precise definition of 
terms used in passport related matters, ambiguity in instructions leading to 
different interpretation by different Passport Offices, lack of public accessibility 
to rules, instructions and clarifications issued by Chief Passport officer. All this 
calls for a fresh look at the entire gamut of rules/ instructions/ clarifications 
and the public display system regarding passport matters with a view to 
making the functioning of passport offi ces more effective and people friendly 
and see that prevailing state of conf usion in not shifted to the proposed 
Passport Seva Project under Public Private Partnership. The Committee hope 
that action will be taken accordingly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.   Passport Rules and procedures ar e reviewed on a regular basis with a 
view to facilitating and speeding up passport services. The revised rules and 
procedures are conveyed to all the Passport Offices for compliance and are 
also communicated to the public through the website of the CPV Division. 
 
2. While major simplification of t he procedures has been carried out over 
the years viz. implementation of t he Passport Information Service on Net 
(PISON) in 2003 and substantive liberalization procedures in December 2006, 
in the absence of a comprehensive computerised system combined with lack 
of training of employees and la ck of a comprehensive management 
information system, unfortunately, a number of procedural errors are 
committed in the Passport Offices.  
 
3. As part of implementation of t he Passport Seva Project, a training 
manual is being developed to clarify t he rules and procedures in simple 
language. The passport issuance pr ocedures will be comprehensively 
computerized in the Passport Seva  Project, including a comprehensive 
management information system. The website of the CPV Division will also be 
modified as part of the Passport Seva  Project to contain all relevant 
information for the public. Passport applicants will also be able to seek 
necessary clarifications from the nat ional call centre that is envisaged under 
the Project.   
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 13

 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the system of post-issuance 
police verification on submission of  stipulated documents has been designed 
by MEA with a view to bringing down the time lag in issue of passports. The 
Committee desire that it should be ensured that the system does not pose 
any security risk. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To ensure that only genuine applic ants are issued passports under 
‘Tatkal’ and post-police verification schemes, steps such as strict 
documentation norms including personal submission of application, telephonic 
verification by the Passport Offices of t he ‘Verification Certificates’ and also 
careful scrutiny of doubtful documents, if any, submitted by the applicants, are 
gone through before such passports are i ssued. In addition, the police reports 
are monitored and immediate action is taken to impound/revoke passports as 
and when any adverse post-verification police report is received on such 
applications.     
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
 An estimated 199 Indian prisoners and 436 Indian Fishermen are 
reportedly in Pakistan jails and the nat ionality status of 39 prisoners and 97 
fishermen has been confirmed by India.  MEA has informed that Consular 
Access to the remaining 160 prisoners and 339 fishermen has been 
repeatedly sought by the Indian High Commission in Islamabad. It has been 
stated that the Judicial Committee (c omprising 4 retired judges each from 
India and Pakistan) which had been formed to speed up the repatriation of all 
prisoners who had completed their tenure had recommended that by 31 st 
March 2008 all those fishermen whose nationality status had been confirmed 
would be released and Consular acce ss provided to the others. The 
Committee regret to learn that this has not happened. The Committee hope 
that the matter will be taken up vigorous ly with Pakistan to ensure safe and 
quick release of the 97 fishermen and C onsular Access to the remaining 339 
fishermen and the 160 prisoners. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Presently, there are 412 fishermen and an estimated 202 Indian prisoners in 
Pakistan. On 28 April 2008 consular a ccess was provided to 367 fishermen in 
Karachi and the nationality status of these fishermen have since been 
confirmed. Although on 26 Februar y 2008 the Judicial Committee had 
 14

recommended that by 31 st March 2008 all those fishermen, whose nationality 
status has been confirmed, should be released, Pakistan released only 96 
fishermen on 14 May 2008. As regards I ndian nationals in Pakistani jails, of 
the estimated 202 such prisoners, Pa kistan has acknowledged the ex istence 
of only 53 prisoners. Consular access has been completed in respect of 53 
prisoners and confirmation of nationality status has been confirmed in respect 
of 23. 
 
3. The India Pakistan Judicial Committee consisting of retired judges from 
India and Pakistan visited various jails  in Pakistan from 9-14 June, 2008 to 
identify prisoners in jail and also to recommend various measures for their 
early repatriation. Visit of the Committee to jails in India is ex pected to take 
place in the end of July 2008.  
 
4. Government continues to take  this matter up vigorously with the 
Government of Pakistan including at the highest political level. It has been 
brought to their attention that notwit hstanding high-level commitments given 
by Pakistan, actual implementation is not effective. 
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 15

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 
It is heartening to note that the Tala Hydro Electric Project in Bhutan has 
already commenced sale of surplus electricity to India and that the project has 
reportedly made savings to the tune of Rs. 90 crore. The Committee hope 
that the surplus electricity from t he project will help India tide over its 
demand/supply gap in power to some extent.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Tala Hydroelectric Power Project, built entirely with Government of 
India assistance in Bhutan was commissi oned fully in April 2007. All surplus 
power generated is being exported to India and is flowing into the eastern and 
the northern grids. The project was dedicated to the peoples of India and 
Bhutan by Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and the Bhutan’s Prime 
Minister Lyonchen Jigme Thinley on 17th May 2008.  
 
2. The Tala project has shown a savings of Rs. 90 crores over its 
approved cost to completion due to ear ly entry into the Operations and 
Maintenance (O&M) phase. It is ex pected that the project would show 
additional savings in the current fiscal. 
 
3. The Project, which was the la rgest project undertaken by the 
Government of India outside its territory, has become a symbol of the 
mutually beneficial partnership between India and Bhutan in development of 
hydropower.  
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
  
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 The Committee observe that Section 5 of the Passport Act, 1967, has 
delegated powers to the Ex ecutive to prescribe fee on two counts: (i) to meet 
the expenses on special security paper, pr inting and lamination; (ii) to meet 
the ex penses on other connected miscellaneous services. Under these 
provisions, the MEA has prescribed a fee of Rs.1000/- for ordinary passport 
apparently to meet the ex penses on prin ting, etc. and fee ranging from Rs. 
100 to Rs. 700 for rendering miscellaneous services. In addition to above, the 
 16

Ministry of External Affairs has pre scribed additional fee for issue of passport 
under ‘Tatkal’ scheme, which admittedl y does not constitute a miscellaneous 
service. The additional fee is reportedl y to meet the ex penses in providing 
‘tatkal’ service. This is obviously outside the scope of Section 5 of the 
Passports Act. According to Foreign Secretary, to stop issuing ‘tatkal’ 
passports now would be a public relations disaster. He has promised that Law 
Ministry will be consulted as to whether  or not an amendment is required in 
the Passports Act. Irrespective of whatever opinion  that might be given by the 
Ministry of Law, the Committee hold t hat powers delegated by the Parliament 
under Section 5 of the Passports Act have clearly been ex ceeded and the 
Committee have been presented with a  fait accompli. Nevertheless, the 
Committee would await the opinion of the Ministry of Law on the need for 
Amendment of the Act to legitimise the collection of ‘tatkal’ fees.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As desired, opinion of Ministry  of Law was sought on the need for 
Amendment of the Passports Act, 1967, to cover the collection of ‘tatkal’ fees.  
 
2. The Ministry of Law have reiterat ed their opinion of 1999 that the ex tra 
fee for ‘Tatkal’ Passport would relate to the services referred to in Section 5 of 
the Passports Act and would also be commensurate with the ex penses 
incurred in providing these services. T he opinion of the Ministry of Law is 
reproduced as under: 
 
 “As aforesaid the legality of levyi ng higher fees for issue of ‘Tatkal’ 
passports has already been ex amined by us and we had observed the same 
to be legally permissible. It may be stated that the object of Tatkal scheme is 
to facilitate the issue of passport to the applicants who intend to visit foreign 
countries urgently for whatever reas ons. They would hence constitute a 
separate category of persons distinct fr om the class of persons who would be 
issued passports in the normal course of time. There could not  be an equal 
treatment even under the established norms  of law to the persons who apply 
for Tatkal scheme and the persons who applied for issue of passport in the 
normal course. Perhaps in such case s  the equal protection, a fundamental 
right guaranteed under the Article 14 of the Constitution,  would not be 
applicable. The equal protection would m ean the right of equal treatment in 
similar circumstances in the privileges conferred and in the liabilities imposed. 
The principle, however, does not take away from the State the power of 
classifying persons for legitimate purposes.   
 
 In light of the cited legal position,  it could be said that it appears to be 
within the competence of MEA to ca tegorise the applicants who apply for 
Tatkal Passports as a different cat egory and accordingly levy a higher fee in 
view of the fact that additional State machinery has to be put on job to meet 
the expectations of such category of persons and  consequently the  same 
would entail additional expenses, as indicated herein before.  
 
 17

 In view of the foregoing, we reiterate our earlier opinion, dated 
14.6.1999 that the ex tra fee for ‘Tatkal’ Pa ssport would relate to the services 
referred to in Section 5 and would al so be commensurate with the ex penses 
incurred in providing these services.” 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
  The Committee are of the view that the proposed SAARC University to 
be set up in India would provide a tremendous opportunity to establish an 
institution of ex cellence without replicat ing the universities that ex ist today. 
The University could be designed to particularly highlight the inter-
connectedness of the politics, the econom ics, the sociology, the literature and 
the culture of the SAARC countries. The Committee feel that these issues can 
be better addressed, if there is an Advisory Committee consisting of the 
SAARC Members and a few eminent and interested people. The Committee 
suggested that the idea of setting up an Advisory Committee in this regard 
could be recommended to SAARC for their consideration. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As establishment of South Asian University is an intergovernmental 
commitment, an Inter-Governmental Steering/Advisory Committee has 
already been set up after the signing of the Agreement on the establishment 
of the University at the 14th SAARC Summit (April 3-4, 2007). This committee, 
comprised of representatives of the academic/planning/financial/foreign affairs 
mechanisms of SAARC Member States , appointed the CEO of the Project 
office of the University and is de liberating and negotiating on the academic 
and administrative issues related to the University. 
 
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 18

CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 There were as many as 1210 slot s of scholarship under ITEC, SAARC and 
SCAAP that remained unutilised during 2007-08. The under utilisation is 
attributed to change-over on account of streamlining of the overall delivery 
system, introduction of dedicated on-line system, etc. The Committee in this 
connection find that scholarship schem es are administered by different 
agencies within the Government, each hol ding separate examination for grant 
of scholarship. The Committee feel that there is a need for holistic look at the 
whole issue with a view to bringi ng about proper co-ordination among the 
agencies in all aspects of administering scholarship schemes to ensure better 
standard and delivery. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  ITEC/SCAAP slots are sanctioned by TC Division without conducting  
any  fitness ex amination, after (i ) the applicant has submitted his/her 
application on-line and  routed it thr ough the Indian Mission abroad, (ii) the 
application is  scrutinized by TC Divis ion and found suitable and (iii) it is  
found suitable from the eligibility point of vi ew   by the concerned  Institute  in 
India conducting the course. Majority of ITEC programmes are for shorter 
duration and are aimed at empowerment/c apacity building of persons already 
working both in Government as well as in private sector. 
 
2. With regard to under-utilization of ITEC/SCAAP slots during 2007-08, 
this arose because of the streamlining/ improvement of the overall delivery 
introduced during the year both in terms  of course content, logistics and 
facilities and stricter enforcement of guidelines and eligibility criteria.  The 
guidelines were also more clearly def ined to avoid mismatches and to ensure 
quality of participation. A new dedica ted on-line system was introduced mid-
year.  The change-over resulted in dela ys and more rejections.  There is an 
overall pattern that the quality of the participants has improved considerably.  
Despite the higher rejection rate, overa ll utilization in 2007-08 is still higher as 
compared to the previous year. 
 
3. SAARC Scholarships also remain underutilized mainly due to following 
reasons:- 
(i) delay in receipt of applicat ions due to multiple channels of 
communication involving SAARC Secretariat, foreign Ministries in respective 
countries, Indian Missions concerned etc.; 
 19

(ii) receipt of incomplete applications; 
(iii) applications do not conform to eligibility criteria; and 
(iv) lack of awareness about the scheme 
 
4. To address these problems with a vi ew to ensure optimum utilisation, 
Government are streamlining the process which would include enhanced 
notice of offer to SAARC Secretariat, increased monitoring of the scheme and 
ensuring its greater publicity by posting information on the SAARC website. 
  
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 20

CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 The Committee had commented upon in their 15
th 
Report (2007-08) the need 
to raise the manpower strength of the Mini stry of External Affairs to cope with 
the expanding role of the Ministry. The Committee are of the view that cadre 
strength of Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs is grossly inadequate and needs to be 
substantially increased. The Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs has since made a 
proposal to create 514 posts out of wh ich 314 posts are at middle and junior 
level. The Committee have been inform ed that Cabinet Secretariat has 
advised Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs to  sort out creation of these posts in 
consultation with the Ministry of Fi nance. The Committee urge that there 
should be no further delay in decidi ng the proposed ex pansion of the cadre 
strength, keeping in view MEA’s enlarged roles and responsibilities brought 
about by India’s increasing international engagements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The proposal for ex pansion of t he MEA personnel strength is being 
actively processed in consultation with Cabinet Secretariat. 
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
In order to have an organized set up of  project delivery, an agency by name 
'India-International Development C ooperation Agency (IIDCA)' was proposed 
to be set up during 2007-08. Regrettably, the proposal has suffered delay and 
is now ex pected to start functioning in 5-6 months' time. The delay is 
attributed to the long drawn process of  inter-ministerial consultations. The 
Committee feel that delay in such consultations could have been avoided, had 
there been inter-ministerial meeting to  discuss and decide such issues. The 
Committee ex pects Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs to take necessary steps to 
ensure that there is no further delay in implementation of the proposal. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The proposed IIDCA – it is now  envisaged that it will be called the 
Indian Agency for Partnership in De velopment (IAPD) - will need to take on 
the entire range of India's overseas  development assistance and related 
commitments.  As per the ex isting Allocation of Business Rules, most of this 
work is being implemented by the Minist ry of Ex ternal Affairs and Lines of 
 21

Credit (LOCs) are approved by the Ministry  of Finance.  In order to provide a 
functionally efficient framework fo r the proposed Agency, the ex isting 
Allocation of Business Rules would have to be amended.  
  
2. Inter-ministerial consultations have been held to resolve various issues 
to ex pedite the setting up of the II DCA (IAPD). Following these inter-
ministerial consultations, a Cabinet No te outlining the structure, mandate and 
functions of the proposed agency was s ubmitted for Cabinet's approval on 7 
March 2008. However, Cabinet Secretariat has suggested revisions and 
these modifications are being carried out and a revised Cabinet Note is to be 
submitted to the Cabinet shortly.” 
 
[File No. AA/125/Parl/43/2008 Dated: 25/07/2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
14 November, 2008                                                     Chairman,  
23  Kartika, 1939 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 22

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 6TH NOVEMBER, 2008  
   
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
3. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa  
4. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
5. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
6. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
7. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
8. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
9. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
11. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
12. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
13. Dr. Karan Singh 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Hoti Lal  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 
 
 23

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Memorandum No. 2 
and the draft Report on Action Taken by Govt. on the recommendations 
contained in the 20 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants  (2008-2009) of the Ministry of External Affairs. The Chairman invited the 
Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report.   
The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
 
4.  XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
5.  The committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report and present the same to 
Parliament.  
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXX Minutes in respect of other Report kept separately. 
 24

 25
Appendix -II 
 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
TWNETIETH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                15 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1-3 6-8, 11-12,15 
    Total-09 
Percentage: 60% 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observati ons which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 and 13-14 
Total-03 
Percentage: 
20% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 10 
Total-01 
 Percentage: 6.67% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 and 9 
 
Total-02 
Percentage: 13.33% 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
  