 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2008-2009) 
 
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 23 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for the year 2008-09] 
 
  
TWENTY  THIRD REPORT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2008-2009) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for the year 2008-09] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008 
    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 

COEA NO. 75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2008 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2008-2009………………………           (iii)  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………          (iv)  
REPORT   
 
Chapter I Report………………………………………………………….            01  
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government………………………………...           08 
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s Replies..…       15 
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
and require reiteration…………………………..……………            16 
Chapter V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………           18 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on       20  
6.11.2008……………………………………………….……....   
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
21st  Report of the Standing Committee on  
External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) ………….………………….       22 

 STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2008-2009) 
 
LOK SABHA 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
2 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar  
7. Shri Syed Shahnawaz Hussain 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan  
9. Shri L. Rajagopal  
10. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
11. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
12. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
13. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil 
14. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani 
15. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
16. Shri M. Shivanna 
17. Shri Vanlalzawma 
18. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
19. Vacant* 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri Bhuneshwar Kalita 
24. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi** 
25. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
26. Shri Balbir Punj 
27. Dr. Ram Prakash  
28. Shri Bharat Kumar B. Raut 
29. Shri Arjun Kumar Sengupta 
30. Dr. Karan Singh  
31. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy- Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri K.C. Pandey - Committee Officer 
________________________________________________________________ 
* Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon 
disqualification for being Member of the Lok Sabha in terms of para 2(1)(b) of the 
Tenth Schedule to the Constitution w.e.f. 12.9.2008   
** Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon   
             expiry of his term w.e.f. 25.11.2008 
 
(iii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs (2008-2009) having 
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
23rd Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the 21st  Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2008-09. 
 
2. The 21st Report was laid in Rajya Sabha on 15 April, 2008 and presented to Lok 
Sabha on 16 April, 2008. The Ac tion Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 31 July, 2008. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 06 November, 2008. The Minutes of  the sitting of the Committee have been 
reproduced at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 21 st Report of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (14 th Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                 DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
14  November, 2008                                                  Chairman,                 
23 Kartika, 1930 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on External Affairs 
                                                                 
 
 
(iv) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committ ee on External Affairs deals with 
the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in their Twenty-First R eport on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) 
of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 16 April, 2008. 
 
2. The Action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs on all the obs ervations/recommendations contained 
in the report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, w hich have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 Total-10 
 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Total- 01 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of w hich 
replies of Government have not been accepted by  the 
Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Total-01 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Total-01 
 
 1 
 

 
 3. The Committee desire that final replies to the 
recommendation/observations for w hich only  interim replies have 
been given by  the government should be furnished w ithin three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal wit h the action taken by the 
Government on some of their observations/recommendations. 
 
A. Filling up of vacancies in the Ministry 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
5. The Committee observed with regret  that even after three years of 
the creation of this Minist ry, it still did not have its own officers at senior 
levels who were taken on deputation and for lower staff they had to depend 
on the Ministry of Home Affairs. T he Committee also felt  that there was 
shortage of manpower which was evident from the fact that as against the 
sanctioned strength of 195 persons, t he Ministry was having only 153 
persons as on 31 March 2008. It was obvious that it would be difficult for the 
Ministry to execute various schemes /programmes undertaken by them. The 
Committee desired that the vacancies in  the Ministry should be filled up 
expeditiously. 
 
6. The Ministry in the action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
“……………… the Ministry of Home A ffairs for lower staff and the 
Deptt. of Official Languages for Hindi posts and for some posts  
on the Ministry of External Affa irs.  They have been reminded to 
provide personnel to fill up the vacant posts. The Ministry has also 
taken up the matter with the Dep tt. of Personnel & Training to 
create a separate cadre of this Ministry for posts, which are 
currently being filled up from the staff of MHA and MEA. This will 
enable this Ministry to get the people directly from the DOP&T 
and the vacancies be filled up. 
 
 2 
 

 For the field offices located in the POEs, vacancies 
circulars have been sent to the various Ministries/Deptt. to provide 
officers on loan basis. It is anticipated that these vacancies will be 
filled up shortly. 
 
All efforts are being made to fill up the posts so that there is no 
difficulty for the Ministry to ex ecute various schemes/programmes 
undertaken by it.” 
 
7. The Committee are unhappy  w ith the Government’s reply  and 
note that even after four y ears of  creation of the Ministry nothing 
concrete except issuing letters/rem inders has been done in this 
regard.  The Committee desire that c oncerted efforts be made to fill up 
the vacancies early .  They  be also informed of the steps taken for 
creation of separate cadre for the Mi nistry and the response of DoPT 
thereto so that programmes/sch emes being implemented by  the 
Ministry are not adversely affected for want of staff.  They desire to be 
informed of the action taken in the matter at the earliest.   
 
B. Construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
8. The Committee noted with regret t hat though a decision to establish 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) had been taken four years ago in the year 
2004, not much headway had been made on this  project so far. Plot for the 
project was acquired only in May 2006. Subsequently, the Ministry initiated 
action for inviting proposals for appoint ing consultants, constitution of 
Consultancy Evaluation Committee (CEC ) etc. After the completion of 
requisite formalities, an agreement  with NBCC was signed on 18.12.2007. 
However, construction on the pr oject had not yet commenced. The 
Committee urged that there should be no further delay in this regard and 
would like to know further details r egarding activities and functions of the 
proposed Kendra. 
 
 
 3 
 

9. The Ministry in its action taken reply state as under: 
 
 
“…………….. It is stated that as the l and allotted by the Ministry of 
Urban Development and Poverty Alle viation for constructing the 
PBK, was meant for “Foreign Mission”  only, concerted efforts are 
being made by this Ministry to get  the land use of allotted plots 
changed formally from “Foreign Mission” to “Institutional – Culture & 
Socio information centre purpos es” to achieve the desire 
objectives. …………………………………… 
 
 
10. The Committee are unhappy to note from the reply of the Ministry 
that the landuse of this plot of la nd allotted to it for construction of 
PBK more than tw o years ago is y et to be got changed from ‘Foreign 
Mission’ to ‘Institutional – Cult ural & Socio Information Centre 
purposes’.  This fact w as know n to the Ministry at that time also.  It 
appears that the Ministry  did not m ake sincere efforts for the last tw o 
years to get the landuse changed.  This, the Committee find is akin to 
a situation w here the cart is put before the horse thereby  hampering 
further progress in the matter.  The Committee feel that all efforts by  
the Ministry  to simultaneously  co mplete all other formalities w ould 
come to a naught unless the land use is changed.  They , therefore, 
desire the Ministry  to take coordinated and concerted steps to 
complete the construction of PBK before the commencement of 
Common Wealth Games in 2010 as assu red by them.  They  would like 
to be informed of the progress in the matter.   
 
 
C. Setting up of Overseas Employment Promotion Council 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 
 
11. The Cabinet had approved setting up of Overseas Employment 
Promotion Council to serve as a strat egic think tank on migration matters 
and prepare market oriented strategies to enable the Indian workers to 
 4 
 

benefit from the job oppor tunities overseas. T he proposal stated that 
Secretary of the Ministry would be t he Chairman of the Council, so that 
there was an organic link wit h the Ministry. The Committee suggested that 
once the Council starts functioning with full fledged activities, the desirability 
of having a distinguished non-official as the Chairman of the Council should 
be considered. 
 
12. The action taken reply furnished by the Ministry is as under: 
 
“The recommendation given by the Standing Committee has been 
taken note of and necessary action will be taken after due 
consideration in future.” 
 
13. The Committee regret to note that the reply  to this 
recommendation is vague.  There is  no reference as to w hether the 
Overseas Employ ment Promotion C ouncil has started functioning.  
The reply is also silent on the acti on taken or proposed to be taken on 
the recommendation of the Committ ee that the desirability  of 
appointing a distinguished non-offici al as Chairman of the Council be 
considered.  They  caution the Minist ry to desist from giving vague 
replies to their recommendations in future.  They desire to be apprised 
of the action taken in the matter.   
 
 
D. Bilateral MoUs with labour receiving countries 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
 
14. The Committee appreciated the in itiative taken by MOIA in 
implementation of its plan to enter into bilateral MoUs with major labour 
receiving countries after almost 18 y ears. The Ministry had signed an MoU 
with UAE and Kuwait in 2006- 07, it had also signed an Additional Protocol 
with Qatar to supplement the 1985 agreem ent for protection and welfare of 
our workers. The MoU with Mala ysia had reportedly been finalized and 
approved by the Cabinet and one round of negotiation had already been 
held with Oman. Efforts were also reportedly being made to initiate 
 5 
 

negotiations with Yemen, Brunei and S audi Arabia during 2008-09. The 
Committee hoped that the MOIA would si multaneously strive to enter into 
such agreements with other major labour receiving countries. 
 
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:  
 
“Follow-up action on the provisions of the MoUs signed with UAE, 
Kuwait and Qatar is being taken through the Joint Working 
Groups constituted for the purpos e. The Agreement with Bahrain 
was initiated on 25 th April, 2008 and a Note for the Cabinet is 
being finalized in consultation with the concerned Ministries. 
Second round of negotiations with Oman for finalizing the MoU on 
Manpower will be held at Muscat on 28 th-29th June, 2008. 
Approval of the Cabinet has been obtained on the Agreement with 
Malaysia and the Agreement will be signed between the two 
Governments at mutual conveni ence, shortly. Even though the 
Government of Saudi Arabia has not  evinced interest in finalizing 
an Agreement, the matter is being pursued with them for putting 
in place an institutional mechanism  in this regard. Negotiations 
are also underway with Yemen and Brunei for finalizing a mutually 
beneficial Agreement. The Ministry is pursuing labour mobility 
Agreements with South Korea and major labour receiving 
countries of Europe includi ng Poland, Denmark and Czech 
Republic with a view to diversif y the destination base of Indian 
workers.” 
 
16. The Committee note that the Sec ond round of negotiations w ith 
Oman for finalizing the MoU on Manpow er w as to be held on 28–29 
June, 2008.  It is regrettable that  though the Ministry  furnished the 
action taken reply  on 28 July , 2008, th ey did not bother to update the 
Committee of the outcome of the Second round of negotiations held 
with Oman on 28-29 June, 2008. Sim ilarly, negotiations/agreements 
were also under-w ay with other c ountries like Malay sia, Saudi Arabia, 
Yemen, Brunei, South Korea and other major labour receiving 
countries of Europe. The Committee w ould like to be apprised of the 
further developments made so far in  the context of negotiations held 
with these countries and time frame,  if any , decided to complete 
negotiations and conclude agreements with such countries. 
 6 
 

 
E. Amendment of Emigration Act, 1983 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
17. The Committee noted with regret  that the bill to amend the 
Emigration Act, 1983 though conceived in February, 2005, was yet to be 
introduced in Parliament. The Co mmittee had been repeatedly emphasizing 
in their successive Reports, the ur gent need to amend the Emigration Act. 
The Committee regretted to note t hat the amendment bill which was 
intended to ensure and protect the intere st of migrant workers had suffered 
such a delay. The Committee desired that  there should be no further delay 
and expect that as assured by the Secretary, MOIA, the amendment Bill 
would be introduced in Parliament in the next session. 
 
18. The action taken reply of the Ministry is as under: 
 
“A revised proposal for amendi ng the Emigration Act, 1983 has 
been approved by the Cabinet. Further action is being taken.” 
 
 
19. The Committee regret to observe that the reply  to such an 
important recommendation is couched in too general terms.  The reply 
does not mention w hen the revised proposal for amendment of 
Emigration Act 1983 w as approved by  the Cabinet and the nature of 
further action required in the ma tter before the amending Bill is 
introduced in Parliament.  It also do es not indicate time frame, if any , 
required for introduction of the Bill in Parliament.  They  again reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that the Bill be introduced in the current 
session of Parliament without any further delay.  
 7 
 

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee find that there has been huge shortfall in utilization of 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs year after 
year. Though the percentage of shortfa ll in budgetary utilization has come 
down considerably over the years, the fact that the shortfall was to the 
extent of 21 % in 2007-08 indicates that budgetary planning in MOIA needs 
to be further improved. The under utilizati on of funds is attr ibuted to lack of 
planning and proper formulation of the schemes, absence of field level 
implementation agency and dependence on Indian Missions for activities 
abroad and State Governments and ot her agencies domestically. The 
Committee hope that necessary acti on will be taken to improve budgetary 
planning and control in MOIA. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
Advance action has been taken in the cu rrent year to ensure that the 
schemes are approved by the competent authorities. The Standing Finance 
Committee has already approved Skill Upgradation Scheme, Scholarship 
Programme for Diaspora Children (SP DC) and the scheme to provide legal 
and financial assistance to women des erted by their overseas Indian 
spouses. OIFC’ action plan has al so been approved by the Finance 
Committee.  
 
The implementation of various schemes is being monitored closely in 
the Ministry so as to utilize the funds  allocated to the Ministry. The budget 
allocated in the current financial year is expected to be utilized fully. 
 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee observe that t hough nearly 50 percent (Rs.31.75 
Crore) of the total allocation for t he current year 2008-09 has been provided 
under Major Head 2061- “Other Schem es”, the Detailed Demands for 
Grants of MOIA which is required to provide all details, have not provided 
details of the ‘Other Sc hemes’. The Committee are not convinced of  MOIA 
Secretary’s plea that the Detailed Demands for Grants is to be read with the 
 8 
 

Outcome Budget where each scheme has  been shown in detail. A break-up 
of the estimates relating to each pr ogramme/organization wherever the 
amount involved is not less than Rs. 10 Lakh and the actual expenditure 
during the previous year is required to be shown in the Detailed Demands of 
Grants. The Committee desire the MOIA to present in future all details in the 
Demands for Grants in terms of the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
 
The Detailed Demands for Grants does  not provide details of the 
break up relating to each programme /organization where the amount 
involved is less than Rs. 10 lakh. The matter has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance through the Int egrated Finance Division for providing 
separate object Heads for different schemes,/organization in the Demands 
for Grants of the MOIA as reco mmended by the Standing Finance 
Committee so that Budget allocated for the different schemes is reflected 
separately in the Demands for Grants from next year onwards. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 
The allocation for Know India Programme (KIP) has been raised from  
Rs. 65 lakh in 2007-08 to Rs. 1 Cr. in 2008-09. However, according to 
Outcome Budget, only two Know Indi a Programmes could be arranged 
against target of three such progr ammes. Know India Programmes are 
conducted in partnership with States  and partner State Governments are 
expected to take care of the logist ics and transport in their States. The 
Committee observe that inadequate planni ng with partner States left little 
time to host  the third Know India Programme. Regrettably, even after 
passage of three years, the Ministry is claiming that Know India Programme 
is still an evolving programme. The Co mmittee expect the MOIA to plan in 
advance, in consultation with partner states and other stakeholders, to 
ensure successful conduct of Know India Programme in future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 
 

Reply of the Ministry 
 
The following is the schedule proposed for the next three Know India 
Programmes (KIPs): 
 
 Tentative Period Partner States Last date for 
receipt of 
nomination in the 
MOIA 
9th KIP August-
September 08 
Gujarat, Uttar 
Pradesh 
30th June, 2008 
10th KIP December 08 – 
January 09 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Haryana 
30th September 
2008 
11th KIP March 2009 Punjab, Orissa 31st December, 
2008 
 
Concurrence of the concerned St ate governments was sought in 
early April 2008. State governments of Punjab, Gujarat and U.P, have since 
conveyed acceptance. Matter is  being persued with other State 
governments. 
 
Participation to the progra mmes has been sought through our 
Missions/Posts in identified countries. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 The Committee observe that only 80 scholarships were given during 
2007-08 as against 100 slots of scholar ship under the Scholarship Scheme 
for Diaspora Children (SSDC). T he MOIA has, however, proposed to 
prepare a reserve list from the ens uing session to ensure that higher 
number of scholarships are availed. Further, it is observed that scholarships 
are also offered by ICCR and other bodies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend MOIA to take a holis tic and coordinated approach in 
implementing the programme in consultation with all concerned. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
With a view to let the applicants know about their selection for the 
Scholarship under SPDC well in advanc e before they commit themselves 
for higher studies in other countri es, to have enough time to offer the 
unfilled slots to those in the reserv e list and for  achieving  a better 
utilization of the Scholar ship, it has been decided to complete the process 
of selection of candidates for SPDC - 2009 by 30 th November 2008.  
Selected applicants would be given one month to send their acceptance. 
 10 
 

Thereafter, the unfilled slot s would be offered to those next in the merit list, 
prepared on the basis of a Common Entrance Test conducted by Ed.CIL. 
 
For the grant of Scholarship dur ing 2007-08 under SPDC - 2007, it 
may be stated that a tota l of 113 applicants were offered the Scholarship.  
Only  81  of them, however, accepted it before the start of the academic 
session. 120 applicants have been offer ed scholarship under SPDC – 2008 
for the academic year 2008-09. 
 
As regards coordinated approach to be followed in implementing the 
programme, the matter would be taken up with ICCR.     
 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 
  
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry launched the Overseas 
Indian Facilitation Centre (OIFC), a not-f or-profit trust in partnership with CII 
to serve as a “one stop shop” for all investment and business related 
services for potential overseas I ndian investors. During PBD, 2008, OIFC 
organized market place in whic h many one-on-one meetings and 
presentations were reported to hav e been organized. The Committee feel 
that the outcome of the efforts made by OIFC can only be judged if the 
quantum of real investment flowing into the country is known. According to 
the Ministry, specific data on invest ments by overseas Indians is not 
maintained either by the Department  of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
(DIPP) which is the Nodal Agency on policy matters relating to foreign direct 
investments or by the Reserve Bank of India. The Committee would like the 
MOIA to attempt an appropriate Management Information System to monitor 
the outcome of the efforts made under t he scheme by keeping the profile of 
NRIs who are in touch with OIFC and matc hing that with the list of overseas 
investors. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
The Overseas Indian Facilitation C entre (OIFC) has been requested 
to maintain a database of the NRIs who are getting in touch with them and 
seeking information for investment pr oposals and forward them periodically 
to the Ministry. The Department of I ndustrial Policy and Promotion has also 
been requested to issue suitable directi ons to the RBI to maintain data 
separately of the NRIs who are investing in India. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 11 
 

Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Cabinet has reportedly appr oved setting up of Overseas 
Employment Promotion Council to serv e as a strategic think tank on 
migration matters and prepare market oriented strategies to enable the 
Indian workers to benefit from the j ob opportunities overseas. The present 
proposal is stated to be t hat Secretary of the Mini stry will be the Chairman 
of the Council, so that there is an organic link with the Ministry. The 
Committee suggest that once the Council st arts functioning with full fledged 
activities, the desirability of having a distinguished non-official as the 
Chairman of the Council should be considered. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
 The recommendation given by the Standing Committee has been 
taken note of  and necessary action will be taken after due consideration in 
future. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
 The Committee appreciate the in itiative taken by MOIA in 
implementation of its plan to enter into bilateral MoUs with major labour 
receiving countries after almost 18 y ears. The Ministry has signed an MoU 
with UAE and Kuwait in 2006- 07, it has also signed an Additional Protocol 
with Qatar to supplement the 1985 agreem ent for protection and welfare of 
our workers. The MoU with Malaysi a has reportedly been finalized and 
approved by the Cabinet and one r ound of negotiation has already been 
held with Oman. Efforts are also reportedly being made to initiate 
negotiations with Yemen, Brunei and Saudi Arabia during 2008-09. The 
Committee hope that the MOIA  will simultaneously strive to enter into such 
agreements with other major labour receiving countries. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
Follow-up action on the provisions  of the MoUs signed with UAE, 
Kuwait and Qatar is being taken through the Joint Working Groups 
constituted for the purpose. The Agr eement with Bahrain was initialed on 
25th April, 2008 and a Note for the Cabinet  is being finalized in consultation 
with the concerned Ministries. Sec ond round of negotiations with Oman for 
finalizing the MoU on Manpower  will be held at Muscat on 28 th-29th June, 
2008. Approval of the Cabinet has  been obtained on the Agreement with 
Malaysia and the Agreement will be si gned between the two Governments 
at mutual convenience, shortly. Even though the Government of Saudi 
 12 
 

Arabia has not evinced interest in finalizing an Agreement, the matter is 
being pursued with them for putting in pl ace an institutional mechanism in 
this regard. Negotiations are al so underway with Yemen and Brunei for 
finalizing a mutually beneficial Agreem ent. The Ministry is pursuing labour 
mobility Agreements with South Korea and major labour receiving countries 
of Europe including Poland, Denmark and Czech Republic with a view to 
diversify the destination base of Indian workers. 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 The Pre-departure Orientation and Skill Upgradation Scheme which 
has been re-designed is reportedly awai ting formal approval by the Finance 
Ministry. The Committee desire that the matter should be taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance for speedy clear ance of the scheme and MOIA should 
ensure its expeditious implementation.  
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
The Standing Finance Committee has since approved the scheme for 
Skill Upgradation and Pre-departure Orientation. The scheme will be 
implemented during the current financial year.   
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 The Committee regret to note that  the bill to amend the Emigration 
Act, 1983 though conceived in February, 2005, is yet to be introduced in 
Parliament. The Committee have been repeatedly emphasizing in their 
successive Reports, the urgent need to amend the Emigration Act. The 
Committee regret to note that the amendment bill which is intended to 
ensure and protect the interest of mi grant workers has suffered such a 
delay. The Committee desire that t here should be no further delay and 
expect that as assured by the Secr etary, MOIA, the amendment Bill will be 
introduced in Parliament in the next session. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
A revised proposal for amending t he Emigration Act, 1983 has been 
approved by the Cabinet. Further action is being taken. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 13 
 

Recommendation No. 12 
 
 The Committee understand that t he essential requirements for 
emigration clearance are not unifo rmly being implemented as per the 
provisions of Emigration Act by all Pr otector of Emigrants (POEs) especially 
by the POE office, Mumbai. POEs are reportedly entertaining Service 
Agents on behalf of Recruiting Agents (RSs).  This differential interpretation 
of procedures provides scope for co rruption in POEs and a nexus between 
RAs and POEs. The Committee desire MOPI A to take urgent and effective 
steps to stem the rot creeping into the system. They also desire that clear  
directions be issued to POEs for uni form application of provisions of 
Emigration Act. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
With due deference to the reco mmendations of the Committee 
suitable instructions has been issued to all the POEs to adhere to the 
provisions of the Emigration Act, 1983 and the Rules framed thereunder in 
letter and spirit, besides uniformly comply ing with all the instructions issued 
by the Ministry from time to time.  
 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008 
 
 14 
 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF  
THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
 The  Committee in their Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry for the year 2007-08 had recommended that there should be a 
mechanism for taking effective prev entive measures and other steps to 
check corruption in the emigration offi ces and to improve the emigration 
process while making it more transpar ent. The MOIA in their Action Taken 
Replies had informed that the posts of  POE at Delhi, Mumbai & Chennai 
had been upgraded to the level of Deputy Secretary/Director while those at 
Thiruvanathapuram and Hyderabad had been upgraded to the level of 
Under Secretary in order to ensure better supervisi on, control and greater 
accountability. However, it appears that  the posts in the remaining POE 
offices have not been upgraded so far. The recent case of CBI raid in the 
office of POE, Chandigar h has brought out the ram pant corruption in the 
emigration office. The Committee desire that the posts in the remaining 
offices of POE may also be consi dered for upgradation to an appropriate 
level to check such cases of corrupt ion. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
The proposal for Upgradation of t he posts to the level of Under 
Secretary in the offices of POE at Kolkata, Chandigarh and Cochin is being 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance so as to check the cases of corruption. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 15 
 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee regret to note that  though a decision to establish 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra (PBK) had been taken four years ago in the year 
2004, not much headway has been made on this  project so far. Plot for the 
project was acquired only in May 2006. Subsequently, the Ministry initiated 
action for inviting proposals for appoint ing consultants, constitution of 
Consultancy Evaluation Committee (CEC ) etc. After the completion of 
requisite formalities, an agreement  with NBCC was signed on 18.12.2007. 
However, construction on the proj ect has not yet commenced. The 
Committee express their concern over the slow pace of progress of the 
project and recommend that the conc erted efforts be made to adhere to 
time bound programme prepared for its implementation and completion of 
the project by the end of the year 2010 as assured by the Secretary during 
the evidence. The Committee urge that there should be no further dealy in 
this regard and would like to know fu rther details regarding activities and 
functions of the proposed Kendra. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
With a view to ensuring timely comple tion of the Project, the Ministry has 
formed a Steering Committee for effectiv e monitoring of its progress. It is 
stated that as the land a llotted by the Ministry of Urban Development and 
Poverty Alleviation for constructi ng the PBK, was meant for “Foreign 
Mission” only, concerted e fforts are being made by this Ministry to get the 
land use of allotted plots changed fo rmally from “Foreign Mission” to 
“Institutional – Culture & Socio informa tion centre purposes” to achieve the 
desire objectives. Simultaneously, appr opriate action for preparation of 
municipal drawings of the PBK has been taken and the drawings of the 
building have since been submitted to t he N.D.M.C. for scrutiny/approval. 
As per the procedure, afte r approval of the drawings by the NDMC, these 
are also to be approved by Delhi Fire Service and Delhi Urban Arts 
Commission. Pending approval of the dr awings by the local authorities, 
NBCC, the Consultant and the Proj ect Manager of t he PBK, have been 
advised to take parallel steps fo r completing documentation and other 
requisite formalities. They have al so been advised to prepare the draft 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of t he PBK. It will be the endeavour of the 
Ministry to complete the project before the ensuing Commonwealth Games. 
 16 
 

 
 The activities and functions of the proposed Kendra would be briefly 
as under: 
 
 The Kendra would symbolize the common aspirations of all members 
of the Diaspora to maintain their cult ural identity and civilizational ethos and 
also their fervent desire to pass on this rich legacy to their coming 
generations. It would house an instituti on, which would enc ourage the spirit 
of camaraderie among all the children of Mother India. 
 
 The Kendra would become the focal point for interactions between 
India and the Diaspora and would also, in course of time, become the hub of 
various activities aimed at creating pride in the achiev ements of India and 
the Diaspora. 
 
 It would serve as an ideal forum to  facilitate harnessing extraordinary 
talent pool among 20 million strong I ndian Diaspora for accelerating our 
development process. 
 
 The proposed Kendra would have pe rmanent exhibition illustrating 
the history of the Diapsora in various  parts of the worl d. It would house a 
well-stocked library with a wide-rangi ng collection of diasporic books and 
audio-visual materials. The proposed Kendra would be developed into a 
Centre for diasporic studies where it would run short-term courses and 
orientation programmes for the youth of  the Indian Diaspora, thus ensuring 
that future generation of PIOs remains connected to India. 
 
 The Kendra would also provide fa cilities for comparative study of 
major Diasporas. 
 
 It would provide facilities for cu ltural interaction among Diaspora 
artistes and facilitate interaction with eminent Indian artistes. 
 
 The presence of Diaspora is an im portant factor in our bilateral 
relationship with countries of their settlement. The Kendra would provide 
informal channels of communication, which would help in promoting 
understanding of issues of vi tal concern to India. In nutshell, the proposed 
Kendra would make useful contribution in promoting our national interest. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 17 
 

CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
 FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 
The Committee regret to observe t hat even three years after the 
creation of this Ministry, it still does not have its own officers at senior levels 
who are taken on deputation and for lo wer staff they have to depend on the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee also feel that t here is shortage of 
manpower which is evident from the fact that as against the sanctioned 
strength of 195 persons, the Ministry is having only 153 persons as on 31 
March 2008. It is obvious that it would be difficult for the Ministry to execute 
various schemes/programmes undertaken by them. The Committee desire 
that the vacancies in the Ministry should be filled up expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
MOIA have to depend on the Ministry of  Home Affairs for lower staff 
and the Deptt. of Official Languages for Hi ndi posts and for some posts on 
the Ministry of External Affair s. They have been reminded to provide 
personnel to fill up the vacant posts. The Ministry has also taken up the 
matter with the Deptt. of Personnel & Trai ning to create a separate cadre of 
this Ministry for posts, which are curr ently being filled up from the staff of 
MHA and MEA. This will enable this Minist ry to get the people directly from 
the DOP&T and the vacancies be filled up. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18 
 

 For the field offices located in the POEs, vacancies circulars have 
been sent to the various Ministries/Deptt. to provide officers on loan basis. It 
is anticipated that these vacancies will be filled up shortly. 
 
All efforts are being made to fill up the posts so that there is no 
difficulty for the Ministry to ex ecute various schemes/programmes 
undertaken by it. 
 
[OM NO. H-11013/1/2008-P&C, DATED 28.7.2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                     DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY, 
14 November , 2008                                                          Chairman,  
23  Kartika, 1930 (Saka)          Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 19 
 

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS HELD ON 6TH NOVEMBER, 2008  
   
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
   
PRESENT 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
3. Shri Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa  
4. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
5. Shri Mukeem Mohammad  
6. Shri Somabhai G. Patel 
7. Dr. Sebastian Paul 
8. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
9. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
11. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
12. Shri Bharatkumar B. Raut 
13. Dr. Karan Singh 
14. Dr. (Smt.) Kapila Vatsyayan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri U.S. Saxena - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Hoti Lal  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
 20 
 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX  
 
4.  The Committee then took up for consideration the Memorandum No. 3 
and the draft Report on Action Taken by Govt. on the recommendations 
contained in the 21st Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants  (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs. The Chairman 
invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the 
draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications.  
 
5.  The Committee then adopted the draft Report and authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the Action Taken Report and present the same to 
Parliament.  
  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________ ______________ 
XXX Minutes in respect of other Report kept separately. 
 
 21 
 

 22 
 
Appendix -II 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                                       13 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 
 
    Total-10 
Percentage: 76.92% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Total-01 
 
Percentage:7.96
% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
Total-01 
 Percentage: 7.96% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
replies of Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Total-01 
Percentage: 7.96% 
 
 