 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2005-2006) 
 
                                  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  8 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
(Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the seventh 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2005-2006)    
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2005-2006) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the seventh Report (14th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the 
year 2005-2006) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2005 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COEA NO.52  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
(ii)

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
          
 PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2005-2006     i v   
INTRODUCTION         v  
    
CHAPTER I  Report       1-21 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations that have been  22-44 
accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the 45-48 
Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of 49-58 
which replies of Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of 59-60 
Which final replies of the government are still awaited 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on           61-62 
12th December, 2005  
 
 II Analysis of Action Taken by Governm ent on the               63  
 Recommendations/observations contained in the 7th  Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(14th Lok Sabha) 
 
III Statement of Recommendations/Obser vations           64-71 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2005-2006) 
Chairman :Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Omar Abdullah 
3 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
4. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
7. Shri Vinod Khanna 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
9. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
11. Shri Dinsha Patel 
12. Shri Somabhai Patel 
13. Shri Sebastian Paul 
14. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma* 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada  
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
20. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
21. Shri George Fernandes 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. K. Maheshwari 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Dr. Karan Singh 
25. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
26. Shri Arun Shourie 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
29. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
30. Shri Fali S. Nariman** 
31. Dr. Mahendra Prasad  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri John  Joseph  - Secretary 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri U.S.Saxena  - Director 
Shri Ram Raj Rai  - Under Secretary 
Shri Lalkithang   - Committee Officer 
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from his seat 
from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 10.10.2005. 
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from the 
membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.11.2005. 
 
(iv) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs having been 
authorised by the Committee to  submit the report on thei r behalf, present this 8th 
Report (14 th Lok  Sabha) on action tak en by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 7th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2005-2006. 
2. The 7th Report was presented to both th e Houses of  Parliament on 26 th 
April, 2005. The Action Tak en Repl ies of the  Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 2 9th 
July, 2005.    
3. The Draft Report on the basis of Action Taken Replies was considered 
and adopted by the Standing  Committee on External A ffairs (2005-2006) at their 
sitting held on 12 th December, 2005.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
have been reproduced as Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the ac tion taken by  Government on the recommendatio ns 
contained in the 7 th Report of the Standing Commi ttee on External Affairs (14 th 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
5. For facilit y of reference and  conven ience, the observations an d 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of 
the Report and have also been reproduced in consolidated form in Appendix-III. 
                
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                      Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)         Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 7 th Report of Standing Committee on External 
Affairs on Demands for Grants for the year 2005-2006 in  respect of the Ministry of External Affairs.  
The 7th Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2005. 
2. Action taken notes have been received from th e Ministry of External Affairs on all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the report.  These have been categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Para  Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,17,18,19,20,21,22,25,28,29,30, 
32,36,37,39,40,41,42,47,48,49 and 50. 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government replies. 
 
Para Nos. 10,43,44 and 46. 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Para Nos. 13.14,15,16,23,24,26,27, 35,38 and 45. 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Para Nos. 31,33 and 34 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government  on some of their 
observations/recommendations. 
A. RENT, RATE, TAXES 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
4.    The Committee had noted that desp ite constructing/acquiring buildings for 
chanceries at 77 stations, residences fo r Head of Missions at 83 stations and 
acquiring 610 residential apartments for other officials at 44 stations, the Ministry 
had not been able to reduce the rental liabilities. Taking into account the fact that 
a large number of buildings had been hire d by the Ministry in India and abroad, 
the Committee had  wondered as to how the Ministry would be able to reduce the 
rental liability in a substantial way – with limited plans of construction/ acquisition.  

While deploring lackadaisica l approach of the Ministry towards acquisition of 
properties/construction of buildings, the Committee had strongly recommended 
the Ministry to draw a comprehensive and time-bound long term plan with 
adequate budgetary support and regul ar monitoring mechanism in place to 
gradually accommodate all their offices,  Missions, residences in their own 
buildings to be acquired / constructed.  The Committee were of the firm view that 
it would not only save huge rental outgo in  the short run but also create assets 
for the country in the long run with the advantage of capital gains. 
  
5. The Ministry in their Action taken reply have stated as under: 
 
 “ Mindful of the high rental outgo on build ings hired for official as well as 
residential accommodation abro ad, the Ministry had ident ified 18 stations with 
high rental liability. Missions in thes e stations have been requested to forward 
specific proposals for Ministry’s consider ation. Specific proposals from many of 
the stations are yet to be received because of non-availability of suitable 
properties/long lease of the existing rented premises.   
6. As a result of the Ministry’s conc erted efforts, there has been progress in 
acquiring properties in two stations.  Ministry has appr oved purchase of a plot of 
land for Chancery in Bahrain and built-up property for Chancery in Buenos Aires. 
Purchase proposal in respect of Tehran  is under active consideration and 
Ministry proposes to seek supplementary grant  to meet the cost of this proposal, 
as existing budgetary allocation is insuffici ent.  Ministry, in t he current financial 
year, has already approved purchase of a built-up property for Embassy 
Residence in Georgetown and Emba ssy Residence-cum-Chancery in Ulan  
Bator.   
7. With regard to construction projects, construction activity is likely to begin 
in Singapore, Abuja, Muscat and Warsaw in the current financial year.  Some of 
the other projects are in an advanced stage of planning and pre-construction 
activity.  
8. As for drawing up a comprehensi ve and time bound long term plan with 
adequate budgetary support, it may be mentioned  that given the diverse social, 
political and commercial conditions prevai ling in different countries, a universal 
approach to acquisition of properties is not possible.  Within the constraints noted 
above, it is the endeavour of the Ministry to ensure that  the construction projects 

and acquisition of properties are both fast tracked so as to reduce rental liabilities 
of the Ministry”. 
 
9. The Committee are not at all convinced with the justification given by 
the Ministry for not drawing up a comprehensive and time-bound 
programme with adequate budgeta ry support for acquiring properties 
abroad with an objective to reduce the rental liabilities on account of 
buildings hired for official as well as residential accommodations abroad.  
They have identified 18 stat ions with high rental li ability but, they have not 
shown the desired determination to purchase/acquire properties on these 
stations.  The Committee welcome th e recent initiatives taken in the 
direction of acquiring properties at so me stations and desire that the 
Government should take initiatives for an early acquisition of properties for 
Chancery in Bahrain and Chancery in Buenos Aires and Tehran and also 
the approved proposals for Embass y Residence in Georgetown and 
Embassy Residence-Cum-Chancery in Ulan Bator.  The Committee also 
desire that construction activities in Singapore, Abuja, Muscat and Warsaw 
should start at the earliest  for a timely completion  of these projects.  The 
Committee once again desire that the Ministry should prepare a 
comprehensive and time-bound short term plan for 18 identified stations 
with high rental liability followed by a long term plan for all other stations 
considering all the factors like diver se social, political and commercial 
conditions prevailing in those countries.  The Committee are of the view 
that without any long-term plan and proper monitoring, they may not be 
able to accommodate all their offices,  missions, and residences in their 
own buildings. 
 
 
B.  ADVERTISING AND PUBLICITY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
  
10. The Committee had found that the reasons advanced by the Ministry for 
under-utilization of funds under the Head  ‘Advertising and Publicity’ was too 
general, not properly analysed and repetitive in nature.   
11. The Committee had observ ed that the continuous va riations in Actual 
Expenditure vis-a-vis BE/RE over the past years est ablished the faulty budget 

estimation and more so, its execution by  the Ministry. The Committee further 
found that though the Minist ry had stated that they had been working in a 
coordinated manner with various Missions in drawing up their publicity plans and 
regular review was also undertaken to ensure better utilization of publicity 
budget, yet these efforts had failed to yield the desired results; as a result 
thereof, Ministry’s publicity plans and budget were going haywire. The Committee 
had recommended the Ministry to totally re-o rientate its XP Division in prudently 
projecting and ensuring utilization of the funds allocated to it, so that the External 
Publicity, which was the most important area of Minist ry’s functioning and could 
be largely instrumental in pr ojecting the opportunities av ailable in the country in 
diverse fields to the outside world and in pursuing economic diplomacy, was 
handled professionally. T he Committee had expressed their hope that the 
Lobbying Firm in United States was functi oning satisfactorily and wanted to be 
assured on the same issue. 
 
12. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:  
“Over the past few years the External  Publicity Division has indeed re-
oriented its publicity objectives and prioriti es. There is a lot of focus now on 
projecting the rapid strides made by I ndia in areas like economy, S&T, IT, 
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, developmental issues etc besides the important 
role being played by India in world affair s. The opportunities available in various 
sectors in India are also consistently  highlighted in promotional activities 
organized by the Indian Embassies and Missi ons. India is projected as a major 
destination for FDI.  
13. At the Headquarters this emphasi s is apparent from  the documentaries 
and brochures brought out by the Division. For example, in 2004-05 out of the 15 
documentaries produced 6 were on issues like IT, biotechnology, child labor, 
democracy etc. Similarly, the focus of  publications was pr ojecting India’s 
achievements and its appeal as a land of opportunity.  The Division also invites 
senior foreign journalists on familiarization visits to India. These journalists visit 
various scientific, industrial and academic  institutions and meet with business 
leaders and senior officials in key areas . Many of them have written extremely 
positive stories on India in foreign newspapers and magazines.   
14. Our Missions are also conscious ly making efforts to project the 
opportunities available in India through business semi nars, exhibitions, buyer-

seller meets etc. Most of these activi ties are done in cl ose cooperation with 
business chambers like CII, FICCI etc and have proved to be very successful. 
For example, Indian Embassy in Beijing organized an India Day in Chengdu, 
Sichuan in May 2005 projecting Indian i ndustry, tourism and India’s cultural 
diversity as a package. An Indian Business Seminar was held as part of the India 
Day with participation of leading Indian companies lik e TCS, Ranbaxy, NIIT etc 
and over 70 Chinese companies.  
15. In light of the Standing Committee’s recommendation the Division has 
renewed its focus on these publi city objectives. In the current financial year, two 
publications “India: Partner for Developm ent in the South” and “India-Africa: 
Partners in Peace and Development” hav e already been brought out. More such 
publications on India’s aid to Afghanistan,  India-China Joint Study Group Report 
on Comprehensive Trade and Economic Cooper ation, emerging India etc are 
planned. Documentaries on India’s bilatera l and multilateral economic relations, 
technology applications in rural ar eas, women entrepreneurs etc are also 
planned.  
16. The details of specific economic publicity activities planned by the 
Missions have also been obtained and the Ministry is ensuring full support for 
these activities.  
17. We had engaged a firm M/s Akin Gump Strauss Hauer Feld LLP for the 
purposes of lobbying in the USA. The contract as initially signed by the Embassy 
of India, Washington DC for a period fr om February to December 2003 was later 
extended thrice on quarterly basis up to September 2004. T he lobbying firm had 
been rendering its services satisfactorily and the extension of contact was based 
on periodic reviews and recommendations of the Embassy. 
18. However, in September 2004, the c ontract with the firm  was allowed to 
expire in view of the fact that t he US Congress had go ne into a recess till 
January 2005 and US Administration was in volved in Presidential elections 
scheduled for November 2004. This meant t hat there was very limited scope for 
lobbying activity till well after the new  Administration and the new Congress 
returned to work in January 2005. 
19. The Embassy utilized the time so obtained to undertake a comprehensive 
review of our requirements and changing priorities and to undertake a new 
exercise of selecting the lobbying fi rm based on this review. After making due 
assessments, our Ambassador has sent a proposal on 20 May 2005 

recommending appointment of  M/s Barbour, Griffith & Rogers, LLC as our 
lobbyist for a period of one year starti ng from June 1, 2005. The proposal is 
presently under consideration of the Ministry of External Affairs”. 
20. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has reoriented its 
publicity objectives and priorities in the light of recommendation of the 
Committee and they have taken some praiseworthy initiatives in this 
direction. The Committee hope that these new initiatives in the form of 
publications and documentar ies will help in proj ecting India as preferred 
destination for FDI in future.  The  Committee however note that while 
preparing such publicity materials, the Ministry has been adopting macro-
level approaches incorporating only general types of issues. The 
committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should adopt a micro-level 
approach and try to incorporate and highlight the specific issues relating to 
the concern countries which could be r esolved with the help of Indian 
Government. The Committee once again desire that the Ministry should 
continue similar efforts by utilizing the funds allocated for this purpose 
professionally. The Committee have not ed that due to presidential 
elections, there was very limited scope for lobbying activity in USA  till new 
Congress returned to work in January, 2005. So, the contract with the new 
firm was allowed to expire. The Committ ee also note that the new proposal 
sent by our Ambassador for appoint ment of lobbying firm is under 
consideration of the Ministry. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that 
all formalities regarding appointment of the lobbying firm should be 
completed without any further delay and the Committee may be apprised of 
the latest position in this regard.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15 and 16) 
21. The Committee had desired to know as to whether the Indian Missions 
abroad had drawn up any action plan for in tensive publicity campaign during the 
year 2005-2006. In response, the Ministry had given information in respect of 
merely eight Missions. While going through the specific publicity initiatives 
mentioned in respect of these eight Missions, the Committee had felt that none of 
these Missions had proposed anything specific  and different in their initiatives. 
The usual publicity measures  had only been projected before the Committee as 
specific publicity initiatives- which, in the opinion of the Committee, might not 

have any significant impact in their publicit y drives or showcase India’s interests 
or achievements to the outside world.  The Committee were also concerned to 
note that only a small number of Missions were taking some initiatives in the 
matter. 
22. The Committee had desired that t he Ministry might obtain information 
regarding specific publicity initiatives from all our Missions for the current fiscal. 
The Committee had liked to be informed about details of specific publicity action 
Plans, if any, drawn up by our Missions in the economically  and strategically 
important countries for India and also funds earmarked for such publicity drives. 
 
23. The Ministry has responded as under: 
“As per the recommendation of the Committee the Action Plans with 
specific publicity initiatives from a si gnificant number of our  Missions have been 
obtained. The list of these Missions is as given below: 
 
ACTION PLANS 2005 – 2006 WITH SPECIFIC PUBLICITY 
INITIATIVES FROM INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD 
Sl. No. Name of the Mission 
1. High Commission of India Accra 
2. Embassy of India Addis Ababa 
3. Embassy of India Almaty 
4. Embassy of India Ankara 
5. Embassy of India Austria (Vienna) 
6. Embassy of India Baku 
7. Embassy of India Bangkok 
8. Embassy of India Belgrade 
9. Embassy of India Bogota 
10. Embassy of India Cairo 
11. Embassy of India Caracas 
12 Embassy of India Copenhagen 
13. Embassy of India Doha 
14. Consulate General of India Durban 
15. Embassy of India Dushanbe 
16. High Commission of India Dhaka 
17. Embassy of India Harare 
18. Embassy of India Kuwait 
19. Embassy of India Lima 
20. Consulate General of India Munich 
21. Consulate General of India Medan 
22. Embassy of India Minsk 
23. Embassy of India Moscow 
24. High Commission of India Nairobi 
25. High Commission of India Lagos 
26. Consulate General of India Osaka Kobe 

27. High Commission of India Ottawa 
28. Embassy of India Panama 
29. Embassy of India Phnom Penh 
30. High Commission of India Port Moresby 
31. Embassy of India Riyadh 
32. Consulate General of India Shanghai 
33. Consulate General of India St. Petersburg 
34. Embassy of India Thimpu 
35. Embassy of India Tokyo 
36. Consulate General of India Vladivostok 
37. High Commission of India Windhoek 
38. Embassy of India Yangon 
39. Embassy of India Phnom Penh 
40. Embassy of India Paramaribo 
41. Embassy of India Yerevan 
24. The Ministry have further responded as under: 
“As mentioned above the Action Plans with  specific publicity initiatives of 
some of our Missions are as given above. These also include specific plans 
drawn up by our Missions in some of the economically and strategically important 
countries along with the funds earmarked for these activities’.  
25. The Committee had categorically desired to be informed about the 
details of specific publicity plan drawn up by our missions in the 
economically and strategically important countries for India and also funds 
earmarked for such publicity drives. But surprisingly the Ministry has not 
been able to furnish the relevant information.  The Committee are 
anguished to note such a casual approach  of the Ministry and desire that 
the details of the action plan with specific publicity initiatives may be 
obtained from our missions includi ng funds earmarked for each such 
publicity drive and the action taken thereon may be furnished to the 
Committee without hiding any facts. 
 
 
C. PASSPORT AND EMIGRATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23 and 24) 
 
  26. The Committee had expressed their concern over the fact that 16 
Passport Offices namely Bhubaneswar, Bangalore, Bhopal, Guwahati, 
Jalandhar, Jammu, Jaipur, Lucknow, Mu mbai, Pune, Ranchi, Trichy, Surat, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Thane and Vishakapatnam, were functioning in the rented 
buildings involving annual r ental outgo of Rs. 3.60 cr ore.  The Committee had,  

therefore, recommended the Ministry to chal k out a comprehensive plan to either 
acquire suitable properties or to take  up the matter with the respective State 
Governments for early allotment of suitable land for the construction of remaining 
passport offices as well as the residential complexes on priority basis. 
27. The Committee had expressed t heir unhappiness over the fact that 
although the Chief Minister, Assam had offer ed a plot of land free of cost to 
construct the building for the Passport Office, Guwahati but nothing had been 
done and the Passport Office, Guwahati was functioning in a rented building.  
The Committee felt that the Ministry  should have pursued the matter at the 
highest level in right earnest which in their considered opinion had not been 
done.  The Committee stressed upon the fact that since the Passport Office, 
Guwahati, which was catering to the need of all seven North-Ea stern States, was 
facing extreme space shortage, urgent action was requi red to construct a new 
building for it.  The Committee, urged upon the Ministry to  expedite the 
examination of the proposal in hand for an early action in the matter. 
 
28. The Ministry in their Action Take n Replies has responded as under:  
 “ Construction of new Passport premis es is underway in Lucknow and 
Bangalore. Recently, Ministry has procur ed a plot of land for construction of 
owned premises in Mum bai. In Bhubaneshwar, the drawings and financial 
estimates have been approved. CPWD has gi ven a time frame of two years for 
construction of the building. In Jaipur , the Jaipur Devel opment Authority has 
been requested to expedite the approval of the dra wings. In Guwahati, the 
mutation of the land in Ministry’s name is expected to be completed shortly. 
Jallandhar has submitted a pr oposal for procurement of  land on auction basis. 
The State Government has been requested to give us the land at the reserve 
price and not through the process of auction.  
 
29. Once the ongoing construc tion projects are completed, the rental liability 
on account of Passport Offices will come down substantially from the figure of Rs 
3.6 crore annually.   
 
30. Effectively, eight Passport Office s have not sent us any concrete 
proposals. These eight offices are: Bhopal, Pune, Ranchi, Surat, Trichy, 
Trivandrum, Thane and Vizag. These offices have been separately instructed to 

get in touch with the concerned State authorities and send us concrete proposals 
to this effect.”  
About the latest position in regard to Guwahati Passport Office, the Ministry has 
informed the Committee that the Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup has been 
requested to personally intervene in this  matter. The matter is expected to be 
resolved shortly.”  
 
31. The Committee are really surpri sed to note that no significant 
progress has been made during th e last several years regarding 
construction of the Passport Office pr emises at various Passport Offices 
and the Ministry has been furnishing more or less same stereo type replies 
for the last 2-3 years.  Rent liab ility on these offices has been increasing 
continuously. The Committee have repeat edly been asking the Ministry to 
chalk out a comprehensive plan to eith er acquire suitable properties and to 
take up the matter with the respecti ve State Governments for an early 
allotment of suitable land for cons truction of Passport Offices as well as 
the residential complexes on priority basis.  But, the Ministry has so far not 
taken any concrete initiative in this direction and has left the matter to the 
respective passport offices.  The Commi ttee, therefore, strongly criticize 
the approach of the Ministry and re iterate that the Mi nistry should now 
come up with a comprehensive plan of  action to complete the projects in 
hand in the shortest possible time and persuade the remaining eight 
Passport Offices/State Governments who have not submitted any concrete 
proposal for constructing their own premises in a time-bound manner.   
32. The Committee are anguished to note the lackadaisical approach of 
the Ministry in resolving the matter relating to construction of building for 
Guwahati Passport Office.  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that 
the Ministry should take all initiati ves for an early construction of the 
building for Passport Office, Guwahati  in consulation with the State 
Government and apprise the Committee a bout the latest position in this 
regard. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
33. As regards inadequacy of staff, the Committee had urged upon the 
Central Passport Organisation to fill up the vacant pos ts immediately particularly 
those at the operational and first superviso ry levels.  The Committee had also 

suggested that pending formal selection of staff and also to meet sudden 
increase in the workload, the RPOs/P Os may be vested with necessary 
administrative and financial powers to recrui t qualified temporary staff in clerical 
and messengerial grades on daily wages  through the local employment 
exchanges.  The Committee had recommended the Ministry to have a fresh look 
at the Cadre of the CPO in view of the increase in the workload in various RPOs 
across the country.  However, as a temporary measure, the Committee had 
suggested that the Ministry should fi rm up a transfer policy for utilizing the 
existing staff whereby the surplus staff in  certain RPOs could be transferred to 
those RPOs where there was shortage. 
 
34. The Ministry has replied that: 
 “ A work-study by the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance is 
underway in Passport Offices to decide upon the quantum of augmentation of 
staff at various levels in Passport Offices. Once this exercise is completed, 
additional staff will be made available to Passport Offices. The exercise of Cadre 
Review can be carried out once the study is  completed. Ministry is also exploring 
the possibility of outsourcing the services of data entry operators to tide over the 
shortage of staff. Due to the existing GoI rules and regulations, additional Casual 
Workers cannot be engaged in Passport Offices.   
35. To meet the immediate staff shor tage, Ministry has prepared a proposal 
for outsourcing of manpower to carry out s pecific tasks in Passport Offices. The 
proposal has been examined by the Internal  Finance Division of the Ministry 
which has suggested certain changes. The same have been noted and the 
proposal is being resubmitted.” 
36. The Committee apprehend that the proposed work study by the staff 
Inspection Unit of the Mini stry of Finance may take their own time.  In view 
of the reply given by the Ministry, it seems that this process may take more 
time, therefore, the Ministry has taken initiatives for outsourcing the 
manpower for Passport Offices.  The  Committee are of the view that 
passport making process is a very sensi tive matter and outsourcing of it 
may not be in national interest. The Committee feel that in this process, 
there is the possibility of sensitive information furnishe d by applicants 
being misused by anti social elem ents or even touts can exploit the 
condition easily.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend that in view of 

sensitivity of the matter, the Ministry  of External Affairs should undertake 
the matter at the highest level for an early completion of the work study by 
the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
37. The Committee had observed that a number  of posts were lying vacant in 
various Passport Offices. Also, Passport Offices at least in Capital Cities of 
Uttranchal, Chattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh could not be opened due to 
shortage of staff.  Keeping in view the in creasing work load in various Passport 
Offices, the Committee had desired that nec essary steps be taken to fill up the 
vacant posts and also to create new posts at  supervisory levels at the earliest so 
that the new Passport Offices could beco me operational soon and the increased 
work load could be reduced.  The Committee had desired that the Ministry might 
consider the feasibility of opening of Pa ssport Office at Agra also for the 
convenience of applicants from various districts of U.P. such as  Firozabad, Etah, 
Mathura, Aligarh, Hathras, Jhansi, Lalitpur, Mahoba, Hamirpur and Banda. 
 
38. Reply of the Ministry was as under: 
 “ Opening of Passport Offices in t he state capitals of Uttranchal, 
Chattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh will be ca rried out only after an augmentation 
of the staff strength in t he Central Passport Organisation. As regards opening of 
a Passport Office at Agra, a study of the existing workload will need to be carried 
out.” 
39. The Committee observe that the Mini stry of External Affairs have not 
informed about the stage of the proces s of augmentation of staff strength 
in Central Passport Organisation and the time frame fixed for completion of 
work in this regard.  Establishing of Passport Offices in the State Capitals 
of Uttranchal, Chattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh related to large number of 
people residing in tough hilly and poorly  connected areas of these States.  
The Committee, therefore, desire th at the Ministry should persuade the 
augmentation of staff strength pr ocess for its early completion and 
simultaneously if there is any possibilit y of taking more time in this regard, 
they must start these Passport Offices by  arranging small number of staff 
from other offices without any further delay.  The Committee also reiterate 

that the Government should undertake study of existing workload for 
opening office at Agra on priority basis. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
40. The Committee, during their study vi sits to various Passport Offices, had 
noted with concern the plight  of a large number of ca sual labourers employed 
there.  The casual labourers working t here for the last several years had been 
entrusted with various kinds of jobs but their requests for the regularisation of 
their services have not been considered fa vourably so far.  The Committee had, 
however, found that the Ministry had r egularized the services of 34 casual 
labouers and 139 cas ual labourers were given temporary status but about 200 
casual labourers were still remained to be regularized. The Committee had, 
therefore, urged the Governm ent that priority should be given to regularize the 
services of remaining 200 casual labourers as and when the permanent 
vacancies under Group ‘C’ and Group ‘D’ fall vacant. 
 
 
41. The Ministry has replied as under: 
 
 “ The existing Government rules do not a llow for regularization of Casual 
Workers against vacant Group C posts. R egularisation against vacant Group D 
posts is permitted. However, there are ve ry few such vacant posts available due 
to which this process will take some time.” 
 
42. The Committee observe that there ar e limitations of the Ministry to 
regularize the services of casual labourers.  However, they find that the 
Ministry are showing their reluctance in regularizing the casual workers 
even if there is an availability of vacancy.  The Committee note that there 
are some vacant posts, but, the Ministry  has not taken any initiative to 
absorb casual workers against these posts.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that a system should be developed so that as soon as any vacancy 
arises in Group ‘D’, the casual labour ers are immediately regularized 
against it. 
 

D. INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
43. The Committee had noted that “Advis ory Committees” for Regional offices 
in Jaipur and Mumbai had been constitut ed and first meeting of these Advisory 
Committees was to be held.  The Commi ttee were not satisfied with the 
constitution of only two Advisory Commi ttees and had expressed their hope that 
similar Committees for the remaining R egional offices would be constituted 
shortly.  The Committee had recommended t hat the creation of posts, which was 
necessary for opening of new Regional o ffices should be processed without 
losing any further time and Regional centers at Bhopal, Bhubaneswar and North-
eastern Region, which had already been  proposed to be opened, should be 
opened on top priority basis in order to remove the regional imbalances. 
 
44. The Ministry has replied as under: 
“The meeting of the Advisory Committees for Regional Offices in Jaipur and Mumbai 
have not been held.  Action for the constitution of Advisory Committees for other Regional Offices 
has been initiated.  
45. The Council has already moved a proposal for creation of new posts which are necessary 
for opening of new Regional Offices.  In response, Ministry of Finance have  sought clarifications 
regarding cadre struct ure of the Council.  Necessary inform ation will shortly be furnished to the 
Ministry of Finance.”  
46. The Committee are surprised to not e that after the constitution of 
Advisory Committees for Regional Offi ces of ICCR in Jaipur and Mumbai, 
not a single meeting has been held so far.  The Committee desire that these 
Committees should meet at regular intervals for  better fulfillment of 
objectives for establishing these Co mmittees.  The Committee do not 
favour the slow progress in consti tuting Advisory Committees for other 
Regional Offices and desire that this should be expedited and completed at 
the earliest. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
47. So far as the question of setting up of a Cultural Centre in Washington 
was concerned, the Committee had expre ssed their unhappiness over the fact 
that at least on five occasions in the past, opportunities had been allowed to slip 

out of hands due to lack of will on the part of Ministry.  The Committee had 
desired that a new proposal had since emer ged, the Ministry should seize this 
opportunity firmly so that the project regarding the opening of  Cultural Centre 
could be realized. 
 
48. The Ministry in their reply has stated as under:  
“The latest proposal of the Mission for purchase of a property to serve as 
the Cultural Centre is under  active consideration of the Ministry. Views of the 
user agency, namely, ICCR had been so ught.  The proposal had also been 
examined by the Ministry’s Technical Cell.  Issues raised by ICCR and Technical 
Cell had been conveyed to the Mission for seeking clarifications and also for 
confirmation of the suitability of location of the building from point of view of 
holding large-scale public functions and non-availab ility of dedicated parking 
area.  Mission has also been requested to c onfirm the likely cost of repair and 
renovation of the building presently being used as a Church, to get an idea of the 
total financial implication involved.  Bas ed on the Mission’s fe edback, visit of a 
Property Team would be planned to examine the proposal from various angles.” 
49. The Committee are happy to not e that the long pending proposal for 
setting up of a Cultural Centre in Washington is now moving in a positive 
direction.  The Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
utilize this opportunity and they sh ould not create any administrative and 
financial hurdle at any stage of setting up of this dream project. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
50. The Committee had noted that with joining of Kathak  and Tabla Teacher, 
the Cultural Center in Suva had start ed functioning from the Embassy Premises 
in February, 2005.  The Committee had al so noted that, classes were being 
conducted at the Fiji I ndia Cultural Centre, Indian College and the MGM High 
School and the Yoga Teacher designate for the sub-center  at Lautoka was 
expected to join in May, 2005.  The Co mmittee had felt that the progress made 
so far was not sufficient.  Ev en after taking such a long time the Ministry was not 
in a position to say till date that ta sk had been accomplished.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that remaining fo rmalities regarding Cu ltural Centres 
Suva and Lautoka should be completed in a fixed time schedule.  The Committee 
had also recommended that the Ministry should process the already pending 

proposals with it to open up Cultural Centers in Be ijing, Tokyo, Tehran and 
Kathmandu at the earliest. 
 
51. The Ministry has replied as under: 
 
“The Cultural Centre in Suva has started operating from the Embassy 
premises in February 2005.  Kathak and Tabla teachers have already joined the 
Cultural Centre and start ed regular classes.  The Yoga Teacher for the Sub-
Center at Lautoka has also joined in Ma y 2005.  While the residences for all the 
teachers have been secured, the Mission’s  proposal for hiring premises for the 
Cultural Centre in Suva  along with the Council’s recommendations are under 
consideration of the Ministry.  
52. The Mission in Tokyo has been advised to start the Cultural Centre from 
the Embassy premises and the Council proposes to open the Centre by deputing 
a Yoga Teacher.  Further ex pansion will be taken up  when Mission locates a 
suitable premises.   
53. The new Cultural Centres at Beijing, Tehran and Kathmandu will be 
opened subject to the allocation of r equisite additional posts and budgetary 
resources.” 
  
54. The Committee find that some fr esh initiatives have been taken by 
the Ministry to establish Cultural Centre in Suva.  But, the proposal for 
hiring premises for Cultural  Centre is still pending with the Ministry.  The 
Committee desire that the proposal should be approved without any further 
delay so that a well established Cent re may start working there.  The 
Committee desire that Tokyo Centre should also start working from the 
embassy and search of site for th eir own premises should also be 
completed at the earliest.  The Commi ttee expect a positive approach from 
the Ministry in the direction of setting up of new Cultural Cenrtes in Beijing, 
Tehran and Kathmandu and desire that  they must come with concrete 
proposals to obtain sufficient funds during supplementary Demands for 
Grants stage and start the work after obtaining the desired fund. 
 
 
 

E. INDIAN COUNCIL OF WORLD AFFAIRS  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
55. The Committee had noted that the Ministry had earlier stated that the 
works related to Sapru House would be completed in financ ial year 2004-2005, 
but the same had not been completed. On the question of formation of 
“Governing Body” of the Council, the Mi nistry had informed the Committee that 
the activities of the ICWA had not been  affected adversely but the formation of 
the Governing Body could facilitate t he demands for enhanced funding of ICWA 
activities and research. The Committ ee was of the view that without the 
Governing Body, no institution could fu nction effectively for want of proper 
direction. The Committee had, therefore,  recommended that the Governing Body 
of the Council should be constitut ed without further delay, so that the 
responsibilities entrusted upon the Council could be fulfilled without any 
constraints. The Committee had also recommended that necessary renovation 
work in Sapru House should be completed by the end of May 2005.  
 
56. The Ministry replied that:  
 “ Ministry has initiated action to cons titute the Governing Body of the 
Council. The Ministry is confident this will be completed in due course of time and 
the Governing Body will be in place before the end of the current financial year 
2005-2006. 
 57. The renovation of th e Sapru House is an ongoing process. Major repairs 
and related civil works in the main bui lding has been completed by end May 
2005. In the current financia l year, the main building will be re-painted and given 
a face-lift. In addition, the annex to Sapru Ho use will undergo repairs and related 
civil works. Subject to availability of  funds, the work will be completed by end 
March 2006.” 
58. The Committee do not find any just ification for such an inordinate 
delay in formation of Governing Body of ICWA which is now proposed to 
be completed before the end of this  financial year.  The Committee do not 
understand as to how can the Ministry  expect the Council to fulfill their 
responsibility entrusted to them by the Government under such 
circumstances.  The Committee, therefore,  desire that the Ministry should 
not wait for the financial year to end,  rather they should take all initiatives 

to constitute the Governing Body of IC WA without any further delay.  The 
Committee also desire that the Ministry should also ensure the completion 
of renovation work of Sapru House with out any financial constraints by the 
end of current financial year.  
 
F. CAPITAL SECTION 
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
59. The Committee while going by the perc entage variation figure over the last 
three years, had noted that there was a steep negative variation i.e. to the tune of 
Rs. 26.56% and 40% respectively under t he Major Heads 4059 and 4216.   The 
Ministry had informed the Committee that  based on the progress of various 
ongoing construction projects and likely acqu isition of properties abroad, Ministry 
had sought an allocation of Rs. 80 cror e under MH  4059 and Rs. 30 crore under 
MH 4216 in its proposal to Ministry of Fi nance for BE 2005-2006.   In view of the 
budgetary allocation agreed to by  the Ministry of Financ e being less than what 
was projected by MEA and taking note of other pressing requirements, capital 
outlay for public works (Major Head 4059)  was kept at Rs. 51.41 crore and 
Capital Outlay for Housing (Major Head 4 216) at Rs. 15 crore.  In fact, the 
projected BE 2005-2006 figures of the Ministry represented a positive variation of 
14.29% under MH 4059 and of 20% under Major Head 4216 vis-à-vis BE 2004-
2005 allocation. The Committee were not c onvinced with the reply furnished by 
the Ministry that projected BE 2005-2006 figures of Ministry represented variation 
of 14.29% under Major Head 4059 and of 20% under Major Head 4216 vis-à-vis 
BE 2004-2005 allocation.   In the opinion of the Co mmittee, if projected amount 
could not be obtained, it serves no purpos e just to say that there was a positive 
variation under these Heads.  The Committee had felt that t he Ministry perhaps 
could not project their requi rements properly, as a resu lt of which, the required 
amount could not be obtained.  The Committ ee had, therefore, desired that while 
securing funds under particular Heads, proper justification should be given before 
the fund allocating authority so that the desired funds can be obtained at a right 
time. 
60. The Ministry in their reply stated as under: 
 “ Proper justification wa s provided for seeking an enhanced budgetary 
allocation under major heads 4059 and 4216 for the financial year 2005-06.  
However, since the overa ll approved budgetary allocati on for the Ministry was 

lower than the projected fi gures, allocation under Capital Outlay was accordingly 
reduced. In fact, insufficiency of funds under Capital Outlay is proving to be a 
hindrance in pursuing some of the acquisition projects, which are under active 
consideration of the Ministry.  Ministry  proposes to seek additional funds under 
Major Head 4059 and Major Head 4216 through supplementary grant.” 
61. The Committee observe that the approved budgetary allocation for 
the Ministry of External Affairs was lower than the projected figures.  This 
lower allocation is proving to be hindrance in pursuing some important 
acquisition projects of the Ministry.  The Committee feel that these projects 
are very important and these should not be delayed due to non-availability 
of funds.  The Committee, therefore, d esire that the Ministry should try to 
get sufficient funds for these projects and other important projects through 
supplementary Demands for Grants.  For this purpose, the matter should 
be undertaken at the highest level with proper justification.  
Recommendation (Para No. 49) 
62. The Committee had noted that the Vi desh Bhavan (now known as the 
Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan) was proposed to  be constructed on a plot of land 
measuring 7.785 Acres at the junction of Janpath and Maulana Azad Road as 
headquarters of Ministry of External Affairs.  In November 2003, it was decided to 
entrust the project to CPWD for design and execution.  Th e concept design 
prepared by CPWD had been approved by the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and 
the Central Vista Committee at the conc eptual stage with some observation.  
Simultaneously, the project had been app roved from financial angle by the 
Committee for Non-Plan Expenditure at a cost of Rs. 175.57 crore.  Financial 
approval of the Cabinet was being sought.   CPWD had indicated that the 
construction of the building will take forty months after receipt of the approvals. 
The Committee were of the view that the construction of Videsh Bhavan seems 
to be inordinately delayed.  The Commi ttee would like that this should be 
expedited and the Co mmittee may be apprised  of the progress made in this 
regard.  
63. The reply of the Ministry is as under: 
 ‘ While awaiting financial approval of the Cabinet for the Jawaharlal Nehru 
Bhawan project, physical possession of the work site has been handed over to 
the CPWD on May 12, 2005. Funds have been released to CPWD for setting up 
their site office and commencing preliminar y pre-construction activities like soil 

testing, etc. A Core Group of officers wit hin the Ministry has been set up to work 
out the detailed space requi rements of the Ministry. Ministry has been holding 
regular meetings with office rs of the Architectural Wing of CPWD for preparation 
of detailed design development plan for seek ing approval of local bodies.  Note 
for Cabinet, in final form, had been sent to Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Urban 
Development and PMO for their information/comments before submission to 
Cabinet.  The Cabinet has since accorded its financial approval on 25.07.2005’. 
64. The Committee are happy to note that the Cabinet has given 
approval for the Jawahar Lal Nehru Bh awan Project.  Now, there is no 
hurdle in actual implementation of the project.  The Committee now hope 
that the Ministry of External Affa irs should make all possible efforts to 
complete the project in proposed forty months’ period. 

CHAPTER- II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSRVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
General Observations 
 
 India’s foreign policy faced many chal lenges in the past, but there is a 
certain resilience in it wh ich steered India clear thro ugh such challenges.   The 
Committee are of the view that our foreign policy should retain this resilience 
and we should calibrate our responses to events of significance taking place far 
and near keeping in view India’s geo-political interests.  
 
(Para No.1) 
  
The foreign policy of I ndia is based on a broad national consensus and, 
therefore, the basic orient ation of this policy do not change.  The unipolar world 
which emerged after the end of the cold war era and the glob alisation of the 
economy created radically new situations requiring new responses.  The 
Committee feel that the successive gover nments which took office during this 
period have conducted the foreign policy with a proper understanding of the post 
cold war world and the political realities which it brought about.  
   
             ( P a r a  N o . 2 )  
 
 The Committee consider that the dec isive and bold moves made by the 
Government of India over the past five years to improve its relation with its 
neighbours are praiseworthy.  The confiden ce building measures taken by India 
at different times to improve its re lation with Pakistan culminating in the 
Srinagar-Muzaffarabad bus service, are borne out of a genuine conviction that 
the relationship between India and Paki stan can be improved.  The Committee 
also appreciate the steps taken by the Go vernment to relax visa regulations to 
enable the people of Pakistan from different  walks of life to visit India and 
interact with the Indian peopl e. The people-to-people contac ts at different levels 
with greater frequency, the Committ ee believe, will bring about better 
understanding of the sensitivit ies of each other as well as of the commonality of 
perceptions of both the people.           
(Para No.3) 
 
 However, the Committee feel that the Government should prepare the 
roadmap for improving its relations with Pakistan with the greatest care.  The 
compulsions generated by the concerns of the international community over the 
perpetual tension prevailing between two nuclear powers should not force the 
Government into hastening the pace in an unrealistic manner.  Every care 
should be taken to protect the vital intere sts of the nation.  The fact that the 
terrorist training camps inside Pakistan’ s territory are still operating, though 
infiltration into Jammu & Kashmir has co me down considerably, points to the 
grave danger inherent in the situation.  The Government of India should not 
allow itself to be taken by surprise at any stage. 

 (Para No.4) 
 
 The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Government to improve 
our relations with China.  The serious atte mpts being made by both countries to 
address the boundary disputes should succeed. High level political visits, the 
Committee believe, will generat e the required momentum in the ongoing efforts 
to settle the disputes.  The Committee are of the view that permanent settlement 
of the major disputes between India and China in a spirit of mutual 
accommodation will bring about a qualitative change in the geo-political situation 
in the South Asian r egion which will help to accelera te India’s economic growth.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of t he steps being taken in this regard.  
Keeping in view our age old traditional relations, the Committee would urge the 
Government to take steps to further improve our relations with neighbouring 
countries particularly Bangladesh and Nepal.  
                        (Para No.5) 
 
 The post cold war power equations seem to be slowly changing with 
China and India emerging as significant players on the world scene.  The military 
and economic might India has acquired plac es it in a positi on of strength from 
where it can influence the world events in a significant  way.  The Indian nation 
has a civilizational dimension and it is poised to play a big role in the shaping of 
the future world.  The Committee are of the firm view that India needs to grow 
into an economic superpower and considerably strengthen its military prowess in 
order to be able to play that role effe ctively.  The Government should grasp the 
dynamics of power equations in the pr esent day world and re-orient our 
approaches and attitudes in such a way that India always remains an 
indispensable participant in  the shaping of the world’s future.  Peace and 
harmony in the world and peaceful co-existence among nations are the 
cornerstones of India’s foreign policy.  But India can talk of peace and harmony 
effectively and convincingly only from a position of strength.  The Committee 
hope that this cardinal principle of international politics will be  internalised by the 
Government and its foreign policy will truly reflect this principle.                                                  
(Para No.6) 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of External Affairs values greatly the insightful and 
perceptive advice offered by the Hon’ble Standing Committee on 
India’s Foreign Policy. 
 
Today, India is at the thres hold of assuming larger global 
responsibilities, as befitting our Nation’s strength and character.  As 
an open, free, plural and inclusive Society, given the vitality and 
resilience of its democratic polity,  the growth and dynamism of its 
economy, its enormous human resources, the caliber of its scientists 
and technological manpower, and its invaluable contribution to 
international peace, security and coop eration, India’s stock is on the 
rise.   
 
India’s legitimate claim to a pe rmanent seat on the United Nation’s 
Security Council, derives not only fr om our impeccable credentials based on 

objective criteria, but al so our capacity to effe ctively shoulder global 
responsibilities, especially, to truly represent the concerns and interests of fellow 
developing nations. 
 
To confront decisively the chall enges and threats facing the world 
community, the reform of the UN system es pecially of the Security Council has 
become absolutely essential.  Our joini ng forces with import ant friendly nations, 
such as Brazil, Germany and Japan should enable us to garner wider 
international support in this important endeavour. 
 
Our foreign policy vision seeks to im prove our relations with all nations, 
large and small, in all ar eas, even while addressing t he differences that there 
may be, in a spirit of goodwill and understanding.   
 
Our especially close and friendly relations with Bhutan, Maldives and Sri 
Lanka have demonstrated the valid ity of according prima cy to the relations with 
our neighbours.  Moved by our abiding frie ndship for Nepal, we have sought to 
reinforce our engagement with Nepal, to strengthen the constitutional forces, for 
the re-establishment of political stability, social cohesion and economic prosperity 
on the basis of a broad nati onal consensus.  We believe  that our relations with 
Bangladesh need to be addressed more subs tantially, in a sp irit of mutual 
understanding, goodwill and cooperation.   
 
Our constructive and sustained engagement with Pakistan has brought 
tangible benefits to peoples of both countries.  The Srinagar – Muzzafarabad bus 
service in operation since April this year , and similar services proposed between 
Amritsar, Lahore and Nankana Sahib,  and the rail link from Munnabao to 
Khokhrapar, are among the m easures, aimed at strengtheni ng the socio-cultural 
links between our peoples.  The reopening of the Cons ulates in Karachi and 
Mumbai early next year would be yet another people centric move.  It is our 
expectation that Pakistan should share our deep conviction that a serious and 
sustained dialogue hinges on mutual trust that brooks no room for violence and 
terrorism.  We shall feel reassured, wh en we will see the infrastructure of 
terrorism dismantled, on the ground, lock, stock, and barrel.  
 
Our relations with China have enter ed a distinct phase of comprehensive 
all-round development.  With the signin g of the Agreement on the Political 
Parameters and Guiding Principles in Ap ril, this year, we have reached a more 
substantive stage in our bilateral dialogue on the boundary question.  
 
We are investing substantially in economic cooperatio n with Afghanistan, 
to strengthen democratic forces, which s hould lead the country to progress and 
prosperity. 
 
We value immensely our strategi c partnership with Russia and our 
engagement with the Central Asian nations. 
 
With the United States, we have nur tured a partnership of growing 
cooperation and trust, focusing on high technologies, energy security, and joining 
forces to combat terrorism and proliferat ion of weapons of mass destruction, and 
in enhancing global security.  
 

With Japan we are engaged in building a partnership that has great 
potential both bilaterally and globally.  
 
 In Africa and Latin America, India needs to invest substantially both by 
way of sharing of developmental experience and forging stronger economic links.  
The trilateral cooperation being develop ed among India, Brazil and South Africa 
holds great promises for realization.  
 
 In today’s rapidly globalizing environment, economic and business 
imperatives have emerged as the most sign ificant driving force in our relations 
with the international community.  
 
 India’s ‘Look East Policy’, the part nership we have been building with the 
ASEAN, our active engagement with the Countries of the Ba y of Bengal Initiative 
for Multi-Sectoral Economic and Techni cal Cooperation, our  presence at the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organ ization, our extensive cooperation with the 
European Union, the Gulf Cooperat ion Council and our comprehensive 
involvement in the SAARC, are all part of the irre versible process of the 
integration of our country with the world economy.  The Comprehensive 
Economic Cooperation Agreement signed with Singapore in June this year, is a 
harbinger of similar arr angements that we would seek with major economic 
players. 
 
Our quest for participation in the Galileo Satellite Navigation Project, and 
the International Thermo Nuclear Reacto r Project are pointer s to the kind of 
cooperation that we would seek from the developed nations. 
 
For our nation today, deeper global engagement is no longer an option but 
an imperative.  India’s presence at the G-8 Summit was a forerunner. 
            (No. AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 
2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that the project ed Actual Expenditure for the year 
2004-2005 is 3758.85 crore agai nst Rs. 3885.00 crore at RE.  It means that Rs. 
126.15 crore again remained unspent during the year 2004-2005 while, Rs. 
65.47 crore was unspent during the y ear 2003-2004 which had been the case 
earlier also in the years 2000-2001 and in 2001-2002.  As per the Ministry’s own 
admission the projection under the Head “Capital Outlay” had been based on the 
plans for purchases of property and construction projects, some of which could 
not reach the anticipated stage of making payments due to unforeseen local 
developments.  The Committee are of th e view that Budget remained unspent 
only due to non-materialization of schemes/projects envisaged at the time of 
making budgetary provisions.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that 
Ministry should initiate remedial measur es with stringent and regular review for 
timely completion of projects/schemes to avoid the non-utiliz ation of funds, so 
that the large unspent provisions can be eliminated.  
 (Para No. 7) 
 
 
 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry’s Expenditure Monitoring Committee will be reviewing the 
progress of expenditure on various projec ts/schemes, on a quarterly basis, and 
take appropriate action, as necessary, to  remedy the situation through suitable 
adjustments such as re-appropriation/real location of funds etc.  Through this 
exercise, the Ministry hopes to minimize the surrender of funds in the current 
financial year.  With regard to the pr ojects and schemes mentioned by the 
Hon’ble Standing Committee, it is submitt ed that individual schemes/projects of 
the Ministry’s bilateral assistance, especially those involving outlay of Rs. 5 crore 
and above are being monitor ed by the Project Monitoring Committees set up for 
the said individual projects/schemes.  It is hoped that such a process of close 
monitoring by these Committees will prevent slippages, and ensure timely 
completion of projects/schemes and optimal utilization of funds. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July26,2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that large sa vings accrued during the year 2004-
2005 under the Heads “Special Diplomatic Expend iture” (Rs. 145.43 crore), “Aid 
to African Countries” (Rs. 25.95 crore) and Capital Outlay (Rs. 62.17 crore).  
According to the Ministry these savings  were re-appropriated to other Heads 
where there was a requirement of more  funds for ongoing programmes/schemes 
and other commitments and thus the overa ll savings from MEA’s allocation got 
reduced to Rs. 126.15 crore.  It means that total projected saving was Rs. 233.55 
crore out of which Rs. 107.40 crore wa s allocated to those Heads under which 
allocated funds were lesser than their requi rements.  In view of the explanation 
tendered before the Committee, they desire that they may be apprised of those 
ongoing programmes/schemes – where additional funds were provided by way of 
re-appropriation which consequ ently reduced the overall savings to the tune of 
Rs. 126.15 crore. 
(Para No. 8) 
 
Reply of the Government :  
  
SAVINGS HEAD OF 
ACCOUNT  
AMOUNT AVAILABLE  
AS SAVING AT FE 
STAGE  
AMOUNT 
REAPPROPRIATED  
Special Diplomatic 
Expenditure 
Rs.145.43 cr. Rs.136.26 
  R s 1 3 . 5 6  c r                      :  
Contribution to UN Organisations  
  Rs. 60 cr + Rs 58.38 cr : Aid to 
Bhutan 
  Rs.3.95 cr                      : Aid to 
Other Developing Countries 
  Rs.0.37 cr                      : Nehru 
Awards &India-UK Round Table    
  Total:          Rs.136.26 
 
SAVINGS HEAD OF 
ACCOUNT  
AMOUNT AVAILABLE  
AS SAVING AT FE 
STAGE 
AMOUNT 
REAPPROPRIATED  
Aid to African countries 25.95 cr Rs.13.15 cr                    : Aid to 
Other  Developing Countries 

  Total: Rs.13.15 cr 
   
 
SAVINGS HEAD OF 
ACCOUNT  
AMOUNT AVAILABLE  
AS SAVING AT FE 
STAGE 
AMOUNT 
REAPPROPRIATED  
Capital Outlay 62.17 Rs.17.25 cr                    : Loan to 
Bangladesh 
Rs.26.00 cr                    : Loan to 
Bhutan  
 Rs. 233.55 Total: Rs. 43.25 cr 
 This takes into account 
savings under above 
Heads only  
 
 
                                       Total re-appropriated from above 3 Heads: Rs. 192.66 cr.  
 
As desired by the Hon’bl e Standing Committee, the above tables indicate 
the final figures of savings /re-appropr iations under the Heads mentioned by the 
Hon’ble Standing Committee in Observation No.8 i.e. “SDE”, “Aid to African 
Countries” and “Capital Outlay”.  
 
With regard to the further desire of  the Hon’ble Standing Committee in 
Observation 8, a set of the re-appropriati on orders for providing funds for various 
ongoing programmes/projects and schemes of  the MEA in the FY 2004-5 , is 
given at Annexure I. It may be seen that the total re-appropriations amounted to 
Rs. 205.16 crores. Total savings (surrender) was Rs.126.15 crores. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that the BE projec tion in 2005-2006 is  7.89% higher 
than BE 2004-2005 while it is 1.11% over RE 2004-2005.  Going by the Ministry’s 
version, taking into account the anticipated inflation of only of 5% in the Financial 
Year 2005-2006, the increase in real terms – in the BE 2005-2006 allocation – 
will be only by 2.89%, while it will be less than RE 2004-2005 by 3.89%.  The 
dearness, exchange rates, et c. which obviously affect  the value of money had 
not been given due cons ideration while formulating the Budget Estimates and as 
a result thereof, 3.89% lesser amount against RE 2004-2005 has been allocated 
in BE 2005-2006 in real terms.  The Committee are not able to understand as to 
how the Ministry will, thus, be in a position to do justice to its stated objectives 
and reinforce the positive image of th e country abroad.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry shoul d keep all these factors in view at 
the time of formulation of budget estimates and projection thereof. 
(Para No. 9) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
 As recommended by the esteemed Co mmittee, all factors such as 
dearness allowance, exchange rate fluctuations etc. are invariably taken into 
account while formulating the budget for the ensuing financial year.  However, 
Ministry is constrained to restrict inter nal allocation under the various Heads to 
keep them within the overall al locations approved by the Ministry of Finance.  At 
various stages, the internal monitoring mechanism of the Ministry reviews the 
expenditure under various Heads to provide for impor tant items/activities where 

there is a shortfall of funds – either fr om other Heads or through Supplementary 
Demands for Grants.   The Hon’bl e Committee’s reco mmendation above 
endorses Ministry’s current practice of calculating budgetary requirements and 
projecting demands after taking all relevant  factors into account.  Ministry will 
therefore continue to proj ect its budgetary requirements to Ministry of Finance 
based on its realistic requirements under various schemes/projects. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs has constituted an 
expenditure monitoring committee to regularly review the overall programme 
expenditure of the various Divisions of the Ministry.  Through this monitoring, the 
Ministry has been able to ensure bette r phasing of expenditure on various 
projects/schemes and was able to ut ilize 71.23% of its BE allocation by 
December, 2004.   With this, the rush of  expenditure in the la st quarter of the 
Financial Year 2004-2005 has been avoided.   The Committee hope that this 
trend will continue in the years to come by bette r phasing of expenditure on 
various projects/schemes.  The Committee al so feel that the better utilization of 
funds in a phased manner will ensure the timely completion of projects/schemes.  
Thus, the problem of non-utilisation of funds can be rectified automatically. 
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Government.  
 
 As pointed out by the esteemed Co mmittee, the Expenditure Monitoring 
Committee of MEA will continue  to periodically review the pace of expenditure in 
MEA, especially on various  projects/schemes to be implemented, with a view to 
ensure proper phasing of expenditure and optimal utilization of funds. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee observe that the Actual Expenditure on account of “Rents, 
Rates, Taxes” under the Heads “Secretari at” and External Affairs: Passport and 
Emigration”, has been less than BEs/R Es from the year 2000-2001 onwards.  
The Committee feel that the Ministry has failed in making accurate estimation of 
requirement of funds under these Heads even at the RE stage.  They note with 
concern that the unrealistic projection of Budget Estimates has become a routine 
in the Ministry.  The assurances given by th e Ministry in the last two years to this 
effect have not yielded the desired results as huge variations continue to exist.  
The Committee, therefore,  recommend the Ministry to tighten the existing 
mechanisms to avoid such variations  and ensure accurate estimate of 
requirement of funds to the maximum extent possible at the BE stage itself. 
 (Para No. 12) 
 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
Every effort is made to accurately estimate the requirement under the 
Head “Rents, Rates, Taxes”.  However, since 2000-2001, the actual expenditure 
has been lower than the BEs/REs on account of factors beyond the control of the 
Ministry.  In the case of the “Secretariat ” Head, Ministry is awaiting a decision on 

the revised rent for Akbar Bhavan - which would be mutually acceptable to the 
Ministry and the New Delhi Municipal Co mmittee.  In the case of Passport 
Offices, it turned out that some of the offices did not eventually receive demands 
from the concerned authorities for ground rent etc. as had been anticipated.  
 
 The Ministry will however, take necessary  steps to ensure that in future, 
the estimation and budgetary projections ar e more accurate at BE stage itself 
and that the existing mechanisms are tightened to ensure that variations between 
the BEs/REs and actual expenditure are avoided.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
      The Committee note that the Ministry of Law and Justice have furnished a 
list of advocates for the formation of a panel of advocates for handling extradition 
cases and the Ministry in consultation with Legal and Treaties  Division and the 
Additional Solicitor Gener al of India has prepared a list of six advocates for 
various extradition cases and forwarded th e same to the Ministry of Law and 
Justice for their concurrence. In view of the urgent need and desirability of having 
best counsels of proven professional comp etence to deal with extradition cases, 
the Committee would urge upon t he Ministry to pursue vigorously the matter with 
the Ministry of Law and Justice to hav e the matter regarding formation of panel 
expedited on top priority. The Committee recommend that the decision in the 
matter may be taken at the earliest so that the realistic Budget Estimates could 
be made under this Head and the funds ar e not kept blocked in anticipation- 
without making any headway in achievi ng the desired objective. The Committee 
further desires that utmost care should be taken to include in the panel of 
advocates top legal luminaries having expertise in the local criminal laws of 
foreign countries. 
(Para No.  17) 
 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
 
The proposal for formation of panel  of advocates for extradition 
proceedings has since been finalized during the month of May 2005 after seeking 
approval of the Minister of State and the Ministry of Law and Justice. The 
concern of the Committee to include in the panel of adv ocates top legal 
luminaries having proven professional com petence has been duly taken care of. 
The professional charges to be paid to th e Government counsels in the panel of 
advocates are substantially higher t han the amount being paid earlier. It is, 
therefore, felt that in t he RE 2005-06, the pr ojected estimates will be as close to 
the actual expenditur e as possible, thereby effecti ng the bare minimum funds, if 
at all any, allowed to lapse. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 

The Committee note that the construc tion of Foreign Service Institute 
building as of now is not complete and as such it is not possible for the FSI to 
start functioning from there.  The Dean FSI has instructed the Additional Director 
General (TD) CPWD, the consultant, the representative of t he contractor that 
even if the whole building is  not completed, the FSI w ants that the office rooms 
and the Lecture Halls be completed in the next 3-6 months so that the FSI moves 
in the premises.  The remaining part of the building i.e. Hostel, auditorium etc. 
can be completed subsequently.  The Dean has been assured that every effort 
will be made to comply with his instructi ons.  The Committee recommend that a 
final time schedule should be firmed up at least now for the completion of 
construction works of the FSI Building so that the Institute starts functioning from 
its own premises at the earliest. 
 (Para No. 18) 
Reply of the Government 
CPWD and consultant have been directed to take action for getting partial 
completion certificate in respect of the building from DDA so that Foreign Service 
Institute (FSI) could move into the new premises at the earliest.  Such portions of 
the building as the FSI would occupy have been identified in consultation with 
Dean (FSI) and CPWD have been advised to complete those portions in respect 
of air-conditioning, electro-mechanical systems and interior works.  Action 
regarding completion of other works is being continued simultaneously. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26,2005) 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee are happy to note that t he FSI is continuing its endeavour 
to make the training-cum-familiarization courses more dynamic, inter-active and 
result-oriented so as to make it on par with the best Diplomatic Institutes of the 
world.  The Institute engages Guest Speak ers who have achieved excellence in 
the academic and their pr ofessional fields, who impart knowledge and 
information to the participants on various is sues like India’s Foreign and Security 
Policy, International Relations, Internat ional Law, matters c oncerning terrorism, 
India’s economic policy, multilateral and bilateral negotiations, protocol and so 
on.  The Foreign Service Institut e has entered into Memorandum of 
Understanding with the Foreign Service Instit utes of several other countries.  To 
date, such Agreements have been concl uded with 22 countries in order to 
facilitate mutual cooperation and improve bilateral relationships.  The Committee 
facilitate mutual cooperation and improve bilateral relationships.  The Committee 
hope that the Foreign Service Institute will  successfully meet the professional 
training requirements of the officers from Indian Foreign Services, Ministries as 
well as foreign diplomats.  The co mmittee, therefore, recommend that the 
required funds should not be a constraint for the effective functioning of FSI and 
Memorandum of Understanding should be negot iated by the Inst itute with more 
countries. 
 (Para No. 19) 
 
Reply of the Government   
 
The Foreign Service Institute (FSI) has not found any difficulty in allocation 
of funds for organizing the various courses.  It will continue its efforts to make the 
training cum familiarization courses more dynamic, interactive and result oriented 
so as to make it on par with the best Institutes in the world.  
 

 The FSI  course modules for the Indian Foreign Service Officers under 
training, cover a variety of subjects thr ough lectures, interactive seminars as well 
as visits to various institutions.  It also  organizes mid-career training programme 
for Officers, organizes a Basic Professional Course for Section Officers and Staff 
proceeding on transfer abroad and organizes Mission orientation programmes for 
officers of other Ministries and department s including Ministry of Defence who 
are proceeding on po sting abroad.  It recently al so organized a Workshop on 
Entertainment and Etiquette for senior IFS officers and their spouses.   
 
 The FSI every year is also org anizing three Professional Courses for 
Foreign Diplomats (PCFD), two Courses on Diplomacy and Foreign Policy 
Programme for Foreign Diplomats (DFPPF D) mainly for diplomats stationed in 
New Delhi and organizes Specia l courses for diplomats from friendly countries.  
Special courses were designed to suit the requirement of  the respective 
countries were organized;  a Special Course for Canadian Diplomats in March 
2005 and a Special Course for Vietnamese Diplomats in June 2005.  
 
 The FSI has entered into Memorandum of Understanding with Foreign 
Service Institutes of several other c ountries.  To date such Agreements have 
been concluded with 24 countries in order to facilitate mutual cooperation and 
improve bilateral relationships.  During the month of June 2005 MoUs were 
signed with Norway and Saudi Arabia.   FSI is also processing MOU with Mexico.  
Proposals for MOU with Latvia, Paraguay, Germany, Botswana and Malaysia are 
also under consideration. 
 
 The diplomats have very much apprecia ted the FSI’s intere st and effort in 
organizing the Courses and providing th em with valuable information which 
would stand them in good stead in their careers.  Sugg estions made by them are 
also appropriately incorporated in the Course Modules while planning future 
courses for the diplomats.   FSI efforts would cont inue to build bridges of 
friendship with various countries.  T he FSI will be provided with the required 
funds by the Ministry, from within the overall allocations received by the Ministry. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note with concern that the Actual Expenditure under the 
Head “Embassies and Missions” has been increasing sharply since 2000-2001.  
The Actual Expenditure in 2000-2001 wa s Rs. 691.61 crore which has increased 
to Rs. 855.00 crore in 2004-2005.  Th e Committee find that the increase has 
been attributed to increase in rates of Foreign Allowance, normal inflationary 
trends, increase in costs of goods and services which occurred after the 
computation of projections under this Head.  The Committee has time and again, 
recommended for reduction of Administrative expenditure on Missions/Posts 
abroad.  The Committee desire that the avoi dable Administrative Expenditure on 
Embassies and Missions be pruned suitably so as to meet the expenses for other 
important activities and new initiative s of the Missions abroad.  The Committee, 
further, recommend that the re-appropriation of savings from other Heads should 
be resorted to sparingly. 
(Para No. 20) 
 
Reply of the Government 
   

 The Ministry has been trying it s best to limit the overall 
Administrative/Establishment expenditure  in Missions/Posts abroad to the 
minimum amount required for meeting the mandatory func tional needs of 
Missions/Posts.  However, some increas e becomes inevitable for reasons such 
as expansion of activities of Government  of India, or variable factors entirely 
beyond Ministry’s control including currency fl uctuations, local inflation etc.  Over 
the last about three years, the local cu rrency fluctuations, inflation and normal 
price escalations have contributed to incr eased overall expenditure in terms of 
Indian Rupees.  It is submitted that Ministry has tried to ensure, through close 
monitoring of the expenditure of Missions/Posts throughout the budgeting 
process - from the initia l budgetary projections of Missions/Posts to RE and FE 
stages – that the expenditure is prudent  and in accordance with the broader 
objectives and priorities of Government of India.  
 
As recommended by the esteemed Committee, re-appropriation of 
savings will be resorted to sparingly.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee also observe that a num ber of vacancies are lying vacant 
in various Missions/Posts abroad, which in turn affect their day-to-day 
functioning.  The Committee recommends the Ministry to take immediate steps 
for filling up the required number of vacancies in Missions/Posts. 
(Para No. 21) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The vacant posts are filled as per prescribed administr ative procedures 
and on the basis of functional requirements of the Missions concerned keeping in 
mind the number of posts available.  There are instances when some posts 
remain vacant for short periods on account of administrative or other reasons.  In 
the interest of functional efficiency of  our Missions/Posts, it has been the 
endeavour of the Ministry to fill such vacant posts as soon as possible. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee observed that an amount of Rs. 121.86 crore was 
allocated to the Ministry at BE stage in the year 2004-2005 and the Ministry 
enhanced the amount to Rs. 159.98 at RE stage.  The reason stated by the 
Ministry for enhancement of requirements at RE stage is that the hike in RE for 
2004-2005 is primarily on account of payment toward s various travel documents 
to India Security Press, Nasik.  The higher BE projection of  Rs. 140.55 crore for 
the year 2005-2006 is stated to have been  made to meet t he expenditure on 
travel documents, scanning of pass port documents, machine-writing of 
passports, salaries, administration, pay ments to State Governments and Union 
Territories for their Passport related services, verifications etc.  While 
emphasizing the need for full utilization of the budgetary allocations during the 
financial year, the Committee trust that the enhanced BE of  Rs. 140.55 crore  for 
the year 2005-2006 will be fully utilized so as to avoid variation between BE/RE 
and the Actuals. 
(Para No. 22)  

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry will ensure that there is no variation between the BE/RE 
figures and actual utilization. 
       (No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 
2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee are surprised to find that in spite of their earlier 
recommendation regarding sending of proposal for acquiring land for 
construction of building for the Passport Offices, which are still functioning in 
rented buildings, the proposals have been received from Mumbai and Jalandhar 
only.  The Committee find that  the Ministry are not serious enough in the matter.  
The Committee, therefore, once again strongly recommend that the proposals for 
the construction of building/acquisition of built up properties may be obtained 
from the remaining Passport Offices witho ut any further delay  and the proposals 
so received be cleared and completed expeditiously. 
(Para No. 25) 
 
Reply of the Government.  
 
 The Ministry is very serious about moving the Passport Offices in owned 
premises. On the directions of Ho n’ble Standing Co mmittee, Ministry 
expeditiously processed the proposal fo r procurement of land for RPO Mumbai. 
The same has now been approved. R egarding PO Jallandhar, efforts are 
underway to persuade the State Government to sell the land at the reserve price 
and not through auction. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005)  
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee recommend that the pr emises of the Passport Offices, 
should be renovated and maintained property and while doing so, facilities for the 
general public/applicants visiting these o ffices be increased to the best possible 
extent till they move to more spaci ous premises where adequate facilities are 
available for the applicants and the staff. The Committ ee also suggest that the 
Ministry should lay down some standard pa rameters for future expansion of the 
Passport Offices.  Since Passport Offices ar e earning substantial revenue for the 
Government, adequate funds may be allocated for renovation and upgradation of 
public facilities. 
 (Para No. 28) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
 Passport Offices have been instructed to improve public amenities for the 
applicants and project the requirement of funds in their estimates accordingly. As 
and when Passport Offices move to owned premises, the problems of space 
shortage and congestion will be taken care of. Scope for future expansion will be 
kept in mind while designing new premises for Passport Offices.  

(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
  
The Committee have noticed that in some Passport Offices touts operate 
in collusion with officials working in the Passport Offices.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that  no effort should be spared to  identity such linkages and 
nexus with unscrupulous elements who ar e out to subvert the procedure and 
exploit the public.  The Committee would recommend that strict legal action be 
taken against the guilty in the matter. 
(Para No. 29) 
 
Reply of the Government.  
 
The Ministry will abide by t he Hon’ble Committee’s above 
recommendation. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee note with satisfaction t he efforts of the Government to 
expedite the issue of passports to app licants in certain categories through the 
Tatkaal Scheme.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should issue necessary 
instructions to al the Passport Offices by setting clear cut guidelines for making 
available passports to the applicants under this Scheme. The success of Tatkaal 
Scheme apart, the Committee would recommend that the entire procedure of 
issuing passports ought to be made very simple and transparent so that the 
common man, who generally does not have access to the Scheme, is also able 
to secure a passport without much hassles and running around. 
(Para No. 30) 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry has also sent guidelines to Passport Offices to carry out process 
re-engineering with a view to simplif y the passport issuance process and 
expediting issue of passports. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that the same  amount has been allocated in BE 
2005-06 to ICCR which was allocated at RE 2004-05 stage.  The Ministry itself 
has submitted that the am ount of Rs.57.50 crore allocated to ICCR in BE 2005-
06 will not be sufficient to meet all the proposed/projected activities of ICCR.  The 
ICCR projected an amount of Rs.68.00 crore for BE 2005-06.  During the course 
of evidence, the Ministry has stated that ‘efforts will be made at RE stage to seek 
additional funds to bridge the short fa ll’.  The Committee recommend that the 
budget of ICCR may be supplemented properly to take up critical activities as per 
the plan of action.  The Committee also recommend ICCR that when their Budget 
is also being supplemented from the capita l Budget of the Mini stry of External 
Affairs, they should avail of the oppor tunity positively and the projects pending 
since long should be initiated immediately. 

(Para No. 32) 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
As per the recommendations of the Fi nance Committee of the Council, a 
subsidiary Plan of Action wi ll be prepared at t he time of the finalization of RE 
2005-06.  Accordingly, additional of funds will be requested at the RE stage. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that the ICCR has undertaken four new initiatives 
such as the task of digitizing the CDs of artists and putting them in a digital 
format, designing of website to make it more attractive and more user-friendly, 
initiative to cut the cost on the scheme to have our chairs abroad and sending 
cultural delegations to take part in major Cultural Festivals.  The Committee also 
note that the ICCR has evolved a system called “Performance Audit” to assess 
their activities like performances of out going and incoming cultural troupes or the 
distinguished visitors whom ICCR invites.   According to the Ministry, for this 
purpose, ICCR has evolved a simple questionnaire with ‘yes’ or ‘no’ questions for 
which audience, Artist as well as visiting dignitaries can give their comments very 
briefly.  The Committee while appreciating  the few initiatives taken by the ICCR 
recommend that ICCR should evolve more broad-based and effective 
mechanisms to assess quality and performance of all their major activities so that 
the efficacy of certain existing activiti es can be gauged and improved as also 
more effective and practical schemes/projects in pursuit of cultural diplomacy can 
be put in place. 
 (Para No. 36) 
 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
In addition to the feedback on performance of cultural troupes sent by the 
Council abroad and inviting comments of incoming disti nguished visitors on the 
relevance and efficiency of the progr amme, the Council has also started 
examining relevance, contribution and effe ctiveness of various activities under 
taken by the Indian Cultur al Centres abroad.  The performance report from the 
cultural centers, on periodi c basis, inter alia relates to performance of the 
teaching faculty at the Cultural Centres and outreach programme undertaken by 
them, organization of exhi bitions, seminars, confer ences, film screening and 
book launches as well as maintenance and utilization of library and reading 
facilities. 
 
These reports provide fairly a good idea on quality of performance of 
various activities undertaken by the Council and thus enable it to address the 
deficiencies noticed.  In addition, the C ouncil is also evolving a system of 
performance audit of our Centres at regular intervals. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 

Recommendation  
 
 In reply to a recommendation (1 st Report, 14 th Lok Sabha), the Ministry 
had informed the Committee that multilate ral Economic Relation Division of 
Ministry of External Affa irs has projected Rs. 1.50 cr ore at BE stage for RIS for 
Financial Year 2005-2006.  The Committ ee find that the proposed enhanced 
allocation could not be made in BE 2005-2006 – despite a solemn commitment 
by the Government in this regard to t he Committee.  Viewing this seriously, the 
Committee recommend that RIS shou ld be encouraged wholeheartedly and 
paucity of funds should not be allowed to come in its way. 
(Para No. 37) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The proposed enhanced allocation of Rs. 1.5 crores for RIS will be 
projected at the RE stage.  However, RIS has been advised to also explore 
external financing so that paucity of funds  does not come in the way of the work 
being done by the organization.  
 
As recommended by the esteemed Commi ttee, the allocation for RIS will 
be augmented at the RE stage.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry is making efforts to make Hindi an 
official language of the UN since quite long time, but no headway has been made 
in this regard so far.  The Ministry is furnishing only stereo-type replies to this 
effect.  The Ministry has again informed that a High Level Committee to seek the 
direction in this regard has been formed.   Three meetings of that Committee 
have since been held.  Subsequently the Ministry has taken some follow-up 
action as an assessment report on the procedure, requirement and impediments 
for making Hindi an official language of the UN have been obtained.  Financial 
implications as well as political and diplomatic efforts required are being 
assessed, “Advocacy paper” to present In dia’s case to the Indian Diaspora is 
also being prepared.  The Committee are of the view that  these exercises should 
be undertaken in a focused manner and a time frame should be fixed  to achieve 
this goal.  The Ministry should not leave this matter on its fate. 
 (Para No. 39) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken a few steps to expedite efforts to make Hindi an 
official language of the United Nati ons. The high level Committee already 
constituted on the subject by the External  Affairs Minister under chairmanship of 
Minister of State for Exte rnal Affairs, Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, and comprising 
veterans like Sri Madhukar Rao Choudhary and Dr. Ratnakar Pandey, met on 8 th 
June 2005. A framework of the Advocacy Paper in this  regard, which has now 
been prepared, has been discussed in the Committee’s meeting and suggestions 
in this regard have been invited.  It is  also relevant to mention that the 
Government of India is making effort s to become a permanent member of the 

United Nations Security Council. It is hoped t hat India’s inclusi on in the Security 
Council will also boost our efforts to make Hindi an official language of the UN.   
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that the Indi an Missions/Posts abroad promote and 
assist in the learning Hindi thr ough correspondence courses conducted by 
Central Hindi Directorate.  In 2004-2005, out of 100 slots, only 43 students could 
be admitted from 18 countries to learn Hin di at Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra.  
The Ministry informed that 115 applications were receiv ed in all and 43 students 
out of those were given admissions by the Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra.  
Admissions are allowed by the Sanst han keeping various factors such as 
suitability of the candidates, number of applications received from a particular 
country in comparison to number of slots allotted to it.  Final  decision regarding 
admissions is taken only by Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra.  The Missions have 
been advised to carefully scrutinize the nomi nations and forward the applications 
of the candidates who fulfill t he criteria so that the avai lable slots can be utilized 
to the maximum extent.  Facilities fo r foreign students at the Central Hindi 
Institute, Agra also need to be improved to attract mo re students from abroad.  
The Committee would like to suggest that  the Ministry can request Kendriya 
Hindi Sansthan, Agra to give more admi ssions against the avai lable slots, even 
if, it involves fixing a bit liberal criteria  for the selection of foreign students and at 
the same time, the improvement of facilities to attract more st udents from abroad 
is also suggested so that the availabl e slots can be utilized to the maximum 
extent. 
(Para No. 40) 
Reply of the Government 
 
As directed by the Hon’ble Standing Committee on Extern al Affairs, the 
Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra, has been requested to ensure increased 
admissions against available slots, and at the same time, they have also been 
requested to improve facilities to attrac t more students from abroad so that the 
available slots can be utilized to the maxi mum extent.  As  against 100 slots of 
last year,  this year we have requested 139 slots from the Sansthan.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
  
Recommendation   
 
 The Committee note that the allo cation under this head shows steep 
increasing trend over the years as Rs. 886.73 (BE 2002-03), Rs. 982.07 (BE 
2003-04), Rs. 1158.39 (BE 2004-05) and Rs. 1432.79 crore is allocated in BE 
2005-06, which shows the increase of 10.75%, 19.95% and 23.69 % 
respectively. The reasons furnished by th e Ministry for such enhancement are 
increase in training slots and better utilisat ion and higher anticipated expenditure 
on projects in Indonesia, Cambodia and Yemen. The Mi nistry has stated that 
these programmes generate tremendous amount of goodwill in friendly 
developing countries also further India's political interests in these countries 
thereby strengthening bilateral relations. The popularity of t he training projects 
can be gauged from the fact that the num ber of the foreign nominees attending 
these courses has gone up by nearly 22% in the past two years. The Ministry has 

also stated that some new projects  will be undertaken during the year 2005-06. 
The Committee are of the considered opini on that if these programmes generate 
considerable amount of goodwi ll in friendly developing c ountries and also further 
promote India's politica l and economic interests in these countries and 
strengthen bilateral relations then enhanced allocations under the Head are quite 
justified and the shortage of funds should not be allowed to come in the way. 
(Para No. 41) 
 
 
Reply of the Government.  
 
Indonesia 
 
1. Indonesia is among the largest recipients of training slots under the ITEC 
programme. Over the past three years, a large number of applications were 
received from Indonesian Government nominees. Not only are the slots allocated 
to Indonesia are fully utilized, Embassy of  India, Jakarta have on occasion even 
accommodated additional slots for Indonesian nominees in view of the popularity 
of the ITEC Training programme. Detail s of ITEC allocations for Indonesia 
utilized over the last three years are placed below: 
 
Year Slots Utilized 
2002-03 29 
2003-04 41 
2004-05 78 
 
2. At the first meeting of the India-Indonesia bilateral Joint Commission held 
on 1 September 2003, it wa s announced that the number of ITEC training slots 
for Indonesia would be enhanced to 75. Howe ver, during the current year, the 
number of slots stands reduced to 50. Embassy of India, Jakarta has drawn 
attention of the Technical Cooperation (TC) Division to  the need to maintain the 
commitment already made at the 1
st Joint Commission Meeting. 
 
3. In addition to the ITEC Training, a Vocational Training Centre (VTC) for 
the Construction Sector has been equip ped, installed and  commissioned in 
Jakarta. The VTC was visualized in Ap ril 2002 when a MoU was signed between 
India and Indonesia. It provided for setting up of  a centre to impart training in the 
trades of carpentry, masonry and brick wor ks, steel works, we lding etc.  This 
project was undertaken under ITEC at a co st of Rs. 3.08 cror es ans is being 
implemented by National Sm all Industries Corporati on Limited (NSIC). The 
Indonesian Minister for Public Wo rks formally inaugurated VTC on 10 th May 
2005, when the first batch of Indonesian trainers concluded their training. The 
eight member Indian training team fr om NSIC are currently conducting the 
second training course for Indonesian trai nees at this centre. The Indonesian 
Government has emphasized the importance of this Centre for their Construction 
Sector training. 
 
4. The Embassy of India, Jakarta is holding further consultation with the 
Indonesian Ministry of Public Works regarding future ITEC projects, which can be 
undertaken in Indonesia. It is likely that a project similar to the one just completed 
may eventually be proposed to the Ministry for approval for a regional location 
outside Jakarta i.e. Aceh. 

 
 
 
 
Cambodia 
  
1. The Archaeological Survey of India is currently working on the Ta Prohm 
temple restoration project.  The projec t will entail an projec ted expenditure of 
Rs.19.57 crores  when completed.   
  
2. Cambodia is also to receive 50 ITEC training slots for civilian courses and 
13 for defence courses for the current financ ial year.  During th e last few years, 
Cambodia has been fully utilizing ITEC slots allocated to it. 
 
Undoubtedly, ITEC and SC AAP Programmes of the Mi nistry of External 
Affairs generate considerable amount of goodw ill in friendly developing countries 
and also further promote I ndia’s political and economic  interests and strengthen 
bilateral relations with these countries. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005)   
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee note that in the five audit exercises conducted jointly by 
CAG’s office and Royal audit authorities of Bhutan some 
discrepancies/misappropriations of funds were detected. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of those discrepancies/ misappropriations and the remedial 
measures that have been taken by the bo th Governments in this regard. The 
Committee recommend that the updating of  detailed project report should be 
completed within a time frame and the m odalities of revival of Dungsum Cement 
Plant should be finalised without any further  loss of precious time so that the 
plant is reactivated at the earliest.  The Committee also recommend that major 
Hydro-power Projects in Bhutan should be completed expeditiously. 
 (Para No. 42) 
 
Reply of the Government.  
 
The audit of the Tala Project is conducted annually and settlement of audit 
paras is an ongoing exercise. As most of the outstanding paras pertain to the 
previous audit, the management of the Project is taking  remedial measures and 
keeping the audit authorities informed.  At this stage, there is no major 
discrepancy or misappropriation which has been brought to the notice of the two 
Governments.  
 
A meeting of Dungsum Cement Project Authority (DCP A) was held in 
February 2005. It was decided that the Technical and Economic Feasibility 
Report (TEFR) should be u pdated and the modalities fo r reactivating the project 
discussed thereafter by the two Governm ents. The TEFR is expected to the 
updated by October 2005. It was also decid ed in the meeting of DCPA that the 
approach road in Assam to the project site should be upgraded  on an urgent 
basis. As the approach road has been noti fied as NH 152, Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways has been requested to take urgent necessary steps.    
 

The Tala Hydro-electric Project is pr ogressing well and is expected to be 
commissioned in 2006. The Detailed Projec t Report of Punatsangchu-I will also 
be completed in 2006 and the decision to undertake the project will be taken on 
the basis of recommendations in the DPR and in consultation with Royal 
Government of Bhutan. The DPRs for Punatsangchu-II and Mangdechu Project 
are being initiated shortly.   
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
According to the Ministry Doha Cons truction Project could not take off 
because the local government has decided to shift the site of the plot allocated to 
India to the new diplomatic enclave.  The Head of Mission has taken up the 
matter of allotment of an al ternate plot with the Qatar Government at the highest 
level. The Qatar government has informed t hat a fresh plot in the new diplomatic 
enclave is likely to be allotted to us by mid-2005.  The Committee hope that after 
allotment of fresh plot in new diplomatic enclave, the project will be taken up on 
urgent basis and the Ministry will prepare a comprehensive plan of action for its 
timely completion.  The Committee woul d also like to be  apprised of the 
developments taking place from time to time in this regard. 
 (Para No. 47) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Qatari Government has indicated t hat allotment of new plot would be 
made after completion of on going designing work of the infrastructure of the new 
diplomatic enclave.  The matter is bei ng regularly pursued with the concerned 
Qatari authorities.  Once the new plot is  allotted, Ministry will take necessary 
steps for early commencement of the cons truction project and its completion in a 
timely manner. The Committee will be k ept informed of the developments taking 
place from time to time. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee are constrained to note t hat the construction of Chancery, 
Embassy residences in Tashkent, Muscat, Tehran, Buenos Aires, Istanbul and 
Bahrain are pending since long.  The Commi ttee Expect that with the creation of 
a separate Projects Divis ion headed by a J.S., gr eater impetus would be 
provided    to the construction and acqu isition of properties.  The Committee 
recommend that the Projects Division of the Ministry should sincerely focus their 
efforts on all the pending proj ects and workout a fixed time schedule for the start 
and completion thereof. 
 (Para No. 48) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Construction and acquisition of properti es in the stations named above is 
receiving due attention of the Ministry. The position with regard to each of the 
stations is given below:  

 
Tashkent: The Ministry is in the process of  obtaining financial approval of 
competent authorities for im plementing the project. Afte r financial and local body 
approvals, construction is expected to take two years with another six months for 
interiors. 
Muscat: Tenders are being invited afresh from short-listed contractors and it is 
hoped that work will be awarded by the end of this year after obtaining financial 
approval of the Committee on Non-Plan Expendit ure. The last tender could not 
go through because of the lowest bid amount being higher than the approved 
cost of the project.   
Tehran: Additional funds are being sought to finance pur chase of the Embassy 
Residence.  Parallely, visit of a Proper ty Team is being planned for negotiating 
and finalizing the purchase proposal. 
Buenos Aires : Ministry has approved purchase of a built-up property for 
Chancery.  The draft Sale Deed is under examination of the competent 
authorities. 
Istanbul: Purchase proposals received from the Post in Istanbul were far too 
expensive than the economic cost. The post has been advised to locate 
economically viable alternative properties.  
Bahrain:  A plot of land has been purchased from the Bahraini Government for 
construction of the Chancery. The Mission is  in the process of obtaining the title 
documents. A short-list of architects is being drawn up for conducting a design 
competition. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee note that the Vi desh Bhavan (now known as the 
Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan) is proposed to be constructed on a plot of land 
measuring 7.785 Acres at the junction of Janpath and Maulana Azad Road as 
headquarters of Ministry of External Affairs.  In November 2003, it was decided to 
entrust the project to CPWD for design and execution.  Th e concept design 
prepared by CPWD had been approved by the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and 
the Central Vista Committee at the conc eptual stage with some observation.  
Simultaneously, the project had been app roved from financial angle by the 
Committee for Non-Plan Expendit ure at a cost of Rs. 175.57 crore.  Financial 
approval of the Cabinet was being sought.   CPWD had indicated that the 
construction of the building will take forty months after receipt of the approvals. 
The Committee are of the view that the construction of Videsh Bhavan seems to 
be inordinately delayed.  The Committee would like that this should be expedited 
and the Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
(Para No. 49) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 While awaiting financial approval of t he Cabinet for the Jawaharlal Nehru 
Bhawan project, physical possession of the work site has been handed over to 
the CPWD on May 12, 2005. Funds have been released to CPWD for setting up 
their site office and commencing preliminar y pre-construction activities like soil 
testing, etc. A Core Group of officers wit hin the Ministry has been set up to work 
out the detailed space requi rements of the Ministry. Ministry has been holding 
regular meetings with office rs of the Architectural Wing of CPWD for preparation 

of detailed design development plan for s eeking approval of local bodies.  Note 
for Cabinet, in final form, had been sent to Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Urban 
Development and PMO for their information/comments before submission to 
Cabinet.  The Cabinet has since accorded its financial approval on 25.07.2005. 
          (No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
Recommendation  
  
As far as the matter of Second Dip lomatic Enclave is concerned, the 
Committee note that nothing has materialis ed so far in this regard.  As the 
Ministry is saying repeatedly that, despi te its best intentions of meeting 
requirements of diplomatic Missions in New Delhi, it can only recommend 
allotment of land to Missions, the decision on the allotment of land for the second 
diplomatic enclave rests entirely with the Ministry of Urban Development and 
Poverty Alleviation – the so le decision making authority in this regard.  The 
Committee believe that both the Ministries  are the arms of the Government.  
While they can understand that  both these Ministries mi ght have their own rules 
and  regulations but when the matter is pending between two Ministries of the 
Government,  such a long delay cannot be justified.  The Commi ttee, therefore,  
recommend that both the Ministries should place their respective cases before 
the Prime Minister and wh atever the Prime Minister decides,  should be 
acceptable and binding on both.  However, the  Committee desire that all  these 
pending projects should gain momentum  and be completed.   The Committee 
would like to suggest that before the beginning of each of these projects,  
comprehensive plan of action should be prepared  and  accordingly  
accomplished.  
 (Para No. 50) 
Reply of the Government.  
 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Devel opment has now indicated that the 
option of the Second Diplomatic Enclave at  Sarojini Nagar w ould be difficult in 
view of the lack of space as well as requirement to  change land use from “ 
residential and partly government offices to   partly diplomatic enclave and   
partly residential”. He has s uggested that they would be willing to give up to one 
hundred acres in Dwarka.  
           
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development has also  indicated that there 
are about twenty vacant   plots in Ch anakyapuri available for allotment to 
diplomatic missions. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSRVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN THE VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Ministry has informed the Co mmittee that in order to manage 
expenditure within th e allocation for BE 2005-2006, they have to carry out a 
review of its various commi tments and prioritize them to  meet expenditure within 
the given allocation.  The Ministry has al so requested the Ministry of Finance to 
allocation an additional am ount of Rs. 432.00 crore fo r 2005-2006 to enab le it to 
meet the bilateral commitments, whic h cannot be delayed.  The Committee 
recommends that at the time of forwardi ng Demands of Ministry , it should in the 
first instance have been well explained to the fund allocating Agency (i.e. MoF), 
so that the funds could be obtained as per requirements of the Ministry to enable 
it to meet bilateral commitments of the country in a satisfactory manner. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 While forwarding the Demands for Grants of the Ministry, detailed 
justification is invariably prov ided to the Ministry of Fina nce. Ministry of Finance, 
however, has been giving MEA an overall allocation - duly taking into account the 
previous years’ allocations.  MEA is required to manage within this overall 
allocation. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
During examination of Annual Repor t [2004-2005] of the Ministry, the 
Committee find that 2826 slots under  ITEC and 716 slots and SCAAP 
programme were allotted in 2004- 2005, but only 1819 and 494 trainees 
respectively availed of the slots, whic h, according to the Ministry, is due to 
unforeseen reasons such as administrative requirements, per sonal requirements 
[as ill health, death in family and other  urgent reasons] some of the nominated 
candidates do not utilise the offer resulting in under utilisation of slots.  Some of 
the candidates who have option to choos e between the offers from India and 
other countries do not avail the offer from India.  This results in cancellation in the 
eleventh hour and under-utilisation.  It was also mentioned before the Committee 
that the number of slot s utilised upto end of March 2005 was 1886 under ITEC 
and 535 under SCAAP.  The Mi nistry also informed that  efforts are being made 
to ensure better utilization of allotted slot s in the coming year by upgrading the 
scale of accommodation for the trainees as well as increasing the amount of 
living allowance payable to them during t he period of training  in India.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that a bout 30% slots remained unutililsed 
under both the schemes.  The Committee feel that the Ministry have not able to 
find out any suitable remedy to cope up with this problem.  The Committee, 

therefore, recommend that the Ministry should explor e an effective mechanism 
so that the full utilisation of the allotted slots under these schemes is achieved. 
 (Para No. 43) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
Reasons for under-utilisation of slot s are unforeseen circumstances such 
as administrative requirements of t he ITEC partner countries and personal 
requirements of the trainees.  For instanc e, during the year 2004-05, over 3,600 
sanctions approving training to nominat ed participants were issued and these 
were up to the slots approved for each country.  However, nominated participants 
from some countries such as Tsunami hit countries could not join due to 
requirements in their countries concer ned.  MEA have no control over such 
circumstances.   
 
The other reason for under-utilisation for offered slots is that some of the 
nominated candidates who have the opt ion to choose between the offers 
between India and other countries do not ava il the offers from India, as these are 
considered less attractive as compared to offers made by other countries, 
despite the fact that Indian training cour ses are quality courses.  To cope up with 
this, MEA have taken steps to make the st ay of the trainees more comfortable by 
enhancing the stipend from the present monthly rates of Rs.8,000 for category ‘B’ 
courses and Rs.5,000 for category ‘B’ courses to a uniform rate of Rs.10,000  per 
month.  Proposal to provide better a ccommodation in hotels/hostels has been 
moved and is likely to be implemented shortly after administrative approval.   
 
The training courses and the instituti ons imparting training are constantly 
reviewed in response to the needs.  For the year 2005-06, ov er 20 new training 
courses have been added and 3 new institutions have also been empanelled.    
 
The institutes and all the courses are widely advertised through ITEC 
website and printed booklets which hav e been distributed to Indian Missions 
abroad as well as Missions of ITEC part ner countries located in New Delhi.  
These booklets were also  widely distributed at “2 nd South Summit” in Doha and 
also by PMI, New York.  Indian Missions accredited to ITEC partner countries 
have also been asked to make extra effo rts to widely publicise and ensure full 
utilisation of slots offered to their countri es/countries of accredition.  All ITEC 
trainees are also encouraged to publicise thei r experiences in In dia during their 
training so that the Govern ment and the people in their countries will know more 
about the excellent opportunities available under ITEC/SCAAP programme.   
 
It is hoped that with incr ease in living allowance, better accommodation 
and introduction of new training cour ses and empanellment of three new 
institutes to meet the demands, civilian training slots will be fully utililsed.   
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee note that under IT EC and SCAAP programmes Rs.35.5 
crore was allocated at BE 2004-2005 stage, wh ich was raised to Rs.50.50 crore 
at RE stage.  However, expenditure incurred up to 31  January, 2005 under this 
Head was Rs.38.86 crore, while  the utilisation of allott ed slots was a little more 

than half of the total allotted slots.  Thus, the expenditure incurred as on 31 st 
January 2005 was much high er than the amount alloca ted at BE stage.  The 
Committee find that there was gross un der-estimation of the expenditure for 
these programmes at the BE 2004-2005 st age and the allocation of Rs.50.50 
crore at RE stage was not sufficient had there been full utilisation of the allotted 
slots.  The Committee do not agree with t he reply furnished by the Ministry that 
the estimates more or less correspond to  the expenditure that has been incurred 
during the year. From this, the Committee feel  that the Ministry is only trying to 
justify its under-estimation of funds under this Head.  Accordingly, the Committee 
conclude that the Ministry are presumi ng that slots will remain unutilised, hence 
enhancement in allocation is not required as such.  The Committee recommend 
the Ministry to make all the possible e fforts for full utilisation of slots and 
allocating sufficient funds for that purpose. 
 (Para No. 44)   
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
It is true that the number of training slots offered were usually not fully 
utilised for reasons explained earlier. Keeping the trend in view, the number of 
slots offered the year 2005-06 have been reviewed to bring it nearer to the 
possible utilisation and the number of slots offered is 2,983.  This will help the 
Ministry to better plan and manage the programmes.  Increase in living 
allowance, better accommodation and mo re training courses and empanelment 
of new institutions to broad base the c ourses are the steps taken to enhance the 
utilisation of slots.  For the purpose, a sum of Rs. 45 crore under ITEC and 
Rs.5.5 crore under SCAAP have been allocated in t he year 2005-06,  as 
compared to actual utilisstion of Rs.46.77 crore on providing training in civilian 
and defence courses, projects and deputation of experts under ITEC and Rs.5.28 
crore for training under SCAAP in the year 2004-05.    
 
It may be mentioned that the funds allocated under ITEC are used for 
providing training in civilian and defenc e courses, projects and deputation of 
experts.  Funds allocated under SCAAP are utilised for training in civilian courses 
only.   
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 
The setting up of the Embassy Complex in Brazil is one of the 
conspicuous cases by itself, where in spite of repeated re commendations by the 
Committee for prioritizing the Brazil project and expediting the construction of the 
Embassy premises, the Ministry has not be en able to make any headway and as 
such the idea of having Embas sy Complex in Brazil has not been fructified as 
yet.  The Project has been hanging fire for the last 40 years or so resulting in cost 
escalation from an estimated US $3.37 lakh in 1971 to an estimated US$ 30 lakh 
in 2004.  Besides, huge ex penditure was incurred during all these years on 
payment of rent, which could have been uti lized for construction project in Brazil. 
However, the Ministry, in its reply, hav e once again simply stated in quite a 
routine manner that the la nguage barrier in Brazil ha s been contributing to the 
delay.  The Committee are totally dissati sfied by the reasons advanced by the 
Ministry in this regard.  They are of the firm opinion th at no logical reason could 

stall the project for such a long period,  particularly when the land gifted for the 
project was free from all encumbrances. The Committee would now desire the 
Ministry to prepare a time schedule fo r different stages involved in the 
construction of Embassy building on this plot of land, in itiate all necessary steps 
to complete the project accordingly and keep the Committee apprised of the 
progress made in this regard from time to time. 
 (Para No. 46) 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The cost estimates and design concept provided by the Consultant were 
submitted to the Internal Finance in April 2005 for vetting.  In the course of their 
examination, the latter have pointed out some discrepancies and arithmetical 
inaccuracies in the cost estimates.  In  the design concept also, some deviations 
from the design brief hav e been found.  Mission has been requested to obtain 
necessary clarifications from the Consultant. 
 
2. The time-schedule for completion of the project would be indicated by the 
Consultant at the tender stage.  The Hon’ble Committee will be kept informed of 
the progress in the matter.  
  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSRVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT  HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE  REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
    The Committee note that despite  constructing/acquiring buildings for 
chanceries at 77 stations, residences fo r Head of Missions at 83 stations and 
acquiring 610 residential apartments for other officials at 44 stations, the Ministry 
has not been able to reduce t he rental liabilities so far. Taking into account the 
fact that a large number of buildings have been hired by the Ministry in India and 
abroad, the Committee wonder as to how t he Ministry would be able to reduce 
the rental liability in a substantial way – with limite d plans of construction/ 
acquisition.  While deploring lackadaisi cal approach of the Ministry towards 
acquisition of properties/construction of buildings, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry to draw a comprehensive and time-bound long term plan 
with adequate budgetary support and regular monitoring mechanism in place to 
gradually accommodate all their offices,  Missions, residences in their own 
buildings to be acquired / constructed.  The Committee are of the firm view that 
this will not only save huge rental outgo in the short run but also create assets for 
the country in the long run with the advantage of capital gains. 
 (Para No. 13) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Mindful of the high rental  outgo on buildings hired fo r official as well as 
residential accommodation abro ad, the Ministry had ident ified 18 stations with 
high rental liability. Missions in thes e stations have been r equested to forward 
specific proposals for Ministry’s consider ation. Specific proposals from many of 
the stations are yet to be received because of non-availability of suitable 
properties/long lease of the existing rented premises.   
 
2. As a result of the Ministry’s conc erted efforts, there has been progress in 
acquiring properties in two stations.  Ministry has appr oved purchase of a plot of 
land for Chancery in Bahrain and built-up property for Chancery in Buenos Aires. 
Purchase proposal in respect of Tehran  is under active consideration and 
Ministry proposes to seek supplementary grant  to meet the cost of this proposal, 
as existing budgetary allocation is insuffici ent.  Ministry, in t he current financial 
year, has already approved purchase of a built-up property for Embassy 
Residence in Georgetown and Emba ssy Residence-cum-Chancery in Ulan  
Bataar.   
 
3. With regard to construction projects, construction activity is likely to begin 
in Singapore, Abuja, Muscat and Warsaw in the current financial year.  Some of 
the other projects are in an advanc ed stage of planning and pre-construction 
activity.  
 

4. As for drawing up a comprehensi ve and time bound long term plan with 
adequate budgetary support, it may be mentioned  that given the diverse social, 
political and commercial conditions prevai ling in different countries, a universal 
approach to acquisition of properties is not possible.  Within the constraints noted 
above, it is the endeavour of the Ministry to ensure that  the construction projects 
and acquisition of properties are both fast tracked so as to reduce rental liabilities 
of the Ministry. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee find that the reasons advanced by the Ministry for under 
utilization of funds under the Head Advert ising and Publicity are too general, not 
properly analysed and repetit ive in nature.  The Committee are constrained to 
point out that at the time of examination of demands for Grants of the Ministry for 
the year 2003-2004, the Ministry had cited somewhat similar reasons; stating that 
the expenditure on Advertis ing and Publicity could not be fully made due to 
India’s nuclear tests, the Kargil incursion, IAC hijacking, Gujarat earthquake, 
World Trade Center attacks on September 11 and terrorists attack on Parliament. 
 
The continuous variations in Actual Expenditure vis-a-vis BE/RE over the 
past years establishes the faulty budget estimation and more so , its execution by 
the Ministry. The Committee further find that though the Ministry has stated that it 
has been working in a coordinated manner with various Missions in drawing up 
their publicity plans and regular review is also undertaken to ensure better 
utilization of publicit y budget, yet these efforts have failed to yield the desired 
results; as a result thereof, Ministry ’s publicity plans and budget are going 
haywire. The Committee, therefore, woul d like to recommend the Ministry to 
totally re-orientate its XP Division in pr udently projecting and ensuring utilization 
of the funds allocate to it, so that t he External Publicity, which is the most 
important area of Ministry’s functioning and can be largely instrumental in 
projecting the opportunities available in the country in diverse fields to the outside 
world and in pursuing economic diplom acy, is handled professionally. The 
Committee hope that the Lobbying Firm in United States is functioning 
satisfactorily. They would like to be assured of the same. 
(Para No. 14) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
Over the past few years the Exter nal Publicity Division has indeed re-
oriented its publicity objectives and prioriti es. There is a lot of focus now on 
projecting the rapid strides made by I ndia in areas like economy, S&T, IT, 
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, developmental issues etc besides the important 
role being played by India in world affair s. The opportunities available in various 
sectors in India are also consistently  highlighted in promotional activities 
organized by the Indian Embassies and Missi ons. India is projected as a major 
destination for FDI.  
 
At the Headquarters this emphasis is apparent from the documentaries 
and brochures brought out by the Division. For example, in 2004-05 out of the 15 
documentaries produced 6 were on issues like IT, biotechnology, child labor, 
democracy etc. Similarly, the focus of  publications was pr ojecting India’s 
achievements and its appeal as a land of opportunity.  The Division also invites 

senior foreign journalists on familiarization visits to India. These journalists visit 
various scientific, industrial and academ ic institutions and meet with business 
leaders and senior officials in key areas . Many of them have written extremely 
positive stories on India in foreign newspapers and magazines.   
 
Our Missions are also consciously  making efforts to project the 
opportunities available in India through business semi nars, exhibitions, buyer-
seller meets etc. Most of these activi ties are done in cl ose cooperation with 
business chambers like CII, FICCI etc and have proved to be very successful. 
For example, Indian Embassy Beijing or ganized an India Day in Chengdu, 
Sichuan in May 2005 projecting Indian i ndustry, tourism and India’s cultural 
diversity as a package. An Indian Business Seminar was held as part of the India 
Day with participation of leading Indian companies lik e TCS, Ranbaxy, NIIT etc 
and over 70 Chinese companies.  
 
In light of the Standing Committee recommendat ion the Division has 
renewed its focus on these publicity objective s. In the current financial year two 
publications “India: Partner for Developm ent in the South” and “India-Africa: 
Partners in Peace and Development” hav e already been brought out. More such 
publications on India’s aid to Afghanistan,  India-China Joint Study Group Report 
on Comprehensive Trade and Economic Cooper ation, emerging India etc are 
planned. Documentaries on India’s bilatera l and multilateral economic relations, 
technology applications in rural ar eas, women entrepreneurs etc are also 
planned.  
 
The details of specific economic publ icity activities planned by the 
Missions have also been obtained and the Ministry is ensuring full support for 
these activities.  
 
 
We had engaged a firm M/s Akin Gump St rauss Hauer Feld LLP for the 
purposes of lobbying in the USA. The contract as initially signed by the Embassy 
of India, Washington DC for a period from  February to December 2003 was later 
extended thrice on quarterly basis up to September 2004. T he lobbying firm had 
been rendering its services satisfactorily and the extension of contact was based 
on periodic reviews and recommendations of the Embassy. 
 
However, in September 2004, the cont ract with the firm  was allowed to 
expire in view of the fact that t he US Congress had go ne into a recess till 
January 2005 and US Administration was in volved in Presidential elections 
scheduled for November 2004. This meant t hat there was very limited scope for 
lobbying activity till well after the new  Administration and the new Congress 
returned to work in January 2005. 
 
The Embassy utilized the time so obt ained to undertake a comprehensive 
review of our requirements and changi ng priorities and to undertake a new 
exercise of selecting the lobbying fi rm based on this review. After making due 
assessments, our Ambassador has sent a proposal on 20 May 2005 
recommending appointment of  M/s Barbour, Griffith & Rogers, LLC as our 
lobbyist for a period of one year starti ng from June 1, 2005. The proposal is 
presently under consideration of the Ministry of External Affairs. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 

Recommendation  
 
 The Committee had desired to know as to whether the Indian Missions 
abroad have drawn up any action plans for in tensive publicity campaign during 
the year 2005-2006. In response, the Ministry has given information in respect of 
merely eight Missions only. While going th rough the specific publicity initiatives 
mentioned in respect of thes e eight Missions, the Committee have felt that none 
of these Missions have pr oposed anything specific  and different in their 
initiatives. The usual publicity measur es have only been pr ojected before the 
Committee as specific publicity initiatives- which, in the opinion of the Committee, 
might not have any significant impact in t heir publicity drives or showcase India’s 
interests or achievements to the outsi de world. The Committee are also 
concerned to note that only a small number of Missions are taking some 
initiatives in the matter. 
 (Para No. 15) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the recommendation of the Co mmittee the Action Plans with 
specific publicity initiatives from a si gnificant number of our Missions have been 
obtained. The list of these Missions is as given below: 
 
ACTION PLANS 2005 – 2006 WITH SPECIFIC PUBLICITY 
INITIATIVES FROM INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Mission 
 
1. High Commission of India Accra 
2. Embassy of India Addis Ababa 
3. Embassy of India Almaty 
4. Embassy of India Ankara 
5. Embassy of India Austria (Vienna) 
6. Embassy of India Baku 
7. Embassy of India Bangkok 
8. Embassy of India Belgrade 
9. Embassy of India Bogota 
10. Embassy of India Cairo 
11. Embassy of India Caracas 
12 Embassy of India Copenhagen 
13. Embassy of India Doha 
14. Consulate General of India Durban 
15. Embassy of India Dushanbe 
16. High Commission of India Dhaka 
17. Embassy of India Harare 
18. Embassy of India Kuwait 
19. Embassy of India Lima 
20. Consulate General of India Munich 
21. Consulate General of India Medan 
22. Embassy of India Minsk 
23. Embassy of India Moscow 

24. High Commission of India Nairobi 
25. High Commission of India Lagos 
26. Consulate General of India Osaka Kobe 
27. High Commission of India Ottawa 
28. Embassy of India Panama 
29. Embassy of India Phnom Penh 
30. High Commission of India Port Moresby 
31. Embassy of India Riyadh 
32. Consulate General of India Shanghai 
33. Consulate General of India St. Petersburg 
34. Embassy of India Thimpu 
35. Embassy of India Tokyo 
36. Consulate General of India Vladivostok 
37. High Commission of India Windhoek 
38. Embassy of India Yangon 
39. Embassy of India Phnom Penh 
40. Embassy of India Paramaribo 
41. Embassy of India Yerevan 
 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry may obtain information 
regarding specific publicity initiatives from all our Missions for the current fiscal. 
The Committee would like to be informed about details of specific publicity action 
Plans, if any, drawn up by our Missions in the economically  and strategically 
important countries for India and also funds earmarked for such publicity drives. 
(Para No. 16) 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As mentioned above the Action  Plans with specific p ublicity initiatives of 
some of our Missions are placed above (See Reply of Para 15). These also 
include specific plans drawn up by our Missions in so me of the economically and 
strategically important countries alon gwith the funds earmarked for these 
activities.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
   The Committee express their concern over the fact that 16 Passport 
Offices namely Bhubaneswar, Bangalore, Bhopal, Guwahati, Jalandhar, Jammu, 
Jaipur, Lucknow, Mumbai, Pune, Ranchi , Trichy, Surat, Thiruvananthapuram, 
Thane and Vishakapatnam, are still function ing in the rented buildings involving 
annual rental outgo of Rs. 3.60 crore.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to chalk out a comprehensive plan to either acquire suitable properties or 
to take up the matter with the respective State Governments for early allotment of 
suitable land for the construction of rema ining passport offices as well as the 
residential complexes on priority basis. 

(Para No. 23) 
 
Reply of the Government.  
 
 Construction of new Passport prem ises is underway in Lucknow and 
Bangalore. Recently, Ministry has procur ed a plot of land for construction of 
owned premises in Mum bai. In Bhubaneshwar, the drawings and financial 
estimates have been approved. CPWD has gi ven a time-frame of two years for 
construction of the building. In Jaipur , the Jaipur Devel opment Authority has 
been requested to expedite the approval of the dra wings. In Guwahati, the 
mutation of the land in Ministry’s name is expected to be completed shortly. 
Jallandhar has submitted a pr oposal for procurement of  land on auction basis. 
The State Government has been requested to give us the land at the reserve 
price and not through the process of auction.  
 
 Once the ongoing construction projects are completed, the rental liability 
on account of Passport Offices will come down substantially from the figure of Rs 
3.6 crore annually.   
 
 Effectively, eight Passport Office s have not sent us any concrete 
proposals. These eight offices are: Bhopal, Pune, Ranchi, Surat, Trichy, 
Trivandrum, Thane and Vizag. These offi ces have been separately instructed to 
get in touch with the concerned State authorities and send us concrete proposals 
to this effect.  
        (No.AA/125/Parl /38/2005 dated July 26, 2005)  
 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee had expressed thei r unhappiness over the fact that 
although the Chief Minister, Assam had offer ed a plot of land free of cost to 
construct the building for the Passport Office, Guwahati but nothing has been 
done so far and the Passport Office, Guwahati is still functioning in a rented 
building.  The Committee feel that the Ministry should have pursued the matter at 
the highest level in righ t earnest which in their c onsidered opinion has not been 
done.  The Committee would like to stre ss upon the fact that since the Passport 
Office, Guwahati, which is catering to the need of all seven North-Eastern States, 
is facing extreme space shortage, urgent action is required to construct a new 
building for it.  The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to expedite the 
examination of the proposal in hand for an early action in the matter. 
 (Para No. 24) 
Reply of the Government.  
 
 The Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup has  been requested to personally 
intervene in this matter. The matter is expected to be resolved shortly. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005)  

 
Recommendation  
 As regards inadequacy of staff, t he Committee urge upon the Central 
Passport Organisation to fill up the vacant posts immediately particularly those at 
the operational and first supervisory levels.  The Committee also suggest that 
pending formal selection of staff and also  to meet sudden increase in the 
workload, the RPOs/POs may be vested  with necessary administrative and 
financial powers to recruit qualified tempor ary staff in clerical and messengerial 
grades on daily wages through the local employment exchanges.  The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to have a fresh look at the Cadre of the CPO 
in view of the increase in the workload in various RPOs across the country.  
However, as a temporary measure, the Committee would suggest that the 
Ministry should firm up a transfer policy fo r utilizing the existing staff whereby the 
surplus staff in certain RPOs can be tr ansferred to those RPOs where there is 
shortage. 
(Para No. 26) 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A work-study by the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance is 
underway in Passport Offices to decide upon the quantum of augmentation of 
staff at various levels in Passport Offices. Once this exercise is completed, 
additional staff will be made available to Passport Offices. The exercise of Cadre 
Review can be carried out once the study is  completed. Ministry is also exploring 
the possibility of outsourcing the services of data entry operators to tide over the 
shortage of staff. Due to the existing GoI rules and regulations, additional Casual 
Workers cannot be engaged in Passport Offices.   
 
 To meet the immediate staff shor tage, Ministry has prepared a proposal 
for outsourcing of manpower to carry out s pecific tasks in Passport Offices. The 
proposal has been examined by the Internal  Finance Division of the Ministry 
which has suggested certain changes. The same have been noted and the 
proposal is being resubmitted. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee also observed that a num ber of posts are lying vacant in 
various Passport Offices. Also, Passport Offices at least in Capital Cities of 
Uttranchal, Chattisgarh and Himachal Pradesh could not be opened due to 
shortage of staff.  Keeping in view the in creasing work load in various Passport 
Offices, the Committee desire that necessary steps be taken to fill up the vacant 
posts and also to create new posts at supervisory levels at the earliest so that the 
new Passport Offices could become oper ational soon and the increased work 
load could be reduced.  The Committee al so desire that the Ministry may 
consider the feasibility of opening of Pa ssport Office at Agra also for the 
convenience of applicants from various districts of U.P. such as  Firozabad, Etah, 
Mathura, Aligarh, Hathras, Jhansi, Lalitpur, Mohaba, Hamirpur and Banda. 
(Para No. 27) 
 

Reply of the Government. 
 
 Opening of Passport Offices in the state capitals of Uttranchal, Chattisgarh 
and Himachal Pradesh will be carried out onl y after an augmentation of the staff 
strength in the Central Pa ssport Organisation. As regards opening of a Passport 
Office at Agra, a study of the existing workload will need to be carried out. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
 
 The Committee note that with joining of kathak and Tabla Teacher, the 
Cultural Center in Suva has started functioning from  the Embassy Premises in 
February, 2005.  The Committee also note  that, classes are being conducted at 
the Fiji India Cultural Centre, Indi an College and the MGM High School and the 
Yoga Teacher designate for the sub-center at Lautoka is ex pected to join in May, 
2005.  The Committee feel that  the progress made so far is not sufficient.  Even 
after taking such a long time the Ministry is not in a position to say till date that 
task has been accomplished.  Therefor e, the Committee recommend that 
remaining formalities regarding Cultural  Centres Suva and Lautoka should be 
completed in a fixed time schedule.  The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry should process the already pending proposals with it to open up Cultural 
Centers in Beijing, Tokyo, Tehran and Kathmandu at the earliest. 
(Para No. 35) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
The Cultural Centre in Suva has started operating fr om the Embassy 
premises in February 2005.  Kathak and Tabla teachers have already joined the 
Cultural Centre and start ed regular classes.  The Yoga Teacher for the Sub-
Center at Lautoka has also joined in Ma y 2005.  While the residences for all the 
teachers have been secured, the Mission’s  proposal for hiring premises for the 
Cultural Centre in Suva  along with the Council’s recommendations are under 
consideration of the Ministry.  
 
The Mission in Tokyo has been advised to  start the Cultur al Centre from 
the Embassy premises and the Council proposes to open the Centre by deputing 
a Yoga Teacher.  Further ex pansion will be taken up  when Mission locates a 
suitable premises.   
 
The new Cultural Centres at Be ijing, Tehran and Kathmandu will be 
opened subject to the allocation of r equisite additional posts and budgetary 
resources. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee note that the Minist ry had earlier stated that the works 
related to Sapru House will be complet ed in financial year 2004-2005, but the 
same has not been completed so far. On  the question of formation of “Governing 

Body” of the Council, the Ministry inform ed the Committee that the activities of 
the ICWA have not been affected adversely but the formation of the Governing 
Body could facilitate the demands for enhanced funding of ICWA activities and 
research. The Committee is of the view  that without the Governing Body, no 
institution can function effectively for want of proper direct ion. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Governin g Body of the Council should be 
constituted without further delay, so that  the responsibilities entrusted upon the 
Council can be fulfilled witho ut any constraints. The Committee also recommend 
that necessary renovation work in Sapr u House should be co mpleted by the end 
of May 2005.  
(Para No. 38) 
Reply of the Government.  
 
 Ministry has initiated action to constitute the Governing Body of the 
Council. The Ministry is confident this will be completed in due course of time and 
the Governing Body will be in place before the end of the current financial year 
2005-2006. 
  The renovation of the Sapru House is an ongoing process. Major repairs 
and related civil works in the main bui lding has been completed by end May 
2005. In the current financia l year, the main building will be re-painted and given 
a face-lift. In addition, the annex to Sapru Ho use will undergo repairs and related 
civil works. Subject to availability of  funds, the work will be completed by end 
March 2006. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee going by the percentage variation figure over the last three 
years, note that there is a steep negative variation i.e. to the tune of Rs. 26.56% 
and 40% respectively under the Major Heads 4059 and 4216.   The Ministry has 
informed the Committee that based on  the progress of various ongoing 
construction projects and likely acquisition of properties abr oad, Ministry had 
sought an allocation of Rs. 80 crore under MH  4059 and Rs. 30 crore under MH 
4216 in its proposal to Ministry of Finance for BE 2005-2006.   In view of the 
budgetary allocation agreed to by  the Ministry of Financ e being less than what 
was projected by MEA and taking note of other pressing requirements, capital 
outlay for public works (Major Head 4059)  was kept at Rs. 51.41 crore and 
Capital Outlay for Housing (Major Head 4 216) at Rs. 15 crore.  In fact, the 
projected BE 2005-2006 figures of the Ministry represented a positive variation of 
14.29% under MH 4059 and of 20% under Major Head 4216 vis-à-vis BE 2004-
2005 allocation. The Committee are not convinced with the reply furnished by the 
Ministry that projected BE 2005-2006 figurers of Ministry represented variation of 
14.29% under Major Head 4059 and of 20% under Major Head 4216 vis-à-vis BE 
2004-2005 allocation.   In the opinion of  the Committee, if projected amount 
could not be obtained, it serves no purpos e just to say that there was a positive 
variation under these Heads.  The Committee feel that the Ministry perhaps could 
not project their requirements properly, as a result of which, the required amount 
could not be obtained.  T he Committee, therefore, des ire that while securing 
funds under particular Heads, proper justification should be given before the fund 
allocating authority so that the desired funds can be obtained at a right time. 
 

(Para No. 45) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Proper justification was provided  for seeking an enhanced budgetary 
allocation under major heads 4059 and 4216 for the financial year 2005-06.  
However, since the overall approved bud getary allocation for the Ministry was 
lower than the projected fi gures, allocation under Capital Outlay was accordingly 
reduced. In fact, insufficiency of funds under  Capital Outlay is proving to be a 
hindrance in pursuing some of the acquisition projects, which are under active 
consideration of the Ministry.  Ministry  proposes to seek additional funds under 
Major Head 4059 and Major Head 4216 through supplementary grant.   
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSRVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation  
 
 The Committee, during their study visi ts to various Passport Offices, have 
noted with concern the plight  of a large number of ca sual labourers employed 
there.  The casual labourers working there for the last several years have been 
entrusted with various kinds of jobs but their requests for the regularisation of 
their services have not been considered fa vourably so far.  The Committee, 
however, find that the Ministry had regularized the services of 34 casual labouers 
and 139 casual labourers were given temporary status but about 200 casual 
labourers still remain to be regularized.  The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government that priority may be given to regularize the serv ices of remaining 
200 casual labourers as and when the permanent vacancies under Group ‘C’ and 
Group ‘D’ fall vacant. 
(Para No. 31) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
 The existing Government rules do not  allow for regularization of Casual 
Workers against vacant Group C posts. R egularisation against vacant Group D 
posts is permitted. However, there are ve ry few such vacant posts available due 
to which this process will take some time. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The Committee note that “Advisory Co mmittees” for Regional offices in 
Jaipur and Mumbai have been constituted and first meeting of these Advisory 
Committees will be held soon.  The Co mmittee are not satisfied with the 
constitution of only two Advisory Co mmittees and hope that similar Committees 
for the remaining Regional offices will be constituted shortly.  The Committee 
recommend that the creation of posts, which is necessary for opening of new 
Regional offices should be proc essed without losing any further further time and 
Regional centers at Bhopal, Bhubaneswar and North-eastern Region, which had 
already been proposed to be opened, shou ld be opened on top pr iority basis in 
order to remove the regional imbalances. 
(Para No. 33) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The meeting of the Advisory Committ ees for Regional Offices in Jaipur 
and Mumbai have not been held.  Action for the constitution of Advisory 
Committees for other Regional Offices has been initiated.  
 

 The Council has alr eady moved a proposal for creation of new post s 
which are necessary for opening of new Re gional Offices.  In response, Ministry 
of Finance have sought clarifications regar ding cad re structure of the C ouncil.  
Necessary information will shortly be furnished to the Ministry of Finance.  
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
Recommendation  
 
 So far as the question of setting up of  a Cultural Centre in Washington is  
concerned, the Committee express its unhappi ness over the fact that at leas t on 
five occasions in the past, opportunities have been allowed to slip out of hands 
due to lac k of will on  the part of Ministry .  Now, as a new pro posal has since  
emerged, the Ministry should seize this opportunity firmly so that the project 
regarding the opening of Cultural Center can be realized. 
(Para No. 34) 
 
Reply of the Government. 
 
The latest proposal of the Mission for purchase of a pr operty to serve as  
the Cultural Centre is  under  active cons ideration of the Ministry. Views of the 
user agen cy, namely, ICCR ha ve been s ought.  Th e proposal has also bee n 
examined by the Ministry’s Technical Cell.  Issues raised by ICCR and Tec hnical 
Cell have been conv eyed to the Mission for seeking clarifications and als o for 
confirmation of the suitability of location of the building from point of view of  
holding lar ge-scale public  functions and non-availab ility of dedicated park ing 
area.  Mission has also been requested to c onfirm the likely cost of repair and 
renovation of the building presently being used as a Church, to get an idea of the 
total financial implication involved.  Bas ed on the Mis sion’s feedback, visit of a 
Property Team would be planned to examine the proposal from various angles. 
(No.AA/125/Parl/38/2005 dated July 26, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)          Standing Committee on External 
Affairs  
 

Appendix I 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 12th December, 2005  
  
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri Vinod Khanna 
5. Shri Dinsha Patel 
6. Shri Sebastian Paul 
7. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
8. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
9. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
II. Rajya Sabha 
10. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
11. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K 
12. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri U.S. Saxena - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 8 th Action Taken 
Report on the recommendations contained in the 7 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External for the year 
2005-2006. The Chairman invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, 
for incorporation in the draft Report.  The Members offered minor modifications. 
 
 
4. XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   

 
5. The Committee desired that modifications suggested by the Members be 
suitably incorporated in the body of the Report. 
 
6.  The Committee then adopted the dr aft Action Taken Reports and 
authorized the Chairman to finalise the Action Taken Reports and present 
the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 

Appendix II 
 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE SEVENTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations     50 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 
Para  Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,17,18,19,20,21,22,25, 
28,29,30,32,36,37,39,40,41,42,47,48,49 and 50   
   
T o t a l           3 2  
Percentage                   64% 
 
 
 III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government replies. 
 
Para Nos. 10,43,44 and 46 
I I I .  T o t a l         
  04 
Percentage                   8% 
 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration. 
 
Para Nos. 13.14,15,16,23,24,26,27, 35,38 and 45 
Total          11 
P e r c e n t a g e                   2 2 %  
 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government 
are still awaited. 
 
Para Nos.  31, 33 and 34  
T o t a l           0 3  
Percentage                   6% 

Appendix-III 
 
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Ministry Observations/Recommendations 
1. 9 External Affairs The Committee are not at all convinced with the 
justification given by the Ministry for not drawing 
up a comprehensive and time-bound 
programme with adequate budgetary support for 
acquiring properties abroad with an objective to 
reduce the rental liabilities on account of 
buildings hired for official as well as residential 
accommodations abroad.  They have identified 
18 stations with high rental liability but, they 
have not shown the desired determination to 
purchase/acquire properties on these stations.  
The Committee welcome the recent initiatives 
taken in the direction of  acquiring properties at 
some stations and desire that the Government 
should take initiatives for an early acquisition of 
properties for Chancery in Bahrain and 
Chancery in Buenos Aires and Tehran and also 
the approved proposals for Embassy Residence 
in Georgetown and Embassy Residence-Cum-
Chancery in Ulan Bator.  The Committee also 
desire that construction activities in Singapore, 
Abuja, Muscat and Warsaw should start at the 
earliest for a timely completion of these projects.  
The Committee once again desire that the 
Ministry should prepare a comprehensive and 
time-bound short term plan for 18 identified 
stations with high rental liability followed by a 
long term plan for all other stations considering 
all the factors like diverse social, political and 
commercial conditions prevailing in those 
countries.  The Committee are of the view that 
without any long-term plan and proper 
monitoring, they may not be able to 
accommodate all their offices, missions, and 
residences in their own buildings. 
2. 20 External Affairs The Committee are happy to note that the 
Ministry has reoriented its publicity objectives 
and priorities in the light of recommendation of 

the Committee and they have taken some 
praiseworthy initiatives in this direction. The 
Committee hope that these new initiatives in the 
form of publications and documentaries will help 
in projecting India as preferred destination for 
FDI in future.  The Committee however note that 
while preparing such publicity materials, the 
Ministry has been adopting macro-level 
approaches incorporating only general types of 
issues. The committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should adopt a micro-level approach 
and try to incorporate and highlight the specific 
issues relating to the concern countries which 
could be resolved with the help of Indian 
Government. The Committee once again desire 
that the Ministry should continue similar efforts 
by utilizing the funds allo cated for this purpose 
professionally. The Committee have noted that 
due to presidential elections, there was very 
limited scope for lobbying activity in USA  till 
new Congress returned to work in January, 
2005. So, the contract with the new firm was 
allowed to expire. The Committee also note that 
the new proposal sent by our Ambassador for 
appointment of lobbying firm is under 
consideration of the Ministry. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all formalities 
regarding appointment of the lobbying firm 
should be completed without any further delay 
and the Committee may be apprised of the 
latest position in this regard. 
3. 25 External Affairs The Committee had categorically desired to be 
informed about the details of specific publicity 
plan drawn up by our missions in the 
economically and strategically important 
countries for India and also funds earmarked for 
such publicity drives. But surprisingly the 
Ministry has not been able to furnish the 
relevant information.  The Committee are 
anguished to note such a casual approach of 
the Ministry and desire t hat the details of the 
action plan with specific  publicity initiatives may 

be obtained from our missions including funds 
earmarked for each such publicity drive and the 
action taken thereon may be furnished to the 
Committee without hiding any facts. 
4. 31-32 External Affairs The Committee are really surprised to note that 
no significant progress has been made during 
the last several years regarding construction of 
the Passport Office premises at various 
Passport Offices and the Ministry has been 
furnishing more or less same stereo type replies 
for the last 2-3 years.  Rent liability on these 
offices has been increasing continuously. The 
Committee have repeatedly been asking the 
Ministry to chalk out a comprehensive plan to 
either acquire suitable properties and to take up 
the matter with the respective State 
Governments for an early allotment of suitable 
land for construction of Passport Offices as well 
as the residential complexes on priority basis.  
But, the Ministry has so far not taken any 
concrete initiative in th is direction and has left 
the matter to the respective passport offices.  
The Committee, therefore,  strongly criticize the 
approach of the Ministry  and reiterate that the 
Ministry should now come up with a 
comprehensive plan of action to complete the 
projects in hand in the shortest possible time 
and persuade the remaining eight Passport 
Offices/State Governments who have not 
submitted any concrete proposal for 
constructing their own premises in a time-bound 
manner.   
The Committee are anguished to note the 
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in 
resolving the matter relating to construction of 
building for Guwahati Passport Office.  The 
Committee, therefore, stro ngly reiterate that the 
Ministry should take a ll initiatives for an early 
construction of the building for Passport Office, 
Guwahati in consulation with the State 
Government and apprise the Committee about 
the latest position in this regard. 

5. 36 External Affairs The Committee apprehend that the proposed  
work study by the staff Inspection Unit of the 
Ministry of Finance may take their own time.  In 
view of the reply given by the Ministry, it seems 
that this process may take more time, therefore, 
the Ministry has taken initiatives for outsourcing 
the manpower for Passport Offices.  The 
Committee are of the view that passport making 
process is a very sensitive matter and 
outsourcing of it may not be in national interest. 
The Committee feel that in this process, there is 
the possibility of sensitive information furnished 
by applicants being misused by anti social 
elements or even touts ca n exploit the condition 
easily.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that in view of sensitivity of the matter, the 
Ministry of External Affairs should undertake the 
matter at the highest level for an early 
completion of the work study by the Staff 
Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance.   
 
6. 39 External Affairs The Committee observe that the Ministry of 
External Affairs have not informed about the 
stage of the process of augmentation of staff 
strength in Central Passport Organisation and 
the time frame fixed for completion of work in 
this regard.  Establishing of Passport Offices in 
the State Capitals of Uttranchal, Chattisgarh and 
Himachal Pradesh related to large number of 
people residing in tough hilly and poorly 
connected areas of these States.  The 
Committee, therefore, desi re that the Ministry 
should persuade the augmentation of staff 
strength process for its early completion and 
simultaneously if there is any possibility of 
taking more time in this regard, they must start 
these Passport Offices by arranging small 
number of staff from other offices without any 
further delay.  The Committee also reiterate that 
the Government should undertake study of 
existing workload for opening office at Agra on 
priority basis. 

 
7. 42 External Affairs The Committee observe that there are 
limitations of the Ministry to regularize the 
services of casual labourers.  However, they find 
that the Ministry are showing their reluctance in 
regularizing the casual workers even if there is 
an availability of vacancy.  The Committee note 
that there are some vacant posts, but, the 
Ministry has not taken any initiative to absorb 
casual workers against these posts.  The 
Committee, therefore, de sire that a system 
should be developed so that as soon as any 
vacancy arises in Group ‘D’, the casual 
labourers are immediately regularized against it. 
 
 
8. 46 External Affairs The Committee are surprised to note that after 
the constitution of Advisory Committees for 
Regional Offices of ICCR in Jaipur and Mumbai, 
not a single meeting has been held so far.  The 
Committee desire that these Committees should 
meet at regular intervals for  better fulfillment of 
objectives for establishing these Committees.  
The Committee do not favour the slow progress 
in constituting Advisory Committees for other 
Regional Offices and desire that this should be 
expedited and completed at the earliest. 
 
9. 49 External Affairs The Committee are happy to note that the long 
pending proposal for setting up of a Cultural 
Centre in Washington is now moving in a 
positive direction.  The Committee desire that 
the Ministry of External Affairs should utilize this 
opportunity and they should not create any 
administrative and financial hurdle at any stage 
of setting up of this dream project. 
 
10. 54 External Affairs The Committee find that some fresh initiatives 
have been taken by the Ministry to establish 
Cultural Centre in Suva.  But, the proposal for 
hiring premises for Cultural Centre is still 
pending with the Ministry.  The Committee 

desire that the proposal should be approved 
without any further delay so that a well 
established Centre may start working there.  
The Committee desire that Tokyo Centre should 
also start working from the embassy and search 
of site for their own premises should also be 
completed at the earliest.  The Committee 
expect a positive approach from the Ministry in 
the direction of setting up of new Cultural 
Cenrtes in Beijing, Tehran and Kathmandu and 
desire that they must come with concrete 
proposals to obtain sufficient funds during 
supplementary Demands for Grants stage and 
start the work after obtaining the desired fund. 
11. 58 External Affairs The Committee do not find any justification for 
such an inordinate delay in formation of 
Governing Body of ICWA which is now 
proposed to be completed before the end of this 
financial year.  The Committee do not 
understand as to how can the Ministry expect 
the Council to fulfill their responsibilit y entrusted 
to them by the Government under such 
circumstances.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should not wait for the 
financial year to end, rather they should take all 
initiatives to constitute the Governing Body of 
ICWA without any further delay.  The Committee 
also desire that the Ministry should also ensure 
the completion of renovation work of Sapru 
House without any financial constraints by the 
end of current financial year.  
 
12. 61 External Affairs The Commi ttee observe that the approved 
budgetary allocation for the Ministry of External 
Affairs was lower than the projected figures.  
This lower allocation is proving to be hindrance 
in pursuing some important acquisition projects 
of the Ministry.  The Committee feel that these 
projects are very important and these should not 
be delayed due to non-availability of funds.  The 
Committee, therefore, desi re that the Ministry 
should try to get sufficient funds for these 

projects and other important projects through 
supplementary Demands for Grants.  For this 
purpose, the matter should be undertaken at the 
highest level with proper justification. 
 
  
13. 64 External Affairs The Committee are happy to note that the 
Cabinet has given approval for the Jawahar Lal 
Nehru Bhawan Project.  Now, there is no hurdle 
in actual implementation of the project.  The 
Committee now hope that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should ma ke all possible efforts 
to complete the project in proposed forty 
months’ period. 
 
 
 