 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2005-2006) 
 
                                  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  9 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
(Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the sixth 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 2005-2006)    
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2005/ Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
(2005-2006) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
(Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the sixth Report (14th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs for the 
year 2005-2006) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2005 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2005/ Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COEA NO.53  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Proc edure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2005-2006  
   
INTRODUCTION         
      
CHAPTER I.  Report 
 
CHAPTER II.  Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III. Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which the replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
CHAPTER V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which the final replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on  
12th December, 2005  
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
 Recommendations contained in the 6th  Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(14th Lok Sabha) 
 
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2005-2006) 
Chairman 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Omar Abdullah 
3 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
4. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigoudar 
7. Shri Vinod Khanna 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
9. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
11. Shri Dinsha Patel 
12. Shri Somabhai Patel 
13. Shri Sebastian Paul 
14. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
15. Shri P.A. Sangma* 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada  
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
20. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
21. Shri George Fernandes 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. K. Maheshwari 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Dr. Karan Singh 
25. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
26. Shri Arun Shourie 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
29. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
30. Shri Fali S. Nariman** 
31. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri John  Joseph  - Secretary 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri U.S.Saxena  - Director 
Shri Ram Raj Rai  - Under Secretary 
Shri Lalkithang  - Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee conse quent upon his resignation from his seat from Lok 
Sabha w.e.f. 10.10.2005. 
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee consequent upon his retirement from the membership of 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.11.2005. 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Com mittee on External Affairs having been 
authorised by the Committee to  submit the report on thei r behalf, present this 9th 
Report (14 th Lok  Sabha) on action tak en by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the 6th Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of  Overseas Indian Affairs for the year 
2005-2006. 
2. The 6th Report was presented to both th e Houses of  Parliament on 26 th 
April, 2005. The Action Tak en Repl ies of the  Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 5 th 
September, 2005.    
3. The Draft Report on the basis of Action Taken Replies was considered 
and adopted by the Standing  Committee on External A ffairs (2005-2006) at their 
sitting held on 12 th December, 2005.  Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
have been reproduced as Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the ac tion taken by  Government on the recommendatio ns 
contained in the 6 th Report of the Standing Commi ttee on External Affairs (14 th 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
               
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                               Dr. 
Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                 Chairman, 
December, 2005/ Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)               Standing Committee on External Affairs  
 
 
(v) 
 
 
 

 8
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 6 th Report of Standing Committee on 
External Affairs on Demands for Grants for the year 2005-2006 in respect of the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs.  The 6 th Report of the Committee was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 26th April, 2005. 
2. Action taken notes have been received from  the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs on all the observations/recommendat ions contained in the report except 
Recommendation No. 4 on which the final replie s of the Government are still awaited.  
These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, whic h have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Nos.  1, 3, 5, 6, 12 and 13 
Total-06 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations wh ich the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
No. 10 
Total-01 
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Nos. 2, 7, 8, 9 and 11  
Total-05 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in r espect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Nos.  4  
Total-01 

 9
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in 
any case not later than three months of the presentation of the Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal  with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their observations/recommendations. 
 
A. Secretariat /Work Allocation  
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
5. During the examination of the Dem ands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the year  2005-2006, the Committee had noted that 
almost a year after the creation of the Ministry, a full complement of Staff and a 
full-fledged secretariat was yet to be put in  place.  While referring the assurance 
given by the Secretary, Mini stry of Overseas Indian A ffairs during the course of 
evidence, the Committee had desired that creation of posts in the Ministry should 
be completed within three months as has  been assured by the.  They had felt 
that there was an urgent need to speed up creation of posts particularly in the 
wake of the new work allocation to the Ministry. 
 
The Committee had also observed that the Overseas Indians had great 
expectations after the creation of an in dependent Ministry dealing with the affairs 
concerning them.  The Minist ry must, therefore, make a ll efforts to interact with 
the Overseas Indian Community and ad dress their concerns which should 
properly reflect in the vision and objective s of the Ministry.  The Committee felt 
that this will be possible only when a full complement of staff to work in the 
Ministry is put in place. 

 10
 
 
6. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
 
“With the approval of  Cabinet, 63 posts have already been created 
for the Secretariat of MOIA.  Acti on has been initiated to fill these 
posts.  Proposals to create certai n additional posts are under the 
consideration of the Committee of Secretaries.”  
 
 
7. The Committee are concerned over the inordinate delay by the 
Ministry in putting in place a full comple ment of staff.  The Committee also 
find that the 63 posts that have alread y been created, are not adequate and 
a proposal to create certain additional posts is under consideration of the 
Committee of Secretaries.  The Committee understand that the Ministry has 
come up with a wide range of proposal s/programmes for the welfare of the 
overseas Indians which cannot be taken up unless there is sufficient 
number of officials to implement them . The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Ministry should fill up the already created posts without any further 
delay.  Simultaneously, they should expedite the proposal for creation of 
more posts as per their requirement so that the Ministry can start 
delivering the goods with a well-established Secretariat.   
 
B. Recruiting Agents/Registration Certificates/Emigration  
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
8. The Committee had learnt that a large number of Re cruiting Agents 
published attractive advertisements stati ng that they would provide suitable 
employment to labourers abroad particularl y in the Gulf countries and extracted 
huge sums of money from the aspiring job seekers.  After taking them to the 

 11
countries of their employment, the problem of such poor job seekers started from 
the airport itself where it was found that most of them had bogus entries. Further, 
those labourers were not paid their sala ry as per the promises made in the 
advertisements and they were forced to  work in most unhygienic and pathetic 
living conditions.  Some of them were  even jailed on trumped up charges/petty 
offences for years together.  The Committ ee were concerned about the plight of 
these labourers and had felt  that the issue needed to be addressed in a focused 
manner.  The Committee had recommended that  the Ministry should take up the 
issue of fraudulent advertisements.  They had further desired that the Ministry 
should also take up cases involving breac h of contract enter ed into between the 
employer and employees.  To deal with the cases in volving woman employees 
who constitute the vulnerable secti on of the society, the Committee had 
recommended that woman officers should be designated in the outposts as far 
as possible.   
 
The Committee had also desired that t he Ministry’s proposal to streamline 
emigration by re-engineering the whole process, introducing IT based solutions, 
bringing in smart cards etc. should be pursued with all the seriousness it 
deserves.      
 
9. The Ministry in their reply responded as under: 
“Semiconductor Complex Ltd. (SCL ), Punjab – a Government of 
India enterprise – has proposed an IT-based solution for emigration 
clearance. The proposal env isages establishing IT infrastructure at 
the Office of Protector-General of  Emigrants and offices of the 
Protectors of Emigrant s and providing tamper proof “Smart Cards” 
to the emigrants. The Smart Cards will have adequate data storage 
capacity to carry personal informa tion of the emigrants and details 
regarding employer, visa particula rs, Recruiting Agent’s details, 
POE office clearance number, insurance details, blood 
group/allergies etc. Essential security  features will also be built into 

 12
the Smart Card so that it is ta mper proof and cannot be duplicated. 
The responsibility of providing in surance covers to emigrants will 
also be undertaken by the SCL.  The proposal is being examined in 
consultation with the Department of Information Technology, 
Department of Space, Bureau of Immigration and the Integrated 
Finance Division.  
Taking into account the vul nerability of women and on the 
recommendation of the Nati onal Commission for Women, 
instructions were issued on 20. 11.2003 to all the Protectors of 
Emigrants for not grant ing emigration clearance to women below 
the age of thirty years intending to go to any foreign country for 
employment as housemaids/domestic workers.  In such cases, the 
employment contract is required to be mandatorily attested by the 
concerned Indian Mission.”  
10. The Committee are happy to note th at SCL, Punjab – a Govt. of India 
Enterprise has developed an IT-based  solution for emigration clearance 
and it is being examined by the Go vernment.  The Committee hope that 
introduction of such programme will go a long way in solving many of the 
problems related to emigration.  The Committee, therefore, strongly desire 
that the examination of this progra mme should be expedited and after 
approval of the same or revised pr oposal, an early implementation should 
be ensured.  The Committee are, how ever, concerned about the silence of 
the Ministry on the issue of controlling/containing fraudulent 
advertisements being made/published by a large number of Recruiting 
Agents and the plight of labourer in the light of such advertisements.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should take up the issue of 
fraudulent advertisements with the co ncerned authority and explore ways 
and means to stop the menace.  

 13
 
 
C. Problems of Overseas Indians  
 
Recommendation No.8 
11. The Committee had apprecia ted the fact that the Overseas Indians were 
making a substantial contribution to the I ndian economy directly and indirectly by 
way of remittances, which was to the t une of $ 14494 millions during 2004-2005 
(till 31.12.2004).  Overseas Indians were  facing numerous problems to invest 
their savings properly in India.  The Committee had desired that the Ministry 
should designate officers in our Missi ons who can guide and assist Overseas 
Indians for proper investment in India. 
 
The Committee were happy to note that  the Ministry w ould be taking up 
certain new schemes during the course of the current year.  The schemes on the 
anvil would include provision of legal and counseling serv ices to NRI workers in 
the Gulf, advisory/information services for women marrying Overseas Indians 
(OIs), scholarships for Overseas Indi an student, Pilot Project on “ Tracing the 
Roots”, commemoration of the departure of the first Pravasi, etc.  The Committee 
had felt that those were very impor tant schemes and should be vigorously 
pursued by the Ministry.  Provision of legal and counseling services to NRI 
workers in the Gulf was particularly important  in view of the fact that most of the 
labourers there are being ill treated, underpaid, subjec ted to inhuman working 
conditions, put up with inadequate medical faciliti es, denied payment of 
compensation in case of accident/death.   Their employers and the recruiting 
agents were also cheating them.  Many were arrested on false chargers/petty 
offences and were being jailed for more than 3-4 years without valid reasons.  
The Committee had, therefore, felt that providing necessary legal help to these 
labourers was extremely im portant.  The Committee had also felt that some 
orientation or general aw areness has needed to be pr ovided to persons going 

 14
abroad.  They had also desired that t he proposed legal and counseling services 
should be the top priority with the Ministry and a concrete proposal should be 
worked out in this regard.    
 
On the issue of false/fraudulent marriage between NRI/PIO grooms and 
Indian women, the Committ ee had noted with satisfaction that the Ministry is 
making lot of efforts to address this issue which had now assumed alarming 
proportions.  As an immediate preventive measure, MOIA was planning to bring 
out an information booklet within three months to create awareness among 
prospective brides and their families.  The Committee had also noted that the 
NCW, had prepared a draft report on NRI marriage problems and a draft 
conventions.    
 
The Committee had, therefor e, desired that the Mini stry should bring out 
the information booklet within three months as envisaged, and the 
recommendation/suggestions contained in the draft r eport prepared by the NCW 
should also be given due consideration for implementation and given a legal 
shape.  The Committee had further suggested that the Ministry should try and set 
up an office or appoint some official in the Ministry having familiarity with the 
legal systems of other count ries rather than just restricting themselves to 
providing advisory/information services to women marrying Overseas Indians-as 
many of the victims were not aware of the legal processes abroad, which further 
compounds the problem.     
 
The Committee had also noted that the ma in concerns of the NRIs in the 
Gulf included cheaper air-fares by Indian Ai rlines and Air India on the India-Gulf 
Sector, identification and negot iation of release of innocent victims from the 
prisons abroad and their repatri ation and bringing of dead bodies in the event of 
death from the Gulf to India.  The Committee had recommended that the Ministry 
must take up the issue of c heaper airfares with the Mini stry of Civil Aviation to 
explore the possibilities of starting a bud get Airline at the earliest.  As for 

 15
identification and negotiati on of release of prisoners and their repatriation was 
concerned, the committee had felt that the Indian Missions in respective 
countries had an immense role to play by way of approaching the host 
Government for seeking consular access to the detainee and ensuring that the 
prison conditions are satisfactory and the trials proceed satisfactorily.  The 
Committee had also felt that the Missions should attempt to take up cases for 
reduction of sentence even if the relative s of the detainees are not making an 
appeal, in certain cases even the relatives are not aware of the arrest. 
 
With regard to bringing dead bodies of Indians who died abroad back to 
India, the Committee had apprec iated the fact that initiative had already been 
taken to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with some of the Gulf 
countries particularly Kuwa it, which would enable the Indi an Mission to formally 
take up cases with the concerned Depar tments there.  The Committees had 
recommended that the Government must also seek to enter into MoUs with other 
countries as well, so that the problems relating to Indian labourers in the Gulf and 
also at other places could be formally taken up with the concerned Governments.  
The Ministry in collaboration with the Emba ssies should play an effective role in 
this regard. 
 
12. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“The Ministry is in the process of bringing out an information 
booklet that will highlight the st eps to be taken by prospective 
brides and their families to verify the antecedents of the prospective 
grooms. The draft of the booklet is  being circulated to the State 
Governments for comments and suggestions, which will be 
discussed at a one-day all-India Seminar organised for the 
purpose. The Ministry will also  launch an awareness campaign. 
Thus both preventive as well as curative steps  are proposed to be 
taken. 
 

 16
Under ‘Tracing the Roots’, a pilo t project is being developed 
with the help of the State Governments of Bihar & U.P.  One district 
each has been identified in thes e States.  The pilot scheme 
envisages that in these two distri cts, the State Governments would 
gear up facilities for accessing rev enue records relating to births & 
deaths, land, etc. Once this is done, an agency will be hired to 
search the records systematically to cull out the particulars of 
interested overseas Indians from re cords available with them such 
as the immigration pass, etc. T he details are being finalized and 
thereafter the scheme will be publicized to the Missions. 
 
The Ministry is also in the process of developing a 
scholarship scheme for overseas I ndian students.  The project is 
proposed to be entrusted to Ed.CIL on a turnkey basis under a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) .  Ed.CIL will be the nodal 
agency for all matters related to placement and award of 
scholarship to overseas Indian students. 
 
Air India has already started it s budget airlines in the Gulf 
sector called Air India Express. The flights are being augmented.  
 
As far as consular access and other services are concerned, 
the Missions do not normally take up release of detainees suo moto 
on account of local stipulations.  In  the case of some countries, the 
principle of reciprocity is applied.”  
 
13. The Committee appreciate the fresh  initiatives taken by the Ministry 
of Overseas Indian Affairs with an objective to help the Overseas Indians 
and hope that these initiatives will help  in solving some of the problems 
being faced by them.  The Committee,  however, note that most of these 
proposals/initiatives are still at a very initial stage.  The Committee desire 

 17
that these schemes should be pursued and followed up vigorously so that 
they take shape and actually benefit the targeted groups.  The Committee 
also feel that the proposal of bringi ng out an information booklet that will 
highlight the precautionary steps to be taken by prospective brides and 
their families to verify the antecedents of the prospective grooms is long 
overdue and should be brought out immediately.  
 
The Committee in their earlier recommendation had also raised a 
wide range of issues relating to the problems faced by the Overseas 
Indians.  However, the Co mmittee regret to note that the Ministry has not 
responded/addressed to some of these issues, as for instance providing 
legal and counseling services to NRI wo rkers in the Gulf, arrangement of 
orientation or general awareness programme for persons going abroad for 
work, entering into MOU with the Gulf and other countries.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that these i ssues should be addressed and the 
Committee may be informed about the steps taken in each case. 
 
D. Pravasi Bhartiya Divas  
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
14. The Committee had noted that Pravas i Bhartiya Divas celebrated every 
year on 9 th January aimed at deepening the engagement between India and its 
Diaspora through focuses activities ac ross sectors, besides strengthening 
emotional and cultural bonds.  The Minist ry had informed the Committee that the 
focus of the 3 rd Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD ) 2005 was to carry forward the 
momentum generated by the earlier two Pravasi Bharat iya Divas (PBDs), and to 
enable Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to have had direct interaction with the 
Diaspora with a view to involving them is India’s Socio-economic development 
and position MOIA as a single point service provider. 
 

 18
The Committee were also informed that  Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBDs) 
has had positive impact on the relations hip of the Indian Government with its 
diaspora.  However, if the profile of the participants in the last three Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas was anything to go by , then the preponderance of the dollar 
Diaspora at the conference led to an impression t hat the Government was 
keener only to woo them.  The Committee had wanted that the focus should not 
merely be on boosting investment alone but the Government should help the 
Overseas Indians to maintain their Indian Cultural identity and address their 
needs in every possible way.  It should be the Ministry’s endeavour to assist the 
Overseas Community to maintain and dee pen their strong emotional, cultural 
bonds with India.  The Overseas Community should be viewed as more than 
mere investors being country’s important links with the world community.      
 
The Committee had also recommended that the Ministry should spend the 
budgetary provision made for Pravasi Bhar atiya Divas (PBD) on durable benefit 
programmes-not just on programmes which have good media coverage but 
which actually gave some tangible benefits to the target group.  The Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas celebration should al so be made more theme specific and 
content specific.  Further, the Committ ee had wanted the Ministry to assess the 
impact of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas and the extent to which it had been able to 
meet the objectives set therefor.  The Committee had felt that  it was extremely 
important since crores of rupees were being spent on that.  As such it should not 
be allowed to go unproductive.   
 
The Committee had also noted that during the third Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas, plenary sessions were held with some of the State Government. However, 
some of the States were not able to par ticipate as they were apparently required 
to pay an amount of Rs.10 lakh, as a result of which many States decided to 
keep themselves away from such sessi ons.  The Committee were of the view 
that this was an exorbitant  amount which acted as a deterrent for those States 
who would have otherwise part icipated.  The Committee had,  therefore, felt that 

 19
the Ministry must extend invitation to representatives of every State to make their 
presentation and woo potentia l investors without having to pay any fee and the 
Ministry should ensure that the fee in no way acts as a det errent for participation.  
The Committee had found that important because the Ministry could not afford to 
be seen as preventing the States from availing of opportunities for networking 
with the potential Overseas Investors.               
 
15. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“It has been decided to invite all the States to participate in Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas’06.  Out of t hose who respond, a few will be 
selected for the interactive sessi ons.  The others will be allotted 
space and encouraged to showcase t heir States by participating in 
the exhibition. 
In order to further enhance the content of the event, it is 
proposed to organise a larger number of plenary sessions on 
specific themes and topics where del egates from all countries take 
part and also hold preparatory c onferences for this purpose, 
wherever possible.” 
16. The Committee find that while conv eying the decision of the Ministry 
to invite all the States to participate in Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 2006, the 
Ministry  has not clarified the position about the payment of participation 
fee by the States participating in pl enary sessions.  The  Committee are of 
the view that if States are required to pay participation fee of Rs. Ten Lakh 
again, then the very purpose of inviting States as potential investment 
destination will be defeated.  The Commi ttee, therefore, are of the firm view 
that the Ministry should not charge  any participation fee from the 
participating States for the plenary s essions.  The Ministry should clarify 
the position and inform the Committee immediately. 
  
 

 20
The Ministry has not responded to the recommendation of the 
Committee that the Ministry should spend the budgetary provision made 
for Pravasi Bhartiya Divas on durable  benefit programmes which could 
give some tangible benefits to the ta rget group.  The Committee had also 
desired that the Ministry should asses the impact and the extent to which 
PBDs have been able to meet the obj ectives set.   The Committee find this 
attitude of ignorance shown by the Mi nistry as highly deplorable.  They, 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should take a decision for utilizing the 
budgetary provisions on durable benefits programmes after making an 
assessment about the impact of PBDs and apprise the Committee 
accordingly. 
 
E. Education/Scholarships  
 
Recommendation No.11 
17. The Committee had noted that the Government had decided to reserve 
one-third of the fifteen per cent supernumerary seats ac ross different disciplines 
in educational institutions for children of NRIs in t he Gulf and/South East Asia at 
fee applicable to resident Indians.  T he Committee had, however, regretted to 
note that many inst itutions were not implementing the decision.  They had, 
therefore, desired that t he decision must be strictly implemented.  The 
Committee had further desired that the Ministry must take up the issue with those 
universities that refused to implement the Government’s decision and also follow 
up on their endeavor to help Overseas boys and girls to get enrolled in Indian 
Universities.  The amount of Rs.1.5 crore earmarked for this scholarship 
programme should be utilized in such a way that it actually benefits the children 
of Indian Diaspora in the Gulf  and the Ministry should see to it that the 5% seats 
earmarked for those students are filled and e ffectively enforced at least from this 
academic year onwards.      
 

 21
The Committee had further recommended t hat the Ministry must explore 
the possibilities of starting off-shore campus es of Indian institutions in countries 
with large Diaspora population, and must take up the task of getting the 
education profile of Diaspora students mapped in a time bound manner. 
18. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
“The Government’s decision to re serve one-third of the fifteen 
percent supernumerary seats in educ ational institutions (except 
medical institutes) for children of  NRIs in the Gulf and South East 
Asia at fees applicable to residen t Indians is under-implementation.  
AICTE has issued guidelines to concerned institut ions regarding 
the same.” 
19. The Committee regret to note th at the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs has not properly taken up the matter relating to non- 
implementation of the decision to reserve one-third of the fifteen per cent 
supernumerary seats across differe nt disciplines in educational 
institutions for children of NRIs in th e Gulf and South East Asia at fees 
applicable to resident Indians in several Indian institut ions/universities.  
They have simply conveyed the provis ions in this regard. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should take up the case on 
priority basis with the Institutions who are not implementing the provisions 
in this regard through AICTE and help the overseas students enrolled in 
Indian Universities who are not getting such benefits. 
 The Committee are also surprised to  note that the Ministry have not 
found it necessary to respond to their recommendation of exploring the 
possibilities of starting offshore cam puses of Indian Institutions in 
countries with large Diaspora populati on and also getting the education 
profile of Diaspora students mappe d in a time-bound manner.  The 
Committee, strongly criticize this type  of approach of the Ministry and 
desire that the Ministry should take initiatives in this direction and inform 
the Committee about their time-bound programme prepared in this regard.   

 22
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Proposals 
Recommendation No.1 
 
The Committee observe that the total budg etary allocation of the Ministry 
has been quadrupled this year i.e. a provision of Rs.35 crores has been provided 
in BE 2005-2006.  During BE 2004-2005, the total budgetar y allocation of the 
Ministry was Rs.7 crores which was subsequently increased to Rs.10 crore at the 
RE stage.  The Ministry has informed t he Committee that the Actual Expenditure 
of the Ministry for the year 2004-2005 is likely to be Rs.6.23 crore, which is 62.30 
per cent of the total budget ary allocation.  The Mini stry cited increase in 
establishment related expenditure as the reason for increase in  the allocation in 
BE 2005-2006. 
 
The Committee note from the Expl anatory Memorandum on the Demand 
for Grants (2005-20060) of the Ministry that a lump sum provision of Rs 5 crore 
has been made for new schemes that co uld be approved and taken up by the 
Ministry during 2005-2006.  In the absence of specific schemes the Committee is 
not a position to analyse the budgetary prov isions.  The Commi ttee, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry to formula te the schemes wit h proper guidelines, 
benchmarks and deliverables for the benefit  of Indian diaspora as has been 
submitted by the Ministry in its reply to the committee.  
 
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should pay focused 
attention towards ensuring that there are no unspent provisions in further, as has 
been the case during 2004-20 05-when the unspent provisions amounted to 
almost 40 percent of its total budgetary provisions. 
  

 23
Reply of the Government 
 
 The schemes on the anvil  include the Internship Programme for Diaspora 
Youth, advisory/information services for women marrying Overseas Indians, pilot 
project on “Tracing the Roots”, scholarships for Overseas Indian Students, 
provision of legal/counseling services to NRI workers in the Gulf, commemoration 
of the departure of first Pravasi etc. The Ministry also intends to support 
innovative schemes of State Governm ents to upgrade the skills of workers, 
rehabilitate returning workers, etc.  These schemes would be finalized with 
appropriate guidelines and taken up for implementation during the coming years. 
 
The Ministry will make earnest efforts to  ensure that the funds allotted in 
the budget are spent properly and judiciously.    
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005]       
 
Advertising & Publicity 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
The Committee note that a provision of Rs.1.5 crore has been made in BE 
2005-2006 under the Head ‘Advertising & Publicity’.  A provision of Rs.0.10 crore 
was made under the same Head in 2 004-2005.  However, the Committee was 
informed that there were no expenditure on Advertising & P ublicity during 2004-
2005.  The Committee expresses their conc ern about the non-utilization of funds 
under this Head and hope that sincere efforts will be made during the current 
year on the Advertising & Publicity related activities. 
 
The Committee are of the view that given the fact the target group of the 
Ministry being very specific i.e. the ‘O verseas Indians’ – and the penetration of 
Internet being very high, the Mi nistry should underta ke publicity and 
advertisement activities mainly through the Internet as far as possible. This, in 

 24
turn, will substantially reduce the expenditure  to be incurred on publicity efforts.  
To this end, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must maintain a 
detailed database of the ent ire Indian Diaspora and t heir Associations and 
disseminate information to them in a cost effective way.    
 
The Committee are also of the view t hat Advertising and Publicity efforts 
should be more focused and in particular undertaken during the events where the 
NRIs/PIOs participate in large numbers.  NRIs and their Associations organize 
their events on their own such as TANA (Telugu Association of  North America), 
Maharastrians Organisation, Gujaratis Organi sation etc.  The Mi nistry can get a 
very captive audience during such events by  putting in least efforts whereas the 
results achieved thereby can be manifold.  The officials of the Indian Embassies 
should also oblige and facilitate such events and the Ministry must, on its part, try 
to reach out to them during such events.  Similarly at the cult ural events like film 
shows and corporate shows that go out from India attract vast audience of Indian 
Diaspora.  The Ministry can place its ce ll in position at such events which can 
facilitate dissemination of the required information to the Overseas Indians. 
     
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is making sincere effo rts to utilize the budgetary funds for 
Advertising and Publicity. It proposes to br ing out booklets on matters of interest 
to Overseas Indians such as investment opportunities, facilities for students in 
professional institutions, etc. The booklet on Emigration will be revised soon to 
make it more informative and user-friendly. 
The Website of the Ministry is in fi nal stage of developm ent and will be 
launched in September. Once the Websit e goes live, direct interaction through 
the Internet with the Indian Diaspora will be facilitated.  
The suggestions given by the Standi ng Committee are well taken and will 
be kept in mind while devising the future advertising and publicity strategies. 
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005]  

 25
   
Contribution/Investment by Overseas Indian 
 
RecommendationNo.5 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry want to position itself as a service 
provider which can coordinate and liaise  on be half of Overseas Indians with 
other Ministries and the Government of India.  The Committee, however, feel that 
the Ministry should not end up being mere ly coordinating Ministry providing only 
certain services to the Overseas Indians (OIs).  Rather, in the considered opinion 
of the Committee the role of the Ministry essentially involves motivating Overseas 
Indians to reach out to India by investing in various sectors.  The Ministry should 
take the initiative to see how best to  provide necessary information to these 
people whereby they are able to contribute in the areas/ sectors of their choice.  
The Committee strongly feel that presently the Overseas  Indians are so far able 
to invest only a lower proportion of their resources in India as compared to the 
Overseas Chinese who have been able to invest in China in a big way.  The 
effort, therefore, of the Ministry should be directed to wards replicating some of 
the success of the Chines e Diaspora, which have c ontributed immensely to 
China’s economy.  For this, the Committee potential Overseas investors to invest 
in India and more importantly-by offering them good reasons to do so.   
 
The Committee are also of the view t hat the Ministry should either allow 
Overseas Indians to make direct invest ment in India of their own choice in 
whichever field of activity they want, or the Ministry could take the initiative in due 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
Planning Commission and float  a bond or a fund as such , for the infrastructure 
development and other high priority areas/sectors.  Those Overseas Indians who 
do not have direct contact to invest in  private industry should be persuaded or 
motivated to contribute to this ge neral fund, which may be utilized for 
infrastructure development in the country.  For this kind of direct and indirect 

 26
investment, the Ministry could provide effective and reliable arrangements in 
place.  The Committee suggest that this pr ocess could be started forthwith in at 
least a few countries, where there’re substantial numbers of Indians.  The 
Ministry should see that its representative is st ationed in such countries at the 
earliest possible, so that t he Overseas Indians are able  to know that there is 
someone whom they could try and sort out their problems.   Such representative 
in turn should motivate and guide the Overseas Indians as to where and how 
they could invest.           
 
The Committee also note that the Ministry intend to set up an Investment 
Promotion unit of Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs with a partner and promote 
state specific investments campaigns abroad.  The Committ ee recommend that 
the Ministry must pursue the proposals in right earnest.  Similarly, the Foreign 
Contribution (Regulation) Ac t, 1976 should be amended to facilitate Overseas 
donors in are as such as education, health, and philanthropy.     
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The point about the Ministry being a fa cilitator for investment by overseas 
Indians was made in the light  of the fact that approv als for such investments 
would either be granted by RBI under the automatic route or by the Foreign 
Investment Promotion Board (FIPB), of which the Ministry is now a member.  
 
Various suggestions of the Committee on how the Ministry could pro-actively 
encourage greater investment s by overseas Indians would be given the fullest 
consideration in drawing up the Ministry’s  strategy and plan of action in this 
regard.  
 
The observations of the Committee about  the Chinese Diaspora are valid. 
The Ministry plans to commission an authoritative study of the Chinese Diaspora, 

 27
its development and involvement  in investment. The terms of references of the 
study are being worked out. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is  in the process of  finalising a new 
Act to manage and regulate foreign contributions. The Ministry has made several 
suggestions with a view to liberalise the process of granting approvals for cases 
involving contributions by overseas Indians. The matter is before a Group of 
Ministers.  
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 
 
Overseas Indian Citizenship (OIC) 
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
On the issue of Overseas Indian Citizenship (OIC), the Committee note 
that Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)  has circulated a draft Cabinet note 
containing proposals to amend  the Citizenship Act, 1955,  and Ministry of Home 
Affairs is awaiting clearance of the Mini stry of Law & Justice to bring the matter 
before the Cabinet.  The Committee also note that MHA has further consulted the 
Ministries and agencies concerned and finalized the simplified application 
form/procedures.  Revised Ru les incorporating these ar e again being cleared by 
Ministry of Law & Justice and could be not ified shortly.  Pending this, acceptance 
of applications and registration of OIC has been put on hold.  The process would 
get restarted once the new rules are notified and put on its Website.  
The Overseas Indian Citizenship iss ue being a credible and an emotional 
issue, the Committee are of the view that it should be addressed urgently with all 
the seriousness it deserves.  The propos al to amend the citizenship Act 1955 
should be speeded up by getting clearance of the Ministry of Law & Justice so 
that the matter is brought before the Cabinet with out any further delay to this 
effect.  The Committee desire that the process should be simplified and 
registration process be started at least in respect of the 16 countries where it has 
already been notified by June 2005.  The Committ ee therefore recommend that 

 28
the Ministry should enlarge the scope beyond these 16 countries and take 
necessary steps towards amending the Ci tizenship Act and br inging it before 
Parliament as early as po ssible.  Also the revised rules should be notified 
immediately and put on the Website of the Ministry within the next three months.   
The Committee appreciate the intention of  the Ministry to offer benefits of 
the voting rights of Overseas Indian Community and recommend that the Ministry 
must codify the benefits that would accrue to Overseas Citizens.  The Committee 
want that the Ministry must seriously consider and explore the feasibility of 
extending benefits such as voting rights to  Overseas Citizens as  India is one of 
the few democracies that denies the voting rights to its own expatriate citizens.  
The Committee feel that a Government that seek the allegiance, support and 
money of its Diaspora should also be willing to be accountable to it. 
 
The Committee also desire that the qu estion of physical character of the 
dual citizenship document must also be settled soon.  The Committee are of the 
view that, a smart card is the most forward looking one, though it would mean 
working out the technical specifications , identifying the nec essary hardware and 
ensuring of machine readabilit y at the entry and exit points.  However, for now, 
the Government should settle for a paper doc ument and switch over to the smart 
card option, after the necessary infrastructure is ready with them in due course of 
time.        
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the recent Monsoon se ssion, Parliament has passe d the Bill to further 
amend the Citizenship Act, 1955 to enable Ov erseas Indian Citizenship (OIC) 
being granted to all persons of Indian Origin (who  were citizens of India or 
eligible to become citizens of India on  26 January 1950 and ar e citizens of the 
countries (except Pakistan and Bangladesh) which allow dual citizenship.  As per 
the Act and the Rules fram ed thereunder, an OIC Card and a life long visa on 

 29
their passports will be given to OICs. The scheme is expected to be operational 
in about two months. 
 
Separately, the Ministry is taking up wit h the Ministry of Law & Justice the 
proposal to grant voting rights to NRIs.  
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 
 
Resource tapping 
 
Recommendation No.12 
 
The Committee are aware that the Minist ry is specially seeking interaction 
with and tapping the expertise of  Overseas Indians in fields such as Education, 
Health, Science & Technology, Culture, Tourism, Youth Affairs, etc. 
 
The Committee desire that sincere efforts should be made to top the 
expertise of Overseas Indians in these fields and the efforts should be focused to 
understand as to how India c an gain from their expertise.  The Ministry should 
also seek to collaborate with scientists fr om NASA in the US, as also experts in 
fields like Meteorology from countri es with excellent disaster management 
systems.  Further, the Commi ttee feel that Science & Technology is a productive 
area, where scientific talent and technological skills of Overseas Indians could 
join up in collaborative resear ch ventures in India.  In  other vital areas such as 
knowledge – based technolog ies, IT and biotechnology , the expertise of the 
Overseas Indians can be quite valuable in achieving the goal of making India a 
knowledge super power.  The Committee also recommend that the procedures 
guiding Medical Council of India (MCI) which come in the way for entry of 
Overseas Medical professionals to come a nd work in India, be  simplified.  The 
Committee are certain that, this in turn, could offer a key to resolving the socio-
economic problems of poverty and developm ent of the country.  The Committee 

 30
would, therefore, advise t he Ministry to approach Over seas Indian experts with 
open mind and be receptive to their creative thinking.         
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter allowing PIO doctors to pr actice in India has already been 
taken up with Ministry of Health & Fam ily Welfare. The Citizenship Act, 1955 as 
recently amended by Parliament empowers the Ministry to notify, under Sec. 7 
(B), benefits to be enjoyed by Overseas Ci tizens of India, notwithstanding any 
provision in any other Act.  The Ministry proposes such notifications, which, inter 
alia, will allow PIO doctors to take t he Foreign Medical Graduate Examination so 
as to practice in India.   Similar will be the case with other professionals such as 
architects, nurses, chartered accountants etc. 
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005]  
 
Proposed Agenda 
 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has come out with an agenda having 
32 specific items which are proposed to be  taken up in the coming year.  The 
proposed agenda has been classified into f our broad functional areas, which 
includes services to Diaspora, Emigration, Social service and 
investment/financial/economic services .  The Committee appreciates the 
proposals of the Ministry and are convinced that these services, if delivered, 
would definitely go a long way in est ablishing stronger emot ional and economic 
bonds with our Diaspora.  The Committees recommend that the proposed 
agenda be discussed with the stakeholder s immediately and finalized for 
implementation during the curr ent year itself.  The Committee would also like to 
suggest the Ministry to pursue its agenda vigorously and in a focused manner 

 31
and inform the Committee periodically about the steps taken/bottlenecks 
faced/progress made in the direction of r ealizing the 32 item s contained in the 
agenda.       
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry would pursue the vari ous items included in the agenda and 
try and achieve tangible progress within the current financial year. 
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 
  

 32
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
With regard to the construction of Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra, the 
Committee note that Ministry of Urban Development has confirmed the allotment 
of plots No. 15A  & 15B in Chanakyapuri in favour of Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs for construction of Pr avasi Bharatiya Kendra. Mini stry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs has since deposited a sum of Rs. 31.83 lakh in favour  of DL & DO of 
Ministry of Urban Development towards the premium and ot her charges in 
respect of the plots.  The Committee also note that Ministry of Urban 
Development also agreed to earmark another  Plot No. 15D m easuring 3024 sq. 
for Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra, which is being pursued with MUD. 
  
The committee, however, regret to note that the plots are yet to be handed 
over to MOIA and Plot No. 15 D is al so yet to be allotted to MOIA.  The 
Committee are of the view that, followi ng the confirmation  by MUD on the 
allotment of Plot 15A & B to MOIA ther e should not have been any difficulties in 
handing over of the plots by the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
Accordingly, the Committee would re commend that the Ministry  should 
immediately take possession of the plots from MEA and should vigorously pursue 
with Ministry of Urban Development to get Plot No.15D allotted in its favour.  The 
Ministry should also get Cabinet approval for the institutional/construction format 
of the Kendra.  The amount of Rs.3 crore earmarked in BE 2005-2006 towards 

 33
the proposed Pravasi Bharatiya Kendra should be utilized for payment of 
premium for Plot No. 15D. 
The Committee desire that al formalities pertaining to possession of all the 
land required for construction of Pravas i Bharatiya Kendra should be completed 
within a time frame, and the whole process of designs, the institutional format, 
obtaining necessary clearance of statutory authorities, inviting bids and awarding 
of contract for the building should be completed by the end of 2005.  The 
Committee feel that this is  important so as to avoid time and cost overruns, and 
the Ministry should ensure that the K endra becomes functional within the time 
limit set by them i.e. wit hin 3-4 years.  In the me antime, the possibility of 
alternative accommodation including taki ng possession of the space in Akbar 
Bhavan to be vacated by FSI may be expl ored.  The Committee further desire 
that they may be apprised from time to time about the progress made in this 
regard.                
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is vigorously pursuing with Ministry of Urban Development to 
get Plot No.15D allotted in its favour. Only  with the allocation of this plot, will the 
uncertainty over the final shape of the avai lable land will come to an end. Once 
the plots are allotted, further action such as taking physical possession, obtaining 
necessary clearance of stat utory authorities, drawing up designs, inviting bids 
and awarding of contract for the building will be taken in a time bound manner. 
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 
 

 34
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Secretariat /Work Allocation 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
The Committee note that almost a year after the creation of the Ministry, a 
full complement of Staff and a full-fledged secretariat is ye t to be put in place.  
Creation of posts in the Ministry should be completed within three months as has 
been assured by the Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs during the 
course of evidence.  There is an urgent need to speed up creation of posts 
particularly in the wake of the new work allocation to the Ministry. 
 
The Overseas Indians have great ex pectations after the creation of an 
independent Ministry dealing with the af fairs concerning them.  The Ministry 
must, therefore, make all efforts to inte ract with the Overseas  Indian Community 
and address their concerns which should properly reflect in the vision and 
objectives of the Ministry.  The Committ ee feel that this will be possible only 
when a full complement of staff to work in the Ministry is put in place. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With the approval of Cabinet, 63 pos ts have already been created for the 
Secretariat of MOIA.  Action has been initia ted to fill these posts.  Proposals to 
create certain additional pos ts are under the considerat ion of the Committee of 
Secretaries.  
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 

 35
Recruiting Agents/Registration Certificates/Emigration 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
The Committee learn that a large num ber of Recruiting Agents publish 
attractive advertisements stating that they would provid e suitable employment to 
labourers abroad particularly in the Gulf  countries and extract huge sums of 
money from the aspiring job seekers.  Afte r taking them to the countries of their 
employment, the problem of such poor job seekers starts  from the airport itself 
where it is found that most  of them have bogus entries . Further, these labourers 
are not paid their salary as per the pr omises made in the advertisements and 
they are forced to work inmost unhygienic and pathetic living conditions.  Some 
of them are even jailed on trumped up charges /petty offences for years together.  
The Committee are concerned about the pli ght of these labourer s and feel that 
the issue needs to be addressed in a focused manner.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take up the issue of fraudulent 
advertisements.  The Ministry should al so take up cases involving breach of 
contract entered into between the employ er and employees.  To deal with the 
cases involving woman employees who cons titute the vulnerable section of the 
society, woman officers should be designated in the outposts as far as possible.   
 
The Committee also desire that the Ministry’s proposal to streamline 
emigration by re-engineering the whole process, introducing IT based solutions, 
bringing in smart cards etc. should be pursued with all the seriousness it 
deserves.      
 
Reply of the Government 
 Semiconductor Complex Ltd. (SCL),  Punjab – a Government of India 
enterprise – has proposed an IT-based solution for emigration clearance. The 
proposal envisages establishing IT infr astructure at the Office of Protector-
General of Emigrants and offi ces of the Protectors of  Emigrants and providing 

 36
tamper proof “Smart Cards” to the emigrants. The Smart Cards will have 
adequate data storage capacity to carry personal informa tion of the emigrants 
and details regarding employer, visa parti culars, Recruiting Agent’s details, POE 
office clearance number, insurance details , blood group/allergies etc. Essential 
security features will also be built into the Smart Card so that it is tamper proof 
and cannot be duplicated. The responsibility of providing insurance covers to 
emigrants will also be undertaken by the SCL.  The proposal is being examined 
in consultation with the Department of  Information Technology, Department of 
Space, Bureau of Immigration and the Integrated Finance Division.  
 Taking into account the vulnerabi lity of women and on there commendation 
of the National Commission for Women, instructions were issued on 20.11.2003 
to all the Protectors of Emigrants for not granting emigration clearance to women 
below the age of thirty years intendin g to go to any foreign country for 
employment as housemaids/domestic worker s.  In such cases, the employment 
contract is required to be mandatorily attested by the concerned Indian Mission.  
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 
 
Problems of Overseas Indians 
Recommendation No.8 
The Committee appreciate that the Overseas Indians make a substantial 
contribution to the Indian economy directly and indirect ly by way of remittances, 
which was to the tune of $ 14494 mil lions during 2004-2005 (t ill 31.12.2004).  
Overseas Indians are facing numerous probl ems to invest their savings properly 
in India.  The Ministry should designate officers in our Missions who can guide 
and assist Overseas Indians for proper investment in India. 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry will be taking up certain 
new schemes during the course of the current year.  The schemes on the anvil 
include provision of legal and counseling services to NRI workers in the Gulf, 

 37
advisory/information services for women marrying Overseas Indians (OIs), 
scholarships for Overseas Indian student, Pilot Project on “ Tracing the Roots”, 
commemoration of the departure of the firs t Pravasi, etc.  The Committee feel 
that these are very impor tant schemes and should be vigorously pursued by the 
Ministry.  Provision of legal and counseling services to NRI workers in the Gulf is 
particularly important in view of the fact that most of the labourers there are being 
ill treated, underpaid, subjected to inhu man working conditions, put up with 
inadequate medical facilities, denied paym ent of compensation in case of 
accident/death.  Their employers and the recruiting agents are also cheating 
them.  Many are arrested on false char gers/petty offences and are being jailed 
for more than 3-4 years without valid reas ons.  The Committee, therefore, feel 
that providing necessary legal help to these labourers is extremely important.  
The Committee also feel that some orientation or general awareness needs to be 
provide to persons going abroad.  They also desire that t he proposed legal and 
counseling services should be the top prio rity with the Ministry and a concrete 
proposal should be worked out in this regard.    
On the issue of false/fraudulent marriage between NRI/PIO grooms and 
Indian women, the Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry is making 
lot of efforts to address this issue which has now assumed alarming proportions.  
As an immediate preventiv e measure, MOIA is planning to bring out an 
information booklet within three months  to create awarene ss among prospective 
brides and their families.  The Committee also note that the NCW, has prepared 
a draft report on NRI marriage problems and a draft conventions.    
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Minist ry should bring out the 
information booklet within three months as envisaged, and the 
recommendation/suggestions contained in the draft r eport prepared by the NCW 
should also be given due consideration for implementation and given a legal 
shape.  The Committee further suggest that  the Ministry should try and set up an 
office or appoint some official in the Ministry who is familiar with the legal 
systems of other countries rather than just  restricting themselves to providing 
advisory/information services to women ma rrying Overseas Indians-as many of 

 38
the victims are not aware of the le gal processes abroad, which further 
compounds the problem.     
The Committee also note that the main  concerns of the NRIs in the Gulf 
include cheaper airfares by Indian Airlines and Air Indi a on the India-Gulf Sector, 
identification and negotiation of release of innocent vi ctims from the prisons 
abroad and their repatriation and bringing of dead bodies in the event of death 
from the Gulf to India.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry must take up 
the issue of cheaper airfares with the Mi nistry of Civil Aviation to explore the 
possibilities of starting a budget  Airline at the earliest.  As for identification and 
negotiation of release of prisoners and their repatriation is concerned, the 
committee feel that the Indian Missions in respective countries have an immense 
role to play by way of approaching the host Government for seeking consular 
access to the detainee and ensuring that t he prison conditions are satisfactory 
and the trials proceed satisfactorily.  T he Committee also feel that the Missions 
should attempt to take up cases forreduction  of sentence even if the relatives of 
the detainees are not making an appeal, in certain case s even the relatives are 
not aware of the arrest. 
With regard to bringing dead bodies of Indians who die abroad back to 
India, the Committee appreciate  that initiative have already been taken to enter 
into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  with some of the Gulf countries 
particularly Kuwait, which will enable the Indian Mission to formally take up cases 
with the concerned Department s there.  The committees recommend that the 
Government must also seek to enter into  MoUs with other countries as well, so 
that the problems relating to Indian labourer s in the Gulf and also  at other places 
can be formally taken up with the concer ned Governments.  The Ministry in 
collaboration with the Embassies should play an effective role in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry is in the process of br inging out an information booklet that 
will highlight the steps to be taken by prospective brides and their families to 
verify the antecedents of the prospective  grooms. The draft of the booklet is 

 39
being circulated to the State Government s for comments and suggestions, which 
will be discussed at a one-day all-India Seminar organised for the purpose. The 
Ministry will also launch an awareness campaign. Th us both preventive as well 
as curative steps are proposed to be taken. 
 
Under ‘Tracing the Roots’, a pilot projec t is being developed with the help 
of the State Governments of Bihar & U.P.   One district each has been identified 
in these States.  The pilot scheme envisages that in these two districts, the State 
Governments would gear up facilities for accessing revenue records relating to 
births & deaths, land, etc. Once this is  done, an agency will be hired to search 
the records systematically to cull out th e particulars of interested overseas 
Indians from records available with them such as the immigrat ion pass, etc. The 
details are being finalized  and thereafter the scheme will be publicized to the 
Missions. 
The Ministry is also in the process of developing a scholarship scheme for 
overseas Indian students.  The project is proposed to be  entrusted to Ed.CIL on 
a turnkey basis under a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).  Ed.CIL will be 
the nodal agency for all matters related to placement and award of scholarship to 
overseas Indian students. 
 
Air India has already started its budget airlines in the Gulf sector called Air 
India Express. The flights are being augmented.  
 
As far as consular access and other services are concerned, the Missions 
do not normally take up release of detainees suo moto on account of local 
stipulations.  In the case of some countries, the principle of reciprocity is applied.     
         [No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005]    
 
 
 
 

 40
Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
The Committee note that Pravasi Bharti ya Divas celebrated every year on 
9th January aims at deepening the engagement between Indi a and its Diaspora 
through focuses activities across sector s, besides strengtheni ng emotional and 
cultural bonds.  The Ministry informed the Committee that the focus of the 3 rd 
Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (PBD) 2005 wa s to carry forward the momentum 
generated by the earlier two Pravasi Bhar atiya Divas (PBDs), and to enable 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs to have direct interaction with the Diaspora 
with a view to involving them is India’s Socio-economic development and position 
MOIA as a single point service provider. 
 
The Committee were also informed that  Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBDs) 
has had positive impact on the relations hip of the Indian Government with its 
diaspora.  However, if the profile of the participants in the last three Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas was anything to go by , then the preponderance of the dollar 
Diaspora at the dollar Dias pora at the conference led to an impression that the 
Government was keener only to woo them .  The Committee want that the focus 
should not merely be on boosting invest ment alone but the Government should 
help the Overseas Indians to maintain t heir Indian Cultural identity and address 
their needs in every possible way.  It should be the Ministry’s endeavour to assist 
the Overseas Community to maintain and deepen their strong emotional, cultural 
bonds with India.  The Overseas Community should be viewed as more than 
mere investors.  They are the country’s important links with the world community.      
 
The Committee also recommend that  the Ministry should spend the 
budgetary provision made for Pravasi Bhar atiya Divas (PBD) on durable benefit 
programmes-not just on programmes which have good media coverage but 
which actually give some tangible benefit s to the target group.  The Pravasi 

 41
Bharatiya Divas celebration should al so be made more theme specific and 
content specific.  Further, the Committee would want the Ministry to assess the 
impact of Pravasi Bharatiy a Divas and the extent to which it has been able to 
meet the objectives set ther efore.  This is extremely important since crores of 
rupees are being spent on it.  As such it should not be  allowed to go 
unproductive.   
The Committee also note that during the third Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, 
plenary sessions were held with some of the State Government. However, some 
of the States could not participate as they were apparently required to pay an 
amount of Rs.10 lakh, as a result of  which many States decided to keep 
themselves away from such sessions.  The Committee are of the view that this is 
an exorbitant amount which ac ts as a deterrent for those States who would have 
otherwise participated.  The Committee, ther efore, feel that the Ministry must 
extend invitation to represent atives of every States to make their presentation 
and woo potential investors without having to pay any fee and the Ministry should 
ensure that the fee in no way acts as a deterrent for participation.  This is 
important because the Ministry cannot afford to be seen as preventing the States 
from availing of opportunities for net working with the potential Overseas 
Investors.               
 
Reply of the Government 
It has been decided to invite all t he States to participate in Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas’06.  Out of those who respond, a few will be selected for the 
interactive sessions.  The others will be allotted space and encouraged to 
showcase their States by participating in the exhibition.   
 
In order to further enhanc e the content of the ev ent, it is proposed to 
organise a larger number of plenary se ssions on specific themes and topics 
where delegates from all countries take part and also  hold preparatory 
conferences for this purpose, wherever possible.  
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 

 42
 
 
Education/Scholarships 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
The Committee note that the Govern ment have decided to reserve one-
third of the fifteen per cent supernumerar y seats across different disciplines in 
educational institutions for children of NRIs in the Gulf and/South East Asia at fee 
applicable to resident Indians.  The Committee, however, regret to note that 
many institutions were not  implementing the decision.  They, therefore, desire 
that the decision must be strictly implement.  The Committee further desire that 
the Ministry must take up the issue wit h those universities that refused to 
implement the Government’s decision and also follow up on their endeavor to 
help Overseas boys and girls to get enrolled in Indian Universities.  The amount 
of Rs.1.5 crore earmarked for this schol arship programme should be utilized in 
such a way that it actually benefits the children of Indian Diaspora in the Gulf and 
the Ministry should see to it that the 5% seats earmarked for those students are 
filled and effectively enforced at least from this academic year onwards.      
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry must explore the 
possibilities of starting off-shore campuses of Indian institutions in countries with 
large Diaspora population, and must take up the tsk of getting the education 
profile of Diaspora students mapped in a time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government’s decision to reserve one-third of the fifteen percent 
supernumerary seats in educat ional institutions (excep t medical institutes) for 
children of NRIs in the Gulf and South Ea st Asia at fees applicable to resident 
Indians is under implementat ion.  AICTE has issued guidelines to concerned 
institutions regarding the same. 
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 

 43
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Overseas Post 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry intends to create posts overseas, 
where the staff would be posit ioned who would be able to directly interact with 
the Overseas Indian Community.  The Co mmittee also note that the staff, would 
work under the administrative cont rol of Indian Ambassadors and High 
Commissioners, but functionally, in terms of content of thei r work, they would 
report to the Ministry.  The Ministry has given itself a time frame of six months for 
the creation of Posts abroad. 
 
The Committee appreciates the intention of the Ministry to create Posts 
abroad as this would allow t hem to directly interact with Overseas Indians and 
provide guidance and counseling to them-i n coordination with the work being 
done by the Missions.  However, the Commi ttee would desire that the Ministry 
should create Overseas Posts initially in those countries only where there are 
substantial numbers of Indi an Diaspora and in those countries from where the 
Diaspora population are cont ributing heavily to India as remittances.  The 
Committee feel that this was a much-felt need to help the Overseas Indians, as 
there have not so far been any reciprocal gesture from the Government side.  
There is a real need to conv ince them that India is all for them. The Committee 
further suggest that such Overseas Posts should be managed by persons who 
are well versed in economics, investm ents and law.  The Committee desire that 
the Out Posts should be created within the time frame of next six months set out 
by the Ministry in this regard.  
 

 44
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Finance have agreed in 
principle for the creation of 60 overseas posts under MOIA. Details of the break 
up of these posts between India- and local-based posts, encadring the India-
based posts and the phasing of the creation of posts are being worked out to be 
placed before the Committee of Secretaries.   
 
Every effort would be made to create the posts within a time frame of six 
months. 
 
[No. H11013/2/2005-DSK dated 5th September, 2005] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
                   Chairman, 
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)             Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 

 45
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS HELD ON 12th December, 2005  
  
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri S.P. Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky 
4. Shri Vinod Khanna 
5. Shri Dinsha Patel 
6. Shri Sebastian Paul 
7. Dr. (Col.) Dhani Ram Shandil 
8. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada 
9. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki 
Rajya Sabha 
10. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
11. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K 
12. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri U.S. Saxena - Director 
3. Dr. Ram Raj Rai - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. XXXX   XXXX    XXXX  XXXX 
 

 46
4. After that, the Committee took up for consideration the draft 9 th Action 
Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the 6 th Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs for the year 2005-2006. The Chairman invited the Members to offer 
their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in the draft Report. Members did not 
suggest any point.   
5. The Committee desired that modifications suggested by the Members be 
suitably incorporated in the body of the Report. 
6.  The Committee then adopted the draft Action Taken Reports and 
authorized the Chairman to finalise the Action Taken Reports and present 
the same to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 

 47
 
Appendix II 
 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE SIXTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations     13 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations, whic h have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Nos.  1, 3, 5, 6, 12 and 13        
T o t a l           0 6  
Percentage            46.16% 
 
 
 III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government replies. 
 
No. 10 
T o t a l           0 1  
Percentage              7.69% 
 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Nos. 2, 7, 8, 9 and 11  
Total          05 
Percentage            38.46% 
 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in r espect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited. 
 
Nos.  4  
T o t a l           0 1  
Percentage             7.69% 
 
 