 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
                                   
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 4 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
SECOND REPORT (14TH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE 
ERSTWHILE MINISTRY OF NON-RESIDENT INDIANS AFFAIRS FOR THE 
YEAR 2004-2005] 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005/Chaitra 1927 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  

FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2004-2005) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF OVERSEAS INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken on the Recommendations contained in the Second Report 
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Erstwhile Ministry of 
Non-Resident Indians Affairs for the year 2004-2005] 
 
 
                Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.04.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.04.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2005/Chaitra, 1927 (Saka) 
 
 

COEA NO.46  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs. ................. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2005 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule  382 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and 
Printed by  
 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2004-2005    
INTRODUCTION       
        
CHAPTER I.  REPORT 
 
CHAPTER II. Recommendations/Observations that have been  
accepted by the Government 
 
CHAPTER III. Recommendations/ Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV. Recommendations/ Observations in respect of  
which replies of Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee 
 
CHAPTER V. Recommendations/ Observations in respect of  
Which final replies of Government are  
still awaited 
 
APPENDICES* 
 
I.  Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 31.03.2005 
  
 
II.   Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the 
 Recommendations contained in the 2nd Report 
of the Standing Committee on External Affairs 
(14th Lok Sabha) 
 
III. Statement of Recommendations/ Observations 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2004-2005) 
 
Chairman -  Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Omar Abdullah 
3 Shri Yogi Aditya Nath 
4. Prof. S.P. Singh Baghel 
5. Shri Narayan Chandra Borkataky  
6. Shri P.C.Gaddigouda 
7. Shri Vinod Khanna 
8. Shri S.K. Kharventhan 
9. Shri Narendra Kushwaha 
10. Shri Nikhil Kumar 
11. Shri Dinsha Patel 
12. Shri Somabhai Patel 
13. Shri Sebastian Paul 
14. Smt. Ranjit Ranjan 
15. Shri P .A. Sangma 
16. Dr. (Col) Dhani Ram Shandil  
17. Shri Saleem Iqbal Shervani  
18. Shri Damodar Barku Shingada  
19. Shri Madhu Goud Yashki  
20. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
21. Shri George Fernandes* 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. K. Maheshwari 
23. Smt. Prema Cariappa 
24. Dr. Karan Singh 
25. Shri Jana Krishnamurthy K.  
26. Shri Arun Shourie 
27. Smt. S.G. Indira 
28. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
29. Shri S.M. Laljan Basha  
30. Shri Fali S. Nariman 
31. Dr. Mahendra Prasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
Shri U.S.Saxena  - Director 
Shri Shiv Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
* Shri Atal Bih ari Vajpayee ceased to a Member of t he Committee consequent upon his 
resignation w.e.f. 13.8.2004 Shri George Fernandes has been nominated to the 
Committee w.e.f. 1.10.2004  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on External Affairs having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, 
present this 4 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on action taken by Government 
on the recommendations contained in the 2 nd Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants of  the Ministry of Non-Resident 
Indians Affairs (renamed as Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs in 
September, 2004) for the year 2004-2005. 
 
2. The 2 nd Report was presented to both t he Houses of Parliament on 
25th August, 2004. The Action Taken Replie s of the Government on all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 
7th December, 2004. 
 
3. The Draft Report on the basis of Action Taken Replies was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committ ee on External Affairs 
(2004-2005) at their sitting held on 31
st March, 2005. Minutes of the sitting 
of the Committee have been reproduced as Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of action taken by Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 2
nd Report of the Standing Committee 
on External Affairs (14th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and  convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the 
body of the Report and have also been reproduced in consolidated form in 
Appendix-III. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                  
31st March, 2005              Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, 
Chaitra 10, 1926 (Saka)                   Chairman, 
                                        Standing Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by 
Government on the observations/re commendations contained in the 2 nd  
Report of the Standing Committee on Ex ternal Affairs on the Demands for 
Grants of the erstwhile Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs – renamed 
as the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs – for the year 2004-2005.  The 
2nd report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 th August 
2004.  It contained 8 Recommendations/ Observations. 
2. Action taken notes on all the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs. These have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the 
Government. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6  and 8 
Total – 4 
Chapter - II 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 5 
Total – 1  
Chapter – III 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 2 and 3 
Total – 2  
Chapter – IV 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 7 
Total – 1 
Chapter-V

 
3. The Committee will now deal  with the action taken by the 
Government on some of their observations/recommendations. 
Recommendation No.1 (Para No. 10) 
 
4. During the examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the ye ar 2004-2005, the Committee expressed 
their satisfaction over the emphasis given by the Government on forging 
relations with Overseas Indian by taking serious note of the 
recommendation of this Committee with regard to Indian Diaspora made in 
their earlier reports. The Committee al so hoped that the creation of the 
new Ministry will lead to greater interaction wi th the NRIs/PIOs and, now, 
their problems and concerns will be addr essed in a more effective and 
meaningful way. 
 
5. The Ministry in their reply responded as under: 
 
“The new Ministry of Non-Resident Indian Affairs has been set up in 
May 2004. It has been re-named as the Ministry of Overseas Indian 
Affairs in September 2004. The Ministry is working towards drawing 
up a work programme that truly reflects the concerns of the 
Overseas Indian community and responds to the opportunities 
offered through greater engagement wi th the Diaspora at the forth-
coming Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (7-9 Jan 2005) in Mumbai and 
beyond”. 
 
6. The Committee note that a be ginning has been made by the 
Ministry in pursuance of the re commendations of the Committee for 
assuming a proactive role in the affairs of Overseas Indian.  It is satisfying 
to note that the Ministry now understands the vital role that the Overseas 
Indian Community can pl ay even if remotely placed.  The Committee 
would like this momentum to be maintained on a continuous basis.  As the 
Pravasi Bharitya Divas, 2005 has already concluded, the Committee 
would certainly like to be apprised  of its achievements in terms of 
concerns of the Overseas Indian Community and to the opportunities 
offered through greater engagement of the Diaspor a as envisaged by the 
Ministry and as also follow-up by the Ministry, emerging therefrom.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 11) 
 
7. During the course of  examination of the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affair s for the year 2004-2005, the Committee 
had observed that though the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs was 
created on 27 th May, 2004 and three precious months had  already been 
gone by then yet the allocation of work for the Ministry was  to be decided.  
Other aspects such as organizational set-up and staffing of the Ministry 

were still pending, awaiting the alloca tion of work.  According to the 
Ministry, a Group of Ministers was in the process of making 
recommendations to the Prime Minister regarding the allocation of work to 
the Ministry of NRI Affairs but no time frame had been suggested for 
implementation of the recommendations .  The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that at least the basic infrastructure, essentially required for 
the working of a full-fledged Ministry s hould be in place at the earliest, so 
that the functional set-up of the Ministry could be established and the 
uncertainty and ambivalence with regard to the working of this Ministry 
ends without any further loss of time. 
 
8. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
 
“The allocation of work of the Mini stry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(earlier known as Ministry of N on Resident Indian Affairs) has been 
finalised on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers 
appointed for the purpos e.  The renovation work at the Akbar 
Bhawan to house the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has been 
entrusted to CPWD and is in progr ess.  It is expected to be 
completed by the end of January 2005.” 
 
9. The Committee would like to know  whether the work  allocation of 
the Ministry has since been notified and the Ministry has started 
functioning as per this allocation. 
 
Regarding the renovation work at the Akbar Bhavan also, the 
Committee may be apprised whether  the renovation work has been 
completed as envisaged and in case of its non-completion as yet, the 
Ministry should spare no effort to ensu re its completion with in a strict time 
schedule so that the basic infrastr ucture, essentially required for the 
working of Ministry is in place.  
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 16) 
 
10. The Committee had noted that Rs.4.80 crore had been allocated 
against the establishment expenditure , Rs.1.20 crore for holding the 
multilateral International Confer ences/meetings and expenditure on 
entertainment of NRIs related event s which may be held in India and 
Rs.1.00 crore had been allocated under  other charges.  The Committee 
were of the view that all these allo cations could be properly utilised only 
after the finalisation of work allocation by the Group of Ministers, which 
was still awaited and also sufficient fund was required only for 
establishment of the Ministry and allo cation of funds for other than the 
establishment expenditure should have been made at the RE stage.  The 
Committee in their recommendation had desired that priority should be 
given to the establishment expenditure in order to have t he organizational 
set-up of the Ministry in place as early as possible.  The Committee also 
desired that the budgetary allocati on of this Ministry be augmented 
substantially in due course so as to enable them to carry on their activities. 
 
11. The Ministry in their reply have merely stated as under: 
 
“Proposals for the creation of posts of the Ministry have been 
circulated for the comments of the Departments concerned.  They 

are likely to be approved in De cember, 2004 paving the way for 
officers and staff to join the Ministry.  Recommendations of the 
Committee have been taken into account and revised budgetary 
allocation at RE stage for the Ministry has been projected.” 
 
12. From the reply of the Mini stry, the Committee observe that 
proposals for the creation of post s were likely to be approved in 
December, 2004, which in turn would have facilitate d joining of officers 
and staff in the Ministry of Overseas  Indian Affairs. The Committee would 
like to know whether the posts aske d for by the Minist ry have already 
been approved, specific work allocations finalis ed and priority given to the 
establishment expenditure for the rema ining period of this fiscal.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of an y delays/deviations that 
have taken place in this regard.   
 
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 36) 
 
13. The Committee appreciated the a ssociation and coordination of the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affair s with the Ministry of Science & 
Technology in launching a website “stio.nic.in” for interactive exchanges 
with the Scientists and Technologist s of Indian origin with a view to 
assisting them in their endeavour to play a role in the national 
development. The Committee also  noted that information on specific S&T 
institutions, schemes, programmes & oppor tunities in India that may be of 
interest to STIOs will be made availa ble on the website and this website 
will facilitate follow-up action on networked joint proposals. The launching 
of this website has created some interest among the STIOs. The 
Committee suggested the Ministry that  vigorous efforts for intensive 
publicity of this website should be made among the Scientific and 
Technical Community of I ndian Origin and steps s hould be taken to keep 
up the interest (whether Resident/NRIs/PIOs) residing abroad.   
 
14. The Ministry have replied to this observation as under: 
 
 “Action as suggested  by the esteemed Committee has been taken. 
We have requested our Missions to  make vigorous efforts for 
intensive publicity of this w ebsite among the Scientific and 
Technical Community of Indian Or igin. This will also be pursued 
during the course of the theme session on Science and Technology 
at Pravasi Bhartiya Divas 2005”. 
 
15. The Committee note with appreciation the action taken by the 
Ministry for popularising the website “stio.nic.in” amongst the 
Scientists and Technologists of Indian Origin (STIOs).  Since 
dissemination of the inform ation about this website has great significance, 
the Committee would prefer that apart from what is being done by our 
Missions to popularise this  website, the Ministry, on its part, should also 
assume a pivotal role fo r the purpose.  The Commi ttee would like to be 
apprised of the developments that to ok place in this  matter during the 
Pravasi Bhartiya Divas, 2005.  
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No.  51) 
16. The Committee in their recomm endation, welcomed the efforts of 

the Ministry of External Affairs and Mi nistry of Home Affairs for securing 
the passage of the Citizenship (Am endment) Bill, 2003 – which has since 
been enacted for granting dual citizenshi p to the Persons of Indian Origin 
in 16 specified countries so far – in response to the long standing 
demands of the Indian Diaspora to strengthen emotional and cultural 
bonds with India and expresse d that rules in this r egard will be finalized 
and notified without any further delay . The Committee also appreciated 
the coordinated efforts of the Ministry of External Affairs with the Ministry 
of Labour in launching the Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana and also hoped 
that with the launching of this Yo jana, problems of Indian Emigrant 
workers will be minimized and their grievances would be mitigated and 
expected that the Ministry of Overs eas Indian Affairs would live up to the 
expectations of the NRIs/PIOs and Indian Emigrant Workers, safeguard 
their interests effectively in the near future. 
 
 
17. The Ministry in their reply submitted as under: 
 
“The Rules have since been finalised. MHA has written to all the 
Missions and requested them to give wide publicity and invite 
applications under the amended Act. 
 
Meanwhile, the Overseas Indian have raised certain doubts and 
sought clarifications on a number of issues.  The Missions and the 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) have taken these up 
with MHA.  These cover the board categories of procedural 
simplification, issue of overseas Indian passports and  coverage of 
countries under the amended Act.  An  inter-Ministerial group of 
officers are meeting regularly to find quick, practical solutions to 
many of these issues. 
 
On insurance, MOIA has taken up the matter of public sector 
insurance companies issuing polic ies other than the basic Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana with the Finance Ministry”. 
 
18. The Committee note wi th satisfaction that the Rules re garding the 
grant of dual citizenship to  the PIOs in 16 countri es have been finalised.  
The Committee, however, strongly feel  that mere finalisation of these 
Rules alone does not serve the purpos e unless these are notified. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that t hese Rules should be notified without 
any further loss of time . The Committee further desi re that alongside it 
should also be ensured that the procedures in volved therein are not 
cumbersome and are easy to follow. 
 
19. The Committee would also like to be ap prised of the feedback 
being given by the inter-Ministerial group of officers to the Ministry 

regarding the doubts of the Overseas Indian in this  regard and the action 
taken/being taken in the light of such feedback. 
 
20. The Committee further desire to know as to  when the matter of 
public sector insurance companies i ssuing policies othe r than the basic 
Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana was take n up with the Finance Ministry and 
what has been their response thereto. 

 CHAPTER II  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee express their satisfaction over t he emphasis given by the Government on forging 
relations with Overseas Indian by taking seriou s note of the recommendation of this Committee 
with regard to Indian Diaspora made in their ear lier reports. Time and again, the Committee had 
strongly recommended strict implementation of  the recommendations made by the High Level 
Committee on Indian Diaspora. The Committee si ncerely hope that the creation of the new 
Ministry will lead to greater interaction with the NRIs/PIOs and, now, thei r problems and concerns 
will be addressed in a more effective and meaningful way. 
 
(Para No. 10) 
 
M. Reply of the Government  
 
The new Ministry of Non-Resident Indian Affairs has been set up in May 2004. It 
has been re-named as the Ministry of Ov erseas Indian Affairs in September 
2004. The Ministry is working towards dr awing up a work programme that truly 
reflects the concerns of the Overseas Indian community and responds to the 
opportunities offered through greater engagem ent with the Diaspora at the forth-
coming Pravasi Bhartiya Divas (7-9 Jan 2005) in Mumbai and beyond. 
 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that a budgetary allocation of Rs.6.00 crore in BE 2004-
2005 has been made in the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the 
celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas. The Commi ttee note in particular that after deletion of 
entry No.40 under Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs, there is no specific entry under the Government of 
India (Allocation & Business) Rules 1961, which just ifies the organization of events relating to the 
Overseas Indian by the Ministry of External Affairs. Accordingly, the budgetary allocation of 
“Pravasi Bharatiya Divas” should have been transferred from the Ministry of External Affairs to the 
Ministry of Non Resident Indian A ffairs. The Non-transfer of this allocation is likely to adversely 
affect the preparations for “Pravasi Bharatiya Di vas” which is now being to be organized by the 
Ministry of Non resid ent Indian Affairs. The Committee reco mmend that the aforesaid allocated 
fund should be transferred suitably to the Ministry of Non-Resident  Indian Affairs within a given 
time frame say at the Revised Estimate sta ge to avoid any constraints/problems for the 
celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in January 2005. The Committee hope that a clear division 
of work between the two Ministries, in particula r relating to NRI affairs should be made at the 
earliest – leaving no scope for confusion and overlapping in respect of their functioning in future.  
 
(Para No. 21) 
 
N. Reply of the Government 
 
As per recommendation of the esteemed Commi ttee, the provision of Rs.6.00 crores 
for celebration of Bharatiya Divas has been trans ferred from Ministry of External Affairs  

to Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs while finalizing Revised Estimates for the current 
financial year. 
 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 
 
O. Recommendation 
 
The Committee appreciate the association and coordination of the Government with 
the Ministry of Science & Technology in launc hing a website “stio.nic.in” for interactive 
exchanges with the Scientists and Technologi sts of Indian origin with a view to 
assisting them in their endeavour to play  a role in the natio nal development. The 
Committee note that information on specific  S&T institutions, schemes, programmes & 
opportunities in India that ma y be of interest to STIOs will be made available on the 
website and this website will facilitate follow-up action on networked joint proposals. 
The launching of this website has created some interest among the STIOs. The 
Committee would, therefore, suggest that vigor ous efforts for intensive publicity of this 
website should be made among the Scientific and Technica l Community of Indian 
Origin and steps should be taken to keep up the interest (whether Resident/NRIs/PIOs) 
residing abroad.   
(Para No. 36) 
 
P. Reply of the Government 
 
Action as suggested  by the esteemed Committee has been taken.  We have 
requested our Missions to make vigorous effort s for intensive publicity of this website 
among the Scientific and Technical Community of Indian Origin. This will also be 
pursued during the course of the theme session on Science and Technology at PBD 
2005. 
 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 
 
 
 
Recommendation 
 

The Committee welcome the efforts of t he Ministry of External Affairs and 
Ministry of Home Affairs for secu ring the passage of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Bill, 2003 – which has since been enacted for granting dual 
citizenship to the Persons of Indian Origin  in 16 specified countries so far – in 
response to the long standing demands of  the Indian Diaspora to strengthen 
emotional and cultural bonds with India. The Co mmittee express the hope that 
rules in this regard will be finalized and  notified without any further delay. The 
Committee also appreciate the coordinated efforts of the Ministry of External 
Affairs with the Ministry of Labour in  launching the Prav asi Bharatiya Bima 
Yojana and also hope that wi th the launching of this Yojana, problems of Indian 
Emigrant workers will be minimized and t heir grievances would be mitigated. The 
Committee expect that the Ministry of N on Resident Indian Affairs would live up 
to the expectations of the NRIs/PIOs and Indian Emigrant Workers, safeguard 
their interests effectively in the near fu ture – for which the same have come into 
existence and rightly fulfill the vision and mission of our forefathers, who believed 
in the spirit of “Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam” (the people of  the whole earth are our 
family). 
 
(Para No. 51) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The Rules have since been finalised. MH A has written to all the Missions and 
requested them to give wide publicity a nd invite applications under the amended 
Act. 
 
Meanwhile, the Overseas Indian have raised certain doubts and sought clarifications 
on a number of issues.  The Missions and t he Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(MOIA) have taken these up with MHA.  These cover the board categories of 
procedural simplification, issue of overseas Indian passports and coverage of countries 
under the amended Act.  An inter-Ministerial gr oup of officers are m eeting regularly to 
find quick, practical solutions to many of these issues. 
 
On insurance, MOIA has taken up the matter of public sector insurance companies issuing 
policies other than the basic Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana with the Finance Ministry.” 
 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that the amount allocated for acquisition of land 
for construction of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra is in addition to the grant of Rs. 25.00 crore 
which Prime Minister announced for this pur pose. The Ministry of Urban Development 
and Poverty Alleviation had already allocated Plot No. 15 A & B measuring 5858 sq. 
mtrs, at Chanakyapuri, New Delhi to the Ministry of External Affairs for the construction 
of Pravasi Bhartita Kendra at  a premium of Rs. 31,83,400/-.  Further, the Ministry of 
External Affairs had also ident ified Plot No. 15 D, measuring 3068 sq. mtrs. adjoining 
the plot already allocated to the Ministry of External Affair s and have requested to 
Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation for allocating this additional 
piece of land for the Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra . It means that sufficient fund is already 
available to the Ministry and an additional plot is required for the construction of 
Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra. Work relating to ta king possession of the plot and activities in 
the Kendra after its functional set-up shoul d be undertaken by the Ministry on top 
priority. The Committee understand that the plot s which are allocated to the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the construction of Pravas i Bhartiya Kendra belong to this Ministry 
and once the Non-Resident Indians Affairs Ministry becomes functional, these will have 
to be transferred to the Ministry of Non Re sident Indian Affairs.  Some paper work 
naturally may have to be undertaken in this regard. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that, in the meanwhile, all the necessary fo rmalities should be co mpleted-so that the 
required set-up in the Ministry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs is in place at the earliest 
for starting the construction work for the Kendra. Taking a less on from the Videsh 
Bhawan project of the Ministry  of External Affairs, all precautions should be taken in 
respect of the construction project of Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra, so that, it does not get 

delayed. Accordingly, the Committee recommend the Ministry of N on-Resident Indian 
Affairs to prepare a time schedule for the c onstruction of this bu ilding and ensure its 
completion within time. 
(Para No. 29) 
Reply of the Government 
 
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The matter has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Urban Development. Once plot No. 15 A, B and D are allocated to Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs for the Pravasi Bhartiya Kendra, preparatory steps will begin keeping in 
view the procedural requirements and with a proper time schedule. Suitable Budget provision will 
be sought in 2005-06. 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation 
 
Now that an exclusive Mini stry of Non-Resident Indian Affairs have been cr eated, obviously they 
should gear themselves fully towards helping to take care of the problems and affairs of the non-
resident Indians and Persons of Indian origin. Howe ver, it is observed t hat though the Ministry 
were created on 27 th May, 2004, three precious months have gone by and the allocation of work 
for the Ministry is yet to be decided. Other aspe cts such as organizational set-up and staffing of 
the Ministry are still pending awai ting the allocation of work. The Government have informed that 
a Group of Ministers is in the process of ma king recommendations to the Prime Minister 
regarding the allocation of work to the Mini stry of NRI Affairs but no time frame has been 
suggested for implementation of the recommendat ions. The Committee recommend that at least 
the basic infrastructure, essentially required for t he working of a full-fledged Ministry should be in 
place at the earliest, so that the functional set-up of the Ministry can be established and the 
uncertainty and ambivalence with regard to the wo rking of this Ministry ends without any further 
loss of time. 
(Para No. 11) 
 
Q. Reply of the Government 
 
The allocation of work of the Mi nistry of Overseas Indian Affairs (earlier known as Ministry of Non 
Resident Indian Affairs) has been finalised on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers 
appointed for the purpose. The renovation work at the Akbar Bhawan to house the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs has been entrusted to CP WD and is in progress. It is expected to be 
completed by the end of January 2005. 
 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 
 
II. Recommendation 
 
The Committee note that Rs.4.80 crore has b een allocated against establishment expenditure, 
Rs.1.20 crore for holding the mult ilateral International Conferences/meetings and expenditure on 
entertainment of NRIs related  events which may be held in India and Rs.1.00 crore has been 
allocated under other charges. All these allocations can be properly utilized only after the 
finalisation of work allocation by  the Group of Ministers which is still awaited. The Committee are 
of the view that at this point of time, suffici ent fund is required only for establishment of the 
Ministry and allocation of funds for other than  establishment expenditure should have been made 
at a later stage i.e. at the RE stage. Therefore, priority should now be given to the establishment 
expenditure in order to have the organizational set-up of the Ministry in place as early as 
possible. The Committee also desire that the budgetary allocation of this Ministry be augmented 
substantially in due course so as to enable them to carry on their activities.   
(Para No. 16) 
 
R. Reply of the Government 
 
Proposals for the creation of posts of the Ministry have been circulated fo r the comments of the 
Departments concerned. They are likely to be approved in December paving the way for officers 
and staff to join the Ministry. Recommendations of the Committee have been taken into account 
and revised budgetary allocation at RE stage for the Ministry has been projected. 
 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 

CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMNET ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Ministry have stated that the ISIL in its Report on the seminar and subsequent 
studies have suggested for a suitable legisl ation to alleviate the problems regarding 
pensions of the spouses and families of  non-resident Indians. The Report also 
suggested that Government of  India need to give urgent consideration to embracing 
the Hague Convention 1965 on the service abroad of judi cial and extra-judicial 
documents in civil or commercial matters . The Committee are of the view that 
embracing the Hague Convention 1965 in its letter and spirit should not pose much of a 
difficulty for the Government of India an d the implementation of ISIL suggestion will 
certainly go in favour of our own people. H ence, the Ministry in coordination with the 
Ministry of Law should ensure that such a legislation is enacted and implemented at 
the earliest. The Committee recommend that no efforts should be spared to protect the 
interests of non-resident Indians. As th e Reserve Bank of India has eased the 
regulations regarding the pens ions, etc. Departments like Income Tax may also be 
persuaded to cooperate in issuing no objection/tax clearance certificate to minimize the 
problems of non-resident Indians as it was being done in the case of Defence 
Pensioners. Now that the Mi nistry of Non-Resident Indians Affairs have been created 
to look after the affairs of non-resident Indians, they should play a prominent role to 
obviate such problems being faced by the spouses and families of the non-resident 
Indians. 
(Para No. 44) 
 
S. Reply of the Government 
 
As regards the recommendation on becoming pa rties to the Hague Conventions on Private 
International Law, the 1961 Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legislation for Foreign 
Public Documents has been sent for Cabinet approv al, after obtaining approval of EAM  and with 
the concurrence of Ministry of Law and Justice. 

The following conventions are being examined with inputs from the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Ministry of Home Affairs and the Department of Women and Child Development, Ministry 
of HRD. 
 
(i) 1965 Convention on the Service of Ab road of Judicial and Extra-judicial 
Documents in Civil and Commercial Matters; 
(ii) 1970 Convention on the Taking of Ev idence Abroad in Civil or Commercial 
Matters; and 
(iii) 1980 Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. 
[No. N/NRI/125/23/2004 dated 7.12.2004] 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      DR. LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY 
31st March, 2005                    Chairman, 
Chaitra 10, 1927 (Saka)          Standing Committee on External Affairs. 
 

 
APPENDIX II 
(Vide Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
SECOND REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (14TH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations                      8 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6  and 8 
Total                 4 
P e r c e n t a g e            5 0 %  
  
III. Recommendations/Observations which t he Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 5 
Total                  1  
Percentage        12.5% 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 2 and 3 
Total                  2  
P e r c e n t a g e            2 5 %  
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 7 
Total                 1 
 Percentage        12.5% 

APPENDIX  III 
 
STATEMENT OF  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Para No. Ministry Recommendations/Observations 
1. 6 External Affairs The Committee note that a beginning has 
been made by the Ministry in pursuance of 
the recommendations of the Committee for 
assuming a proactive role in the affairs of 
Overseas Indian.  It is satisfying to note that 
the Ministry now growingly understands the 
vital role that the Overseas Indian 
Community can play even if remotely 
placed.  The Committee would like this 
tempo to be maintained on a continuous 
basis.  As the latest Pravasi Bharitya Divas, 
2005 has already been concluded the 
Committee would certainly like to be 
apprised of its achievements in terms of 
concerns of the Overseas Indian 
Community and responds to the 
opportunities offered through greater 
engagement with the Diaspora as 
envisaged by the Ministry and as also 
follow-up by the Ministry as emerging 
therefrom. 
 
2. 9      -do- The Committee would like to know whether 
the work allocation of the Ministry has since 
been notified and the Ministry has started 
functioning as per this allocation. 
 
Regarding the renovation work at the Akbar 
Bhavan also, the Committee may be 
apprised whether the renovation work has 
been completed as envisaged and in case of 
its non-completion as yet, the Ministry should 
spare no effort to ensure its completion within 
a strict time schedule so that the basic 
infrastructure, essentially required for the 
working of Ministry is in place.  
  
3. 12 - do - From the reply of the Ministry, the 
Committee observe that proposals for the 
creation of posts were likely to be 
approved in December, 2004, which in 
turn would have facilitated joining of 
officers and staff in the Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs. The Committee 
would like to know whether the posts 
asked for by the Ministry have already 
been approved, specific work allocations 
finalised and priority given to the 
establishment expenditure for the 
remaining period of this fiscal.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised 
of any delays/deviations that have taken 
place in this regard.     
 
4. 15 - do - The Committee note with appreciation the 
action taken b y the Ministr y for popularising 

the website “stio.nic.in” amongst the 
Scientists and Technologists of Indian Origin 
(STIOs).  Since dissemination of the 
information about this website has great 
significance, the Committee would prefer that 
apart from what is being done by our 
Missions to popularise this website, the 
Ministry, on its part, should also assume a 
pivotal role for the purpose.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the 
developments that took place in this matter 
during the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas, 2005.  
 
5. 18 to 20 - do - The Committee note with satisfaction that 
the Rules regarding the grant of dual 
citizenship to the PIOs in 16 countries 
have been finalised.  The Committee, 
however, strongly feel that mere 
finalisation of these Rules alone does not 
serve the purpose unless these are 
notified. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that these Rules should be notified 
without any further loss of time. The 
Committee further desire that alongside it 
should also be ensured that the procedures 
involved therein are not cumbersome and 
are easy to follow. 
 
The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the feedback being given by the 
inter-Ministerial group of officers to the 
Ministry regarding the doubts of the 
Overseas Indian in this regard and the action 
taken/being taken in the light of such 
feedback. 
 
The Committee further desire to know as to 
when the matter of public sector insurance 
companies issuing policies other than the 
basic Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana was 
taken up with the Finance Ministry and what 
has been their response thereto. 
 
 